WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every namo and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declaro his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable niatenal for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instiuc-tion in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Gbeat Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respectiia branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..............34	Craven Terrace, London, IV 2, England
Canadian.........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, StrathHeld, N. S. IV., Australia South African.........Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in seveial languages )
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription pnco may have The Watchtower tree upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the leason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.' Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postoffice.
Act of March 3, ISIS.
“JEHOVAH OF HOSTS”
The testimony period “Jehovah of Hosts” embraces the nine days February 6 14, 1937. This midwinter campaign will specialize on booklets, and all those on Jehovah’s side will offer a 10c combination consisting of two booklets with colored cover and the latest self-coyered booklet. Let Jehovah's people take this coming campaign to heart, faithfully making all due preparation therefor. Consult forthcoming issues of the Informant for additional instructions. The “man with the inkhorn” promptly reported the matter, and likewise each one will report his activities and the results in this campaign.
1937 CALENDAR
The new calendar, for 1937, expresses militant service, both in text and in illustration. The year’s text is from Obadiah 1: “Arise ye, and let us nse up against her in battle.” The design based on the text is most expressive, and stirring and strengthening to behold. Accompanying is a seasonable letter by the Society’s president, and setting out the special testimony periods for 1937; also the calendar date pad, marking such testimony periods and likewise the regional or divisional service campaigns. The calendar may be had, five copies on a contribution of $1.00, sent to one address, or, singly, on a 25c contribution. Groups will please combine all individual orders and forward through their local servant, with remittance enclosed.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1937
This is to announce the Society’s issuance of a new year book for use during 1937. It contains the comprehensive report by the president of the Society covering the work accomplished during the service year 1935-1936 by Jehovah through his witnesses and their companions throughout the world. The information included therein is most valuable, especially in view of the war now on with the religionists. There is also a brief discussion by the president on the 1937 year text, additionally a text for each day of the year together with an enlightening and encouraging comment taken from The Watchtower, In view of the special expense of publishing such a limited edition as that of the Year Book a contribution is asked of 50c a copy. Please order now, sending remittance with order. Groups will place individual orders with their local servant, so as to spare the Society much time and expense in shipping.
ANNOUNCING COMPANY MEETINGS
Many hearers of radio transcription lectures have the desire to meet with Jehovah’s witnesses and to study his Word with them. Hence wherever the kingdom message is radiocast, the time and place of meeting of the local company of Jehovah's witnesses should be announced after the transcription. The time on the air being paid for, the station manager ought to readily grant your request to make such announcement.
Vol. LVIII
January 1, 1937
No. 1
MALACHI
PART 5
“Blessed be the name of Jehovah from this time forth and for evermore.”—Ps. 113:2, A.R.V.
JEHOVAH is supreme. He is the Creator of heaven and earth, and the fullness thereof belongs to him. “Jehovah is high above all nations, and his glory-above the heavens. Who is like unto Jehovah our God, that hath his seat on high?” (Ps. 113:4,5, A.R.V.) From the beginning his purpose is that all creation that lives shall praise his name and do so joyfully. That purpose is certain to be fulfilled. The faithful prophets of old wrote of that purpose. Jesus often emphasized the paramount importance of magnifying Jehovah’s name, and the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ frequently spoke of the supremacy of Jehovah’s name. But when so-called “followers of Christ Jesus” began to practice religion and called it “the Christian religion” they soon lost sight of the name of the Most High and of the supreme importance of magnifying his holy name. Religion has long been used selfishly for the temporal gain of man, and the name of Jehovah has been pushed aside and forgotten. During the time that Jesus, the great Messenger, was ‘preparing the way before the Lord’ many heard the truth then revealed, and most of them that accepted it did so by reason of a more or less selfish desire. What they first saw was that there is a chance to be saved and be taken to heaven to help the Lord rule the earth and to ‘ ‘ restore” the remainder of the human race. Many even assumed the position that God would forgive and save all men and give life to them whether they obeyed God or not. It must be remembered, however, that those persons were brought into the religious organizations and error was thoroughly instilled in the mind of each. Those who had lived in the organization of Babylon and who heard and accepted the truth came out of Babylon with their garments soiled, that is to say, they were still influenced much by the world and worldly desires and they followed worldly formalism and practices. There was ever before the mind of such rhe question: “What will the people think of me and the course I take?” And they tried to govern themselves accordingly, seeking the approval of men. To please men and to sing the praises of men, and to have others sing their own praise, was uppermost in the mind of many. When the great Messenger of Jehovah, Christ Jesus, came to the temple for judgment there were a
large number of this selfish kind that stood before him awaiting judgment. Such were important in their own eyes, and hence felt qualified to have their own way and insisted on having their own way, and they continue to seek the praises of creatures and to give praise to man. At the same time there were others standing before the Lord Jesus for judgment and who had a different motive for their course of action. Their love was for Jehovah and the Lord Jesus Christ, and their desire was to serve and please the Lord. Although their garments were soiled by reason of what they had learned and practiced in the Babylonish institutions, their heart desire was to do the right thing. They had come out of Babylon with soiled garments that now must be taken away if the Lord found them in a perfect heart condition. The temple judgment made manifest the selfish and the unselfish ones, and only the latter withstood the test and were approved by the great Judge. These approved ones were made the “faithful and wise servant” class, but even they did not fully appreciate the importance of magnifying Jehovah’s name; but in due time at the temple the matter was made clear to them, and now, thanks be unto God, the faithful and true see that the name of Jehovah is the great issue and that his name shall be vindicated and that in due time every creature that breathes shall sing his praises. The Lord, by the temple judgment, therefore, makes clear the distinction between the selfish or “evil servant” class and the unselfish or “faithful and wise servant” class.
2	Jehovah by his prophet Malachi speaks of the paramount importance of his own great name, and he draws a sharp contrast between the unfaithful and the faithful priests. “For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the heathen, saith the Lord of hosts. But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted; and the fruit thereof, even his meat, is contemptible. ”-Mal. 1:11, 12.
3	First Jehovah shows that his purpose is that all creatures who please him and live must praise his name, and the priestly class, being those selected as
3
4
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
a "people for his name", should be the first to praise his name, not only for a time, but at all times. "From the rising of the sun even unto the going down” thereof means all the day long, that is, all the time, continuously. Therefore the name of Jehovah is great all the time, and all who ever receive life everlasting must come to see and acknowledge that fact and joyfully praise his holy name. All of the temple do now praise the name of Jehovah, as it is written: "The voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to calve, and dis-covereth the forests: and in his temple doth every one speak of his glory.”—Ps. 29: 9.
4	The decree of Jehovah is that his name "shall be great” among the multitude without number, and those who are now coming into that company sing the praises of Jehovah’s name. Jehovah is now gathering the "great multitude” from all nations, kindreds, peoples and tongues, and this he does in spite of those professing "priests” who despise Jehovah’s name and his gracious work. Once these professed priests stood before the Lord at the temple judgment, but have now been cast away, and these attempt to interfere with the great multitude in learning of God’s gracious provision for them. In this they will not succeed, however.
5	God declares that his name shall be great amongst the Gentiles. The great multitude are not spiritual Israelites, and hence they are Gentiles as this prophecy speaks of Gentiles. They hear of Jehovah's temple and his true worship there by the faithful remnant, and they voluntarily seek Jehovah and his King. "Moreover, concerning a stranger [alien, foreigner] that is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name’s sake: (for they shall hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy stretched out arm;) when he shall come and pray toward this house: hear thou in heaven thy dwellingplace, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for; that all people of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, as do thy people Israel; and that they may know that this house, which I have builded, is called by thy name.”—1 Ki. 8:41-43.
9	This last-quoted text was a prayer of Solomon and was a prophecy directed of Jehovah and must have fulfillment, and the same is now having fulfillment. The great multitude coming out from all nations, kindreds and tongues is fulfilling this prophetic prayer, and these are coming, seeking the house of the Lord and praying toward his house. They are learning to praise Jehovah’s name. Concerning this same matter it is written by God’s prophet: "And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged ; because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces [riches (Leeser)] of the
Gentiles shall come unto thee. . . . and I will glorify the house of my glory. ’ ’—Isa. 60: 3-5, 7.
’ The great multitude must be brought, and the Lord will bring them. While the faithful approved priestly class, the remnant, go forth and continuously offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness by continuously singing the praises of his name, the Lord is doing his work, "his strange work,” and is gathering the great multitude. Those who come into the great multitude join with the priestly class in proclaiming the praises of Jehovah even now.
8	Mark that the prophecy says: " In every place incense [sacrifice] shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering. ’ ’ The Hebrew for the word ‘ ‘ incense ’ ’ here used means "a burning”, whether of animals or of perfume. Could it be lawful to offer incense to the name of Jehovah in every place by Gentiles, in view of the law of God, which required the priest to offer incense in the holy of the temple and on the golden censer? This question is made clear in the light of the Scriptures and what the Lord is now doing. It is written: "The priests, the sons of Aaron, . . . are consecrated to burn incense.” (2 Chron. 26:18) The Hebrew for the phrase "shall be offered”, as stated in the words of the prophecy (Mal. 1:11), means ‘to be brought near, or, to be made to approach, come near’. Therefore those among the Gentiles where Jehovah’s name is great do not act lawlessly and independently of Jehovah’s temple, but they do contribute or send their offerings to cause them to be brought to his temple to be burned upon his anointed altar by his anointed priesthood. During the past twenty years ‘this gospel of the kingdom has been preached’, and his servants continue to preach the same in all parts of the world for a witness to all nations, and within those nations the people of good will toward God come to the temple company with their pure offering, their unselfish devotion to God, and it is offered and the name of Jehovah is great amongst those of good will. (See Zechariah 8:20-23.) Therefore within the meaning of the prophecy the name of Jehovah is great among the great multitude, or people of good will, in every place where the offering of praise is made to Jehovah’s name.
8	The work of the Lord in which the remnant participate continues, and those of good will hear the truth and come to Zion to learn more of God’s purpose and to give praise to his name, while at the same time the so-called "priests”, who have proved to be unfaithful, now oppose the work of bringing the truth by the witnesses of Jehovah, who magnify the name of Jehovah and point out to the people of good will their privilege of serving and praising him. The Lord God therefore tells these unfaithful "priests” that they have enjoyed great privileges of serving him but have proved unfaithful, and now others of less privilege are seeking the way to his organization and are singing his praises. Says God through his prophet to these unfaithful
JANUARY 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
5
priests: “But ye have profaned it [my name], in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted; and the fruit thereof [produced and placed upon the table by the Lord] ... is contemptible.’’ The facts now made known fully show the fulfillment of this part of the prophecy. At the beginning of the temple judgment there was a company of spirit-begotten Levites serving in the priest’s office, and who were moved by selfishness to so serve, and who magnified the name and teachings of a man, giving man credit and honor that properly belong to the Lord only. Doubtless at the beginning they were sincere in giving adulation to a man. Had they been unselfish and tried to know, they could easily have known that such a course of conduct is wrong. Opportunity was given them to know, but they rejected it. Because of their wrongful course of action they were not approved by the Lord at the temple, and now they continue to blindly follow the teachings of a man and laud and praise the name of a man, and bring a “blind’’ and “sick” and “lame’’ sacrifice unto the Lord, which is not acceptable unto him. Furthermore, they become embittered against the remnant w’ho do bear the message of the kingdom to the people of good will, and such opposing and embittered “priests’’ attempt to ‘turn the stranger away from his right’, by inducing those of good will to decline to associate with Jehovah’s witnesses. Because of the wrongful conduct of these unfaithful “priests’* God says he is against them tor the reason that they turn the stranger away from his right.—Mal. 3: 5.
10	To be sure, those unfaithful men called “priests”, and who at one time were of the priestly class, would be horrified, or at least appear to be, to say to one another or to others the words here uttered: “The table of the Lord is polluted ’ ’; but by their course of conduct they have said and continue to say louder than by uttered words that “the table of the Lord is polluted; and ... his meat is contemptible”. Such is exactly their attitude toward the publications of the Watch Tower. Is the Lord feeding his people upon food which he causes the Watch Tower to publish? If so, then those who oppose The Watch-tozver and speak with words of scorn and contempt of what is therein contained speak against the Lord’s table. The Jonadabs who now engage in the proclamation of the kingdom message put to open shame those unfaithful “priests”, who were adversely judged at the temple and who now oppose the kingdom message. Jehovah’s name has become great amongst those now entering the “great multitude” company, and they sing the praises of the name of Jehovah and his King, declaring that salvation is of God and of the Lamb that sitteth upon the throne. At the same time these unfaithful “priests” attempt to turn the “strangers”, or the Jonadabs or great multitude, away from their right, which right is a knowledge of Jehovah and the privilege of serving him. Jehu pictured the true and
faithful Priest, and he said to Jonadab: “Come . . . , and see my zeal for Jehovah.” The opposing ones above mentioned have no part with those pictured by Jehu. The Jonadabs today show more zeal for the name of Jehovah than those who have professed to be the followers of Christ Jesus and who were once of the priestly class. With these opposers the name of Jehovah is not great, and they make no effort to have a part in the vindication of his name, but, together with the religionists, heap ignominy upon his name. Furthermore, they say that the food that the Lord has put upon his table for his people is contemptible, and thus insult the Lord. The modern-day Pharisees, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, are hypocrites and are doomed to complete and everlasting destruction. Concerning the “evil servant” class, those once in line for the kingdom and who are now unfaithful and are opposing God’s kingdom, the Lord says: “And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”—Matt. 24: 51.	'
11	Let the Jonadabs now take warning from the words of Jehovah and keep out of reach of those who oppose the kingdom work, and who at one time were “priests” but who are now the enemies of God. To those unfaithful ones, the “evil servant” class, Jehovah further says through his prophet Malachi: “Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at it, saith the Lord of hosts: and ye brought [for sacrifice] that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your hand ? saith the Lord. ’ ’—Mal. 1:13.
12	To those unfaithful ones the privilege of serving God by bringing the fruits of the kingdom before others, as the Lord has commanded, has become only a tiresome ceremony and formality, which offers them no opportunity to shine in the eyes of men. The carrying of the kingdom message from house to house in printed form, and presenting this to the people, is too humiliating for such self-important ones. They find no joy in it, and they have no desire nor do they make any effort to magnify Jehovah’s name by making known his kingdom message. They have never ‘entered into the joy of the Lord’ because they do not see that Jehovah’s name must be vindicated. Therefore they have said, and continue to say: “This carrying books about is merely a book-selling scheme. What a wearisome task that is!” They once had an opportunity of doing good, but they grew weary in well doing. (Gal. 6:9) They turned wholly to selfishness and were pushed away into darkness. Blindly they go about their own way of serving the Lord, and this they do by opposing the faithful servants of the Lord who carry his message to the people.
13	Those of the “elective elder” stripe and their adherents have done service work by distributing the truth publications, but in doing it they “have snuffed at it, saith the Lord of hosts”. Snuffing scornfully
6
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
at the witness work, speaking contemptuously of it, they have considered themselves justified in being careless of the witness work, and that carelessness has led them into willful opposition to God’s witness work. For this reason the Lord, by his angels, gathers them out of the temple and casts them into darkness. (Matt. 13: 41) Continuing the prophet says to them, the unfaithful ones: “And ye brought [for sacrifice] that which was torn [that which was taken by violence (B.F.) ; that is, stolen goods].’’ They have brought something that did not represent self-denial on their part, but something that would bring them into prominence and exalt them and that would bring no reproach upon them as men. They had no love for God, but desired to shine and be honored of men. In order to carry out their desires and course of conduct such men have lorded it over others and bossed them and deprived them of their real ministry. It appears at times that one appointed as a servant of a company becomes impressed with his own importance and begins to boss his brethren and to seek to draw away followers after hirr If, and thus to deprive the real ones of their opportunity of witnessing to the Lord.
11 Furthermore the prophet says that these have brought as a sacrifice that which is “lame” and “sick”. Trying to please Satan’s organization and to receive plaudits therefrom, at the same time they still assume to be servants of God. Being spiritually sick and blind to God’s purpose, they continue in the attitude of claiming to be his servants, but they seek the approval of men.
“ They have failed to obey God’s commandment directed to the priesthood: “And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.” (Ezek. 44:23) It is the duty and obligation of those who serve God in truth and in sincerity to call attention to these things. For that reason the proper application of these scriptures must now be told. The Watchtower observes the opposers attempting to steal away the people of good will and to turn them out of the way; and The Watchtower must cry out and spare not, because such is the commandment of the Lord. (Isa. 58:1) There is no expectation now of doing any good to the “evil servant” class, but the publication of such warning is for the benefit of those who have turned their hearts to the Lord, that they may keep away from the evil ones.
’’Jehovah then puts the question squarely to the unfaithful priests: “Should I accept this of your hand?” The “evil servant” has thought to deceive, but the Lord cannot be deceived. Jehovah then answers his own question put to the “evil servant” class and says: “But cursed be the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen. ’ ’—Mal. 1:14.
” Those who were faithful to the Lord are not deceived. The onlooker may get the wrong impression, and hence the warning is for such. It is written: “God is not mocked”; and therefore the unfaithful “priest”, who attempts it, is cursed of Jehovah, as this prophecy states. The “deceiver” is a hypocrite, who puts stumbling blocks in the way of those who are faithfully endeavoring to serve God, and thus the deceiver shows contempt for Jehovah and for his name. The unfaithful defames Jehovah’s name and furnishes an argument for Satan that men will not maintain their integrity toward God when put under the test. (Job 1: 9-11) Such unfaithful “priests” are lawless, disloyal, covenant-breakers, and are cheats and frauds. Their course of action is a gross insult to Jehovah.
18	Could any person who understands and loves Jehovah treat the Most High with such contempt? The Lord answers that in the negative and says for the good of all who will hear: “For I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.” Jehovah is “The King of Eternity”, the Supreme One, the Most High above all, and the One to whom every soul must be subject if he would live. Jehovah, particularly since 1914, is King, having then placed his anointed One, Christ Jesus, as his vicegerent upon the throne of Zion to rule. (Pss. 2:6; 97:1) When the faithful remnant of natural Israel returned from Babylon in 536 B.C., they had no king of the tribe of Judah reigning over them. Jehovah was the King of the faithful, even though the Persian ruler claimed the land of Palestine. When Jehovah’s faithful remnant were delivered from Babylon after 1918, they had no earthly king or ruler over them but Jehovah was, and is, the great King, and his royal palace is his temple, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and he is ruling according to the will of the Most High. The “evil servant” class, the murmurers and complainers, do not fear God. They have not appreciated his statement, “My name is dreadful [terrible (R.P.)] among the heathen.” But many who claim to serve Jehovah do not fear and do not honor his name. “Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come into his courts. 0 worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him, all the earth. Say among the heathen, that the Lord reigneth: the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously.”—Ps. 96:8-10.
18	This command is to all who fear his name and who love and serve him, and none other will live. “Dreadful” is the name of Jehovah, particularly since the “seven vials” of the ‘seven last plagues of the wrath of God’ have been poured out, in the period of time from 1922 to 1928, as stated in Revelation sixteen. The warning notice has been given and served upon the rulers of this world, and even they are terrified by what they have heard, yet the “evil servant”
Januaby 1, 1937
fffie WATCHTOWER.
7
manifests no fear of God. Those of the Jonadab company now learn of Jehovah, and they fear his holy name and prove it by their course of conduct. To the unfaithful ones, the “evil servant’’, Jehovah says: “Where is my fear? saith the Lord of hosts unto you, 0 priests, that despise my name.’’—Vs. 6.
JEHOVAH’S CHARGE
20	The sons of Levi through Aaron the high priest were the priests of natural Israel. Those priests foreshadowed the consecrated serving in the priestly office at the time the Lord appears at the temple for judgment. Other Levites performed other service before the Lord. In 1918 the Lord Jesus, the great Judge, appeared at the temple for judgment, and a command or charge is directed to those serving in the priest’s office in particular: “And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you.” (Mal. 2:1) What, then, is the charge or command here given to the priests? There was need of cleaning up the sons of Levi, both priests and other servants, and the Lord Jesus began his judgment of cleansing and purifying the sons of Levi at his appearing at the temple, to the end that those who were able to “abide” that day and to come through the fiery operation might be assigned to the duty of offering unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Although the Lord appeared at the temple in 1918, his coming was not known and proclaimed until 1922, and the purifying judgment of the sons of Levi proves from the facts to have been accomplished first by 1932. The commandment or charge given to the antitypical priests needed to be heeded and applied unto the cleansing of the sanctuary and thereafter. The test upon the “sons of Levi” began with the beginning of judgment in 1918, whether they had knowledge of the Lord’s presence at the temple or not. The motive or heart condition of such there began to be tested. It was the time for those who had made a covenant to do the will of God to cease giving honor to men and to cease raising their own “lightning rods”, inviting others to give honor to them. The time had come for them to give all honor and glory to the name of Jehovah God. Hence the necessity for the charge and for the cleansing.
21	The presumption would follow that there would be a class of professed priests who were not giving heed io and obeying the charge. This presumption necessarily flows from the language of the commandment itself. Said the Lord to the priests: “If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart. ’ ’—Mal. 2: 2.
22	This commandment showed that at least a part of the priests were moved by selfishness and that they would not successfully weather the day of testing. The 'Watchtower of January 1, 1923, began to give
prominence to the necessity of magnifying and vindicating Jehovah’s name. At least from that time on there could be no excuse offered by those who had access to Jehovah’s table to disregard the name of Jehovah and to continue to laud the name of man. From that time on, at least, all serving in the priest’s office must give heed by setting their hearts upon Jehovah’s name as worthy of all their love, honor and glory. As the consecrated began to learn of the purpose of Jehovah to make glorious his name, and that he had taken out of the world a people for his name, who must give testimony concerning his name, all coming to the knowledge of these great truths must give glory unto the name of Jehovah God and cease bestowing adulation, honor, glory and praise upon men. In order to obey this commandment those servants in the priest's office must correct the abuses and practices of which they were guilty and into which error they had led others. Formalism, assumed sanctimoniousness, the attitude of ‘more holy than thou’, seeking the honor of men, and giving glory to men, and all things of that nature, must be put away. Only honesty, sincerity and full devotion to the Lord could be pleasing to him. The approved ones must bring an offering worthy of the name of Jehovah and which would take away the contempt for his name.
23	In the Babylonish systems the name of Jehovah is defamed and the name of man exalted. Among those of the Lord’s organization on earth there was, particularly at the beginning of the temple judgment, a strong disposition to follow many things that they had learned in the religious organizations from which they had come out. Such formalism must now be put away, because the time had come for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, which must be accompanied by the delivery of true testimony throughout the earth to the honor of Jehovah’s name. No more should the teachings of any man be praised and followed. If'that man had taught the truth, follow and continue therein, but give the honor and glory and power to the Lord, to whom glory belongs. The Lord of hosts had given command, the day of battle is at hand, and the command of the Mighty One must be obeyed. Those who had been moved by an honest and sincere desire to do whatsoever is the will of God gladly obeyed the commandment to give honor to the name of Jehovah, and continue to obey. Others, who give no heed to the commandment, what shall the Lord do unto them ?
24	The hosts of Jehovah, led by Christ Jesus accompanied by all his holy angels, are now at the temple to execute the judgment of the Lord, and all are commanded to give heed and obedience to whatsoever they are directed by the Lord to do. The curse would be upon those who would fail or refuse to obey the commandment. “Saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you.” The particular ones addressed here are those once in line for the kingdom and who at the time of judgment are found to be unfaithful, and who
8
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
subsequently are assigned to the “evil servant” class. The curse of the Lord is upon them at once when judgment takes place at the temple, and by their course of conduct they show that God’s curse is upon them. The prophetic truths revealed by the Lord at the temple are a blessing to the faithful servants, but these same truths become a curse to the unfaithful, and thus their ‘blessings have been cursed’ even now. This is true because the truth was placed before them which would result in their blessing, and by their refusal to give heed thereto the truth operates as a curse. Others, who are not of the “evil servant” class but who are guilty of shortcomings, carelessness and indifference to their duties, need to be warned that God will curse their blessings if they do not mend their course of conduct and render full devotion to the Lord and show real care and dependability on their part in looking after the kingdom interests committed to their hands. All who receive his approval must lay the warning to heart. Their “good intentions” furnish no excuse for failure to perform. The Lord requires faithfulness on the part of his servants, and that means that where the servant fails or refuses to faithfully perform his God-given commission, he shows that he is unworthy of the blessings of Jehovah. The commandments of the Lord are, to him, of the greatest importance, and the faithful will look well to the performance of the obligations laid upon him.
25	Jehovah’s dealings with natural Israel were prophetic. The complete fulfillment of his prophetic utterances is upon spiritual Israel, that is, those who are in a covenant with God to do his will. Further describing the curse that should come upon them Jehovah says: “Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts, and one shall take you away with it.” —Mal. 2:3.
26	This prophecy, according to the American Revised Version, reads: “I will rebuke your seed, and will spread dung upon your faces.” Such a curse God literally visited on natural Israel, as stated in the prophecy of Haggai 1:6-11 and 2:16,17. Jehovah declared his purpose to bring upon them the curse, and this he would do by withholding the rain to sprout the seed of their crops, so that their crops would not be brought to maturity for harvest. If the rains came and the crops grew, Jehovah would send hail or pests to devour their crops, and the result would be shortage of food. Now the Devil, who is a mimic god, brings more woes and distress upon the people in general by sending pests, such as storms to destroy the crops, and floods and pests to bring havoc upon the people, and then the Devil causes his clergymen to charge these calamities and disasters up to Jehovah. It should be kept in mind that Jehovah sent the curse upon his covenant people Israel, and such was a prophecy of what shall come upon the unfaithful spiritual Israelites. The calamities and woes that come upon the
people of earth today emanate from the Devil. God’s great calamity upon all the world will be that which he will bring to pass at Armageddon. The prophecy of Malachi here uttered applies to the unfaithful priestly class of spiritual Israel, who suffer for want of spiritual nourishment and sustenance. Because of their selfishness those unfaithful ones cannot receive and feed upon the blessings of truth that the Lord provides as spiritual food for his own. Such truths, to the unfaithful, are nauseating. They take offense at the same and, having no sustaining spiritual food, they die spiritually. The warning is here given in order that those who will hear and give heed and turn their hearts wholly to Jehovah, and serve him, may be revived, come fully into God’s favor, and live. To God’s covenant people these words are addressed: “Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a work-man that necdeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.” (2 Tim. 2:15) One who studies to show himself to be approved of man is going contrary to the Lord’s admonition, because that which is highly esteemed among men is an abomination in the sight of God. The positive commandment, therefore, is to study to show oneself approved “unto God”.
27	Now concerning that part of the prophecy, ‘ ‘ I will . . . spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts”; “and ye shall be taken away with it. ’ ’ The man appointed to drag the dead carcass outside of the camp was considered unclean and required to purify himself. (Lev. 16:27,28) In line with that provision of the law Jehovah states what his curse will be upon the unfaithful ones.. The judgment of God would bring upon them a disgraceful death and a dishonorable burial by spreading upon their faces the foul excrement of animals or the refuse of sacrifices, which must be burned without the camp. The one assigned to drag such refuse out of the temple must take it through the dung gate and dump it into the incinerator of Gehenna, thus fortelling the fate of the “evil servant” class. This part of the prophecy shows that the unfaithful priests are punished by complete annihilation.
28	The expressed purpose of Jehovah is that none of the priestly class shall have excuse for professed ignorance. Therefore God says to the unfaithful priesthood: “And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levi, saith the Lord of hosts.” (Mal. 2:4) The faithful servants of the Lord “know”, because they have been given the truth and joyfully received the same. The unfaithful might have known, had they exercised ordinary diligence. The “covenant of the priesthood” was made plain in the publication of the book named Jehovah, and those who received the message therein, which the Lord provided, have rejoiced to put forth their best endeavors to fulfill their covenant. God’s purpose is that the covenant must continue to be performed by the faithful. They must show
January 1, 1937
Sfe WATCHTOWER.
9
their devotion to him by the performance of their covenant continuously. The Levites, as a tribe, stood on Jehovah’s side on the occasion of the ‘golden calf’ incident at Mount Sinai. (Ex. 32:25-29) Prior to that time Aaron and his sons, who were Levites, were chosen and appointed to be priests. When Aaron and his sons ministered in the priest’s office, they must wear the holy, priestly garments. These statutory requirements Jehovah made for ever to observe, and they must be observed and obeyed by Aaron and his sons, and all who follow in the priestly office thereafter. (Ex. 27: 21; 28:1-43) Jehovah’s covenant with Levi, and which is inclusive of all thereafter of Levi, is shown in this provision of God’s law: Numbers 1:1,47-53. The Levites were charged with the duty of keeping the tabernacle. This constituted the covenant with all the tribe; and the Levites, having on a previous occasion, as above cited, openly declared themselves on the side of Jehovah, and having vowed to be his servants, were fully consecrated to the Lord. They were given to the high priest as his servants, according to Jehovah’s covenant with them. (Num. 3: 6-12; 8:1-26; 18: 6) The Lord Jesus, as Jehovah’s great Messenger and Judge, at the temple reveals to the antitypical priesthood these truths concerning the covenants, and now there is no excuse for them to fail or refuse to know and to obey the commandments of the Lord. In the prophecy Jehovah expressly mentions this covenant, saying: “My covenant was with him [Levi] of life and peace; and I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name. ’ ’—Mal. 2: 5.
28	Jehovah, in addressing Aaron the high priest, at Numbers 18:1,19, expressly referred to this covenant. Phinehas, the son of Aaron the high priest, on an occasion showed his zeal for Jehovah and his covenant, and concerning this Jehovah said: “Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy. Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace: and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel.”—Num. 25:11-13.
80	Just preceding his death Moses blessed the tribe of Levi and, speaking as the messenger of Jehovah, said: “And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.... And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one [the house of Levi], whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah; . . . for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar.” (Dcut. 33:1-10) True to
his covenant Jehovah permitted the Levites to live and fill office down to the day of John the Baptist, who was a Levite.—Luke 1: 5-13, 57-80.
81	God keeps his covenants and changes not: “For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.” (Mal. 3:6) In this last prophecy “Jacob” includes the tribe of Levi. Said the Lord then concerning Phinehas: “I give unto him my covenant of peace.” That covenant denoted continuance in the priest’s office. (Num. 25:12,13) The father of John the Baptist was an active priest in the temple of Jerusalem. Peace implies safety, welfare and prosperity. No greater honor could be given to a Levite than to be the forerunner and announcer of Jehovah’s beloved Son and Servant, Christ Jesus, and that this honor was given to John the Baptist shows the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promise concerning that priesthood. (Matt. 11:11) Note, therefore, that the antitypical “sons of Levi”, meaning all those consecrated and wholly devoted to God, are promised the peace of God, glory, honor, immortality and life everlasting for them.—Rom. 2: 6, 7.
32	The antitypical sons of Levi of this day, who are Jehovah’s witnesses, his remnant, sent forth to declare his name, like John the Baptist, now announce and advertise Jehovah’s anointed King, Christ Jesus, and his kingdom. The covenant with them is the covenant “of life and peace”, and these fear Jehovah and stand in awe of his name, and continue to obey his commandment by declaring his name.
38	Jehovah gave the tribe of Levi the service of his holy tabernacle as priests and Levites, and, says Jehovah by his prophet, this He did ‘1 for the fear wherewith he feared me ’ ’. The Levites feared God, and this is shown by them at Mount Sinai, when they took their stand on the side of Jehovah and then acted as executioners of those who had turned to the Devil worship. (Ex. 32:25-28) Later Phinehas showed a like fear by zealously serving Jehovah as the executioner of the unfaithful. This foreshadows the antitypical Levites acting fearlessly and boldly in declaring God’s judgments upon those who become unfaithful, and furthermore shows the obligation laid upon them to so declare God’s judgments. It is not their prerogative to do any actual slaying, but they must make known Jehovah’s judgments. (Isa. 58:1) Such is the reason why The Watchtower should now publish these truths, that there might be no excuse for ignorance concerning the same, and hence no excuse for negligence by those who are serving as antitypical priests. Note now how the mimic god, Satan, and his ministers have perverted the truth of God’s Word.
34	The Jesuits and others of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, attempting to justify their wrongful course of action, have counterfeited the provision of God’s law and greatly perverted the same, and have used it as an excuse and justification for their murder of so-called “heretics”. By “heretics” they mean all
10
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
who do not bow to the Hierarchy. Thus the priests of the Devil, acting in the name of Christ, have brought great reproach upon the name of Jehovah. They assume that one who is not wholly and faithfully devoted to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is unfaithful to the Lord and they are justified in slaying him. Those devilish Jesuit priests of the “man of sin’’ crowd do not show any fear of God. Likewise the “evil servant” class do not show that they are “afraid before my name”, saith the Lord. On the contrary, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy priests and their allies oppose Jehovah and his work done by his witnesses. The prophecy, therefore, shows the end of such opposers and persecutors with certain and complete destruction. If anyone professes to be the follower of Christ Jesus, and finds himself disposed to oppose the work of Jehovah and the Lord Jesus Christ and his servants in proclaiming the name of Jehovah and his kingdom, let him beware. This prophecy is notice to such. They that follow that course will find their fate pronounced by the Lord Jesus concerning the goats.
THE TRUE WITNESSES
85	The prophecy then directs attention to Jehovah’s “faithful and true” witnesses. This prophecy applies primarily, of course, to Christ Jesus. Says the prophet: “The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity.” —Mal. 2:6.
86	The Lord Jesus Christ is the great High Priest and Head of the antitypical priesthood. (Heb. 3:1) As Jehovah’s servant he spoke out boldly and plainly and published God’s law and denounced the counterfeit law of the religious organization that defamed Jehovah’s name. He openly showed that God’s law is supreme and far above the law of man-made governments or institutions, even as it had been commanded by Jehovah: “They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar.”—Deut. 33:10.
87	The prophecy of Malachi here describes Christ Jesus as Jehovah’s great High Priest, the Greater than Moses or than Aaron. All true and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are necessarily included in this description; and that means also the faithful remnant now on the earth. “Iniquity,” that is, disloyalty or lawlessness and perversion, “was not found in his lips.” Christ Jesus upheld the law of Jehovah. His faithful apostles did likewise. The same must be true today with regard to the faithful remnant who, in the face of the cruel opposition by selfish “elective elders” and other opposers, such as the modern Pharisees, the strong-arm squad, magistrate courts and others, continue the service. The faithful witnesses of Jehovah must and will continue to boldly declare God’s purpose, regardless of such opposition. They have been
commanded by the Lord, and by his grace they will obey his commandments. (Isa. 43:10-12; Ezek. 9:4; Matt. 24:14) These faithful ones may expect now to encounter much opposition; and, being a part of the priesthood, they will go courageously on making proclamation of the kingdom message, which God has commanded them to do. His law and his truth are in the mouth of such witnesses, and unrighteousness shall not be upon their lips.
88	Further speaking of Jesus Christ the great High Priest, the prophecy says: “He walked with me in peace and equity [(Hebrezvs) level; a plain; concord; justice].” Christ Jesus sought to establish peace, unity and order among God’s people. He denounced pride, and hypocrisy, and inequality. He taught honesty, uprightness and sincerity, and he “did turn many away from iniquity [that is, lawlessness and the crooked way] ”. When Christ Jesus appeared at the temple he turned the “faithful servant” class away from lawlessness, perverseness and crookedness, and those who were not thus turned away were disapproved. (Mal. 3:2, 3) Now the remnant, as the faithful antitypical sons of Levi whom the great Refiner at the temple has purified, turn others in the right way by proclaiming the plain truths of God’s Word in their presence and hearing, and thus they show those who will form the “great multitude” how they may escape the wrath of God and find refuge in bis organization and under his protection. (Joshua 20; Jas. 5:19, 20) “And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. ’ ’ —Dan. 12: 3.
RELIGION AND CHRISTIANITY
88	Jesus Christ, the great High Priest of Jehovah, made a clear distinction between religion and the law of God. He showed that religion is the product of the Devil, because it is contrary to God’s commandment and is practiced by professional hypocrites. “Tradition” is a precept which is taught by men and is contrary to God’s law, and therefore from the Devil. Everything brought forth to deceive and turn Hie people away from Jehovah proceeds from the Devil. The truth of God’s Word is often perverted to accomplish this wrongful purpose of the enemy. Jehovah describes the teachers of tradition as those who draw near to him with their mouths but their hearts are lar removed from him; whose wisdom and tradition shall perish. (Isa. 29:13,14) The Pharisees were of that class of teachers or clergymen who followed tradition and disregarded the commandments of God, and who were hypocrites. The religionists of this day are in the same class. They induce the people to believe that Christianity and religion are one and the same thing, whereas “Christianity” means to observe and practice the truths which Christ Jesus taught and which truths he received from Jehovah God; whereas “re
January 1, 1937
tte watchtower.
11
ligion” means the observance and practice of that which is taught by men contrary to the Word of God and which emanates from the Devil. There is no such thing as “the Christian religion”. There is that which is called “the Christian religion”; but that is a misnomer. No Christian could be a religionist. The Pharisees propounded this question to Jesus: “Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders?” The answer of Jesus given plainly and directly to that question is conclusive proof that religion emanates from the Devil and the hidden purpose thereof is to bring reproach upon the name of Jehovah God. “But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? For God commanded, saying, Honour thy father and mother; and, He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; and honour not his father or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. Ye hypocrites! well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”—Matt. 15:3-9.
40	Those Pharisees did not honor God their Father by their covenant, nor their “mother”, God’s organization; but for their own selfish reason and purpose they taught exactly contrary to God’s commandment, and for this Jesus denounced them as hypocrites. The religionists of the present day do the same thing. The teachings of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy are based upon the teachings or traditions of men, and not upon the Word of God. The well-known writers of the Catholic doctrines cite the tradition of the “fathers” as authority for their doctrines and pervert the Scriptures in an effort to sustain the teachings of tradition. In a book written and published by the late James Cardinal Gibbons, bearing the title The Faith of Our Fathers, he relies chiefly upon the tradition of the “fathers” to sustain doctrines therein taught, and which are held and taught by the Catholic Hierarchy. Concerning the doctrine of “purgatory”, the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy which nets the greatest amount of revenue to that organization of hypocritical priests, Cardinal Gibbons says: “This interpretation is not mine. It is the unanimous voice of the Fathers of Christendom. And who are they that have removed the time-honored landmarks of Christian faith by rejecting the doctrine of purgatory? They are discontented churchmen impatient of the religious yoke.” He further says: “The same motive which you have for rejecting the opinion of an ignorant politician and embracing that of eminent jurists, on a constitutional question, impels you to cast aside the novelties of religious innovators and to follow the
unanimous sentiments of the Fathers in reference to the subject of purgatory. ... I would wish to place before you extended extracts from the writings of the early Fathers of the Church bearing upon this subject; but I must content myself with quoting a few of the most prominent lights of primitive Christianity. ’ ’ Then Cardinal Gibbons names and quotes from the following so-called “fathers” of Christianity, to wit, Tertullian, Eusebius, Cyril, Ephrem, Ambrose and others, and adds: “You see that praying for the dead . . . was ... an act of religion preached and inculcated by all the great Doctors and Fathers of the Church, who are the recognized expounders of the Christian religion.”—The Faith of Our Fathers, page 208 and following.
41	All the doctrines of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy are based on the same authority, that is, the teachings of the men in the early days of that organization and designated as “fathers in the church”, and their doctrines are wholly unsupported by the Bible. In this respect the Pharisees and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy teachers are exactly in the same position. They disregard the commandments of God and pervert the law and teachings of God and of Christ Jesus, in an effort to sustain the teachings of the early ‘ ‘ fathers ’ ’.
42	It is interesting to note here that the apostle Paul was once a Pharisee, but by the grace of tne Lord he reformed and became a zealous preacher of the truth. As a Pharisee Paul followed and taught, as he stated, the Jewish “religion,” which was based upon the tradition of the fathers. After the Lord had made Paul an apostle, Paul wrote to the Galatians and said: ‘ ‘ For ye have heard of my manner of life in time past in the Jews’ religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and made havoc of it: and I advanced in the Jews’ religion beyond many of mine own age among my countrymen, being more exceedingly zealous for the traditions of my fathers.” —Gal. 1:13,14, R.V.
43	Here the apostle makes the clear distinction between Christianity and the traditions of the fathers, which tradition was the basis for the Jewish religion. True Christianity is the Word of God, as taught by Christ Jesus; whereas religion is the tradition taught by men. That the religion of the Pharisees or “Jews’ religion” was a perversion of the truth, and hence from the Devil, is further shown by the apostle’s word, to wit:' ‘ Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.”—Col. 2: 8.
44	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy falsely claims that the apostle Peter was the first pope and that the popes following thereafter are his truly divine successors; which doctrine is also supported only by the tradition of the fathers. Peter himself takes an exactly contrary position and shows that the teachings of the fathers were vain and contrary to God’s Word: “Knowing
12
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that ye were redeemed, not with corruptible things, with silver or gold, from your vain manner of life handed down from your fathers.” (1 Pet. 1:18,R.V.) The apostle Peter there definitely states that the tradition of the fathers was vain and contrary to God’s Word. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has followed the same vain traditions.	.
45	Concerning those who followed the tradition of their fathers and who taught and practiced the Jewish religion, which clearly emanates from the Devil, it is written: “Jesus said unto them, If God were ycur Father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.”—John 8: 42-44.
46	The ancient Pharisees and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy teachers, who are the modern Pharisees, are therefore clearly in the same class, and both are anti-God and anti-kingdom. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy falsely claims that that man-made Devil-originated institution constitutes God’s kingdom, and therefore the Hierarchy refuses to enter the kingdom of God under Christ and uses all manner of methods to keep others out; and concerning such the Lord Jesus says: ‘ ‘ But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.” (Matt. 23:13) The modern Pharisees, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, use every possible means of wrongdoing to proselyte or bring into their own organization, and under their control, all kinds of people; and concerning this Jesus says: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves. . . . Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell ? ’ ’—Matt. 23:15, 31-33.
47	Such thing as the “Christian religion” does not and never did exist. The name “Christian religion” is a perversion and a defamation of the name of Jesus and of Jehovah God. Its teachings and practices of formality are exactly contrary to the Word of God, and hence proceed from the Devil. Christianity is that which is taught by Christ Jesus in full obedience to the law and commandment of Almighty God. The ancient Pharisees persecuted Jesus unto death because he taught the truth of God’s Word. The modernday Pharisees, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies who practice religion, likewise persecute Jeho
vah’s witnesses, the true followers of Christ Jesus, and seek to bring about their death. Christ Jesus was in complete disrepute and disgrace with the ancient Pharisees. The true followers of Christ Jesus today, who are Jehovah’s witnesses, are in complete disrepute and disgrace in the eyes of all religionists and all of the Devil’s crowd. Thus the true and faithful servant class are privileged to suffer with Christ Jesus, even as he suffered, and all who are the witnesses of Jehovah suffer together, all being in disgrace and disrepute and hated by the religionists because they proclaim tho name and kingdom of Jehovah God.
48	In this connection, referring to the prophecy of Malachi 2:6, it is clearly seen that Christ Jesus and his true followers speak the truth. The law of truth is in the mouth of Christ Jesus and his faithful followers. Iniquity is not found in them; but the teachers of religion and all who oppose the kingdom message brand themselves as the enemies of God and of Christ. This specifically applies to the “evil servant” class, who had full opportunity to know better and to take the right course, but which class has wholly failed to profit by what the Lord gave them.
DUTY OF THE PRIESTS
48	Jehovah announced what is the duty of those who are in line for the kingdom and who are therefore of the priestly order. He directs his prophet to write: “For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law [of Jehovah] at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.” (Mal. 2:7) The remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses must keep their lips continually, and at all times they must be ready to speak when opportunity offers, and tell the truth of and concerning God and his kingdom. Jehovah instructed those who covenant to serve him, saying: “And that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the Lord hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.” tLev. 10:11) This commandment applies more emphatically to the antitypical priesthood. They must speak boldly the truth of God’s Word and against the perversion thereof. This they accomplish by spreading the knowledge of the truth abroad in printed form; which they are doing now.
50	Further says the prophet: “And they [meaning all who are on Jehovah’s side] should seek the law [of God, and not the traditions of men] at his mouth.” The priestly class must obey God’s law and must make it known to others who will hear, because Jehovah sends them forth as his messengers to declare his Word and his name. As John the Baptist was the messenger of God sent forth to make announcement of God’s purpose to send Christ Jesus, so the remnant of God’s priestly class are now sent forth to declare Jehovah, his King and his kingdom. John the Baptist was killed because he declared God’s law to King Herod and to other practitioners of the Jewish religion. Herod was a proselyte to the Jewish religion and practiced that
January 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
13
hypocritical formality. (Mark 6:14-29) Christ Jesus is the great Messenger of Jehovah, who prepared the way before the Lord and then straightway appeared at the temple. (Mal. 3:1) For this reason Jesus repeatedly spoke of himself as the Messenger of Jehovah and spoke of Jehovah as “Him that sent me”. Christ Jesus at the temple now sends forth the remnant, even as he declared concerning his disciples: “As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world.” (John 17:18) “Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you.” (John 20:21) The remnant are sent forth as the witnesses of Jehovah directly under the command of the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ Jesus has gathered his faithful followers into the temple, and in the secret place he informs them; and what they there receive they must go out and proclaim openly and boldly. (Matt. 10:27) In so doing, according to the commandments given them, the remnant come near to God, their Father, and to his organization, their “mother”, and of which organization Christ Jesus is Head and next to the Father; and all this is done by Christ Jesus and his faithful followers in the name of and for the sake of the name of Jehovah.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
T 1. What is now seen to be Jehovah’s purpose concerning his creatures in their relationship to him? To what extent has that purpose been discerned and appreciated? Account, in this respect, for two classes manifest at the present time.
H 2-7. What is meant by the declaration, ‘From the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, my name shall be great ’? To what extent has this had fulfillment?
I 8. By whom, and how, is there offered “in every place’’ ‘incense, and a puie offering, unto Jehovah’s name’?
T 9,10. Relate the facts showing fulfillment of Malachi 1: 12. Account for the condition of those to whom those prophetic words are addressed.
H 11-14. How have the unfaithful said, ‘ ‘ Behold, what a weariness is it 1 ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ snuiled at it ’ ’ ? How have they ‘ ‘ brought
[for sacrifice] that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick”?
T 15. Wherein have the unfaithful “priests” failed to obey God’s commandment recorded at Ezekiel 44: 23? For what purpose is the proper application of these scriptures now published?
T 16-19. Why does Jehovah speak to and of the unfaithful “priests” as “the deceiver” and as ‘vowing, and sacrificing unto him a corrupt thing’? Account for the declaration then made, “For I am a great King,” “and my name is dreadful among the heathen.” To whom is the commandment at Psalm 96: 8-10 addressed, and with what response?
T 20. Show the fitness of the statement at Malachi 2: 1.
T 21-23. Describe the situation foreshown in the prophecy at verse 2.
If 24. Apply the statement, “I will curse your blessings.” Account for the Lord’s then immediately declaring, “I have cursed them already.”
1f 25-27. Apply verse 3.
T 28. Referring to verse 4: Who shall know, and how ? Explain the expression, ‘ ‘ that my covenant might be with Levi. ’ ’ Point out the performance of that covenant, in the matter as recoided; also the fulfillment thereof as a prophecy.
T 29-31. What important instruction is seen at Numbers 25: 11-13 in connection with Deuteronomy 33:1-10?
T 32. How does the course taken by Phinehas serve as an example to the antitypical pnests and Levites?
T 33, 34. Why did Jehovah give the tribe of Levi the service of his holy tabernacle? How does this foreshadow the antitypical Levites? Point out how Satan and his ministers have perverted the truth of God’s Word. What, then, is the purpose of this prophecy?
If 35-38. Apply the statement, (a) “The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips.” (b) “He walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. ’ ’
T 39-41. With illustration, distinguish between religion and Christianity. Compare the position taken by the Pharisees of Jesus’ day with that of the religionists of the present day.
f 42-45. Show, from statements by the apostles Paul and Peter, and those of Jesus, that the religion of the Pharisees was entirely a perversion of the truth, and hence from the Devil.
If 46-48. Relate facts which show that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy teachers are anti-God and anti-kingdom, having clearly taken the same course as the ancient Pharisees as stated by Jesus in Matthew 23: 13 and 23: 15, 31-33.
If 49,50. Apply the statement, (a) “The pnest’s lips should keep knowledge.” (b) “They should seek the law at his mouth.” Compare the position and commission of the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses at the present time with that of John the Baptist and of Christ Jesus.
PROSPERITY UNDER GOD’S KINGDOM
ONE of the great benefits that will result to the people under the Lord’s government will be its administration for the general welfare of all. As an example: The radio belongs to God. He provided it for man and brought it to light at the proper time to announce his kingdom. Now the selfish interests would control the radio and use it entirely for selfish purposes. God will see to it in his due time that all the people shall hear the truth, and he will use the radio as one of the means of informing them. His lightnings will carry his truth and lead the people in the right way. (Job 38:35; Ps. 43:3) The Lord will judge the people with his truth, and therefore they must know the truth; and he will use his own good way which he has provided, to bring the truth to them.
“Earth,” as used in the Scriptures, symbolically
represents the visible organization of God’s kingdom on earth. “Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven.” (Ps. 85:11) God made the earth for man. (Isa. 45:12,18) He put the electricity in the earth and around the earth for the benefit of the general welfare of the people. That power that is in the waves of the sea belongs to the Lord, for “the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof”. (Ps. 24:1) Use of the radio has been brought to light for the general welfare of the people. (Dan. 12:4) The power of the ocean waves will operate the great machines that have been invented, and others that will be invented, and will produce the electricity that will light all the homes, provide the heat for fuel for all the homes and the power to operate all the necessary machines in the homes and upon the farms. The people will pay a small and reasonable
14
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tax merely to cover the necessary cost of operation, but no one will be permitted to reap a selfish profit therefrom, because none will be permitted to oppress or hurt in all that holy kingdom. That will be one of the great benefits to the people.—Isa. 11: 9.
If a small percent of the taxes now paid by the people of the United States were used to build great highways and improve the water-power, the country would soon be wonderfully developed and there would be no men hunting for work. Suppose a great highway should be built from ocean to ocean ■ power lines paralleling boulevards; in the center part provision made for railways or rapid transit; on either side wide boulevards for heavy motor trucks; outside of this, and adjoining on either side, wide boulevards for pleasure cars; and beside each of these, and on the outside, footpaths for those who desire to walk; along the entire system of the highway, and at intervals of every few miles, lodgings provided wherein the people could find rest and comfort and food at a minimum cost. Such an arrangement would be a great benefit to the people. The Lord will do that and much more. All the wealth and all the power in the hand of the righteous Ruler will be used for the general welfare. Then there will be no men and women seeking employment that they might earn their bread. No heavy burdens will be laid upon anyone. Not only will the government be operated for the general welfare, but the Lord will look down with righteousness upon the earth, and truth will spring forth from amongst the people. “Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven. Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good; and our land shall yield her increase. Righteousness shall go before him, and shall set us in the way of his steps.’’—Ps. 85:11-13.
The Lord’s government will carry on a great reconstruction work for the general welfare of the people. He will restore the waste lands and make the places that once were desolate blossom like the rose and bring forth in abundance. The people will feel secure in their property, in their lives, and in their liberties; and all will learn to do right.
When Solomon was king over the Jews his reign was marked by great prosperity, contentment, and joy among the people. Palestine is a small country, and at that time there were many people in that land. God had promised Israel to bless them abundantly if they would obey him, and under Solomon’s reign he was doing it. (1 Ki. 4:1, 20) The government of Solomon foreshadowed the righteous government of God’s righteous Son. Solomon’s rule therefore foreshadowed the reality, that under Messiah’s rule there would be great prosperity, contentment and joy among the people. The ruler or governor brings honor upon himself, and properly so, when he looks to the general welfare of all the people. This rule is stated by the Lord: “In the multitude of people is the king’s honour: but in the want of people is the destruction of the prince.”
(Prov. 14:28) In harmony with this, Jesus stated: “And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.” (John 12:32) With absolute certainty we may know that under his righteous government the peoples’ interests will be protected and the benefits of that government will extend to all mankind. The blessings which God promised to Israel if obedient will be multiplied to all the nations of the earth. —Deut. 15: 4-10.
It must be apparent to all sober-minded persons that in a country like the United States, where there is so great an abundance of material wealth, there must be something radically wrong when more than ten million persons cannot find work by which they can earn their bread. That unhappy condition is enhanced when it is considered that at the same time millions of dollars daily change hands by those who gamble on the products and labors of others. The United States is cited as an example because these things are actually going on and because without a doubt the United States is the most favored land and government on earth. Under the righteous government of Jehovah and his King all the people will have an opportunity to work and will be required to work. Gambling in stocks will not be permitted. Work is a blessing to man and brings much pleasure when he can enjoy the fruits of his work. Work becomes irksome and laborious when man toils under adverse conditions and then has his earnings unjustly taken away from him.
Under God’s government the people “shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble”. (Isa. 65:23) They will all enjoy the fruits of their work. Thorns and thistles have long encumbered the ground and made it difficult for man to obtain a good yield from the soil. The Lord will show man how to remove these hindrances, that his crops may be raised in abundance.—Isa. 55:13.
Famine has been one of the great enemies of man under Satan’s reign. There will be no famines when God’s government is in full sway in the earth. “Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God, shall bless us. ’ ’—Ps. 67: 6.
It is quite the rule obtaining in present evil governments that those who govern do not suffer from famine, but have plenty. The prophet describes these: “And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered. ’ ’—Mal. 3:15.
Conditions will be entirely different when the righteous One has full sway and exercises it. Then the people will have plenty and will rejoice. “When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked bcarcth rule, the people mourn.” (Prov. 29:2) With the production and distribution of food and raiment carried on in justice and righteousness the people will be contented and happy. “And in this [government] shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of
January 1, 1937
STSe WATCHTOWER.
15
wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. ’ ’—Isa. 25: 6.
The health of the people is of very great importance. If all the people eould have health, that would be a great benefit to them. The present governments take some steps to safeguard the health of the public, but in so doing the people are exploited. Many who claim to serve the sick connive at making even the well sick that they may be able to reap pecuniary gain therefrom. Foods are adulterated to such an extent that much sickness results therefrom.
Under the Lord’s righteous government the people will be taught what is proper to eat and how to eat it; they will be taught proper sanitary conditions, how to sleep and exercise, and no one will be permitted to deceive them. They will be told the truth; and knowing that they are receiving the truth, they will be encouraged and benefited and will progress rapidly. God will eure the sick that they may remain well. He says: “There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away.’’ (Rev. 21:4) “And [then] the inhabitant shall not [any more] say, I am sick.’’—Isa. 33:24.
Strength of mind and body will be another lasting benefit which the people will receive and enjoy under
God’s righteous government. There are many who are now literally blind and who are blind also to the truth. “Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened” and “the blind shall see out of obscurity”. (Isa. 35:5; 29: IS) God would have these precious truths told to the people now, that they may gather strength therefrom.—Isa. 35: 3, 4.
Those who are obedient to the law of God are assured that they will receive strength, because “the way of the Lord is strength to the upright”. (Prov. 10:29) The old, sick and decrepit man will grow strong if he will hear and obey the righteous Ruler. The great Interpreter of the truth and righteousness is God's Anointed One, Christ his King. He is the Messenger that will bring truth and peace to the people at Jehovah’s command. All men will be brought to an exact knowledge of the truth, and particularly that truth that Jehovah is God and that Jesus Christ gave his life that men might live. Then hearing and obeying the truth, man will benefit thereby and will be restored to the days of his youth. (Job 33: 25) By the mouth of all his holy prophets God declared that under the righteous reign of his Beloved the King he will fully bless with strength of human perfection all men who will obey him and his Christ, his Vindicator.
CAN SEE THE GREAT MULTITUDE COMING
Dear Brother Rutherford:
My heart is so filled with joy because of my experiences in the aervice today (Sunday) that I must tell you; for I know that your heart also will be made happy.
I invited a Spamah lady whom I met here, and who ia reading, to get into the chariot and go with me today. There were only a few houaea in the Spanish aettlement that I had not called on; so I drove there. She said, "No, no! Let us not work here. I lived in this neighborhood. They are all Catholics belonging to the Penitente branch. They hang some of their members on a cross from Good Friday until the following Sunday. If they die, they pass immediately into heaven. If they survive, they are reveienced as saints. They all hate me becauae I quit the church, and it won’t do any good to go to them.’’
I assured her that they muat be given the witneaa, whether they hear or forbear.
The first witness resulted in leaving a Riches; the next, a Riches and three booklets; the next, three booklets; the next, a bound book; and so on. We made fourteen calls, placing ten books and thirteen booklets, with twelve obtainers, and took orders from the. other two. Very few are now attending services, and my companion was truly astounded!
This afternoon we called on Spanish people with whom I had previously placed literature, giving them lectures on the portable. We found some reading their books, and they were so glad for the lectures. The priest had warned them not to buy the Bibles and books, and told them they should give their money to the hospital fund! He charges two dollars apiece for baptizing their babies, and they realize they have been "held up’’.
I, for one, can see the great multitude coming, washing their robes, and beginning to wave their palm branches before Earth’s New King. The Protestants, so called, are prejudiced and indifferent. The Catholic people as a class are more hungry.
I surely am rejoicing in the marvelous light from the temple. The light concerning the Gibeonites thrills my soul; and words fail to express the joy of heart to behold them coming in their tattered and dust-covered garments, their wine bottles empty, their bread moldy and stale, but asking for the bread from
heaven! We are happy because the Greater Joshua is making a covenant of peace with them, which the great Jehovah will respect and will preserve them alive in the day of his fierce anger. It is my prayer that we may never lack courage to meet them and to assist them in making their covenant.
I thank you, Brother Rutherford, for your example of unwavering loyalty and devotion, and, as an instrument in the hands of our Teachers, for pointing us to the many promises that our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us and will smite the enemy 1 ‘ from Gibeon even to Gazer ’ ’. May he speed the day!
Joyfully yours,
M. Cady Gilman, Pioneer.
(Continued from page 16)
TENNESSEE
Jackson WTJS Su 10:30am
Su 12: 15pm Su 2:30pm
Knoxville WNOX Su 10:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 9:45pm
Memphis WREC Su 10:00am
Su 3:55pm Su 10:15pm
TEXAS
Dallas WRR Su 9:30am
Su 4:00pm Su 9:00pm
El Paso KTSMSu 9:10am
Su 1:15pm Su 6:30pm
Ft. Worth KTATSu 10:15am
Su 3:00pm Su 7:00pm
Midland KRLH Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 5:15pm
Pt. Arthur KPAC Su 9:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 4:30pm
S.Antonio KMAC Su 7:55am
Su 2:55pm Su 7;55pm
UTAH
Salt L.City KSLSu 8:30am
VIRGINIA
Harrisonb. WSVA Su 12:15pm
Su 2:30pm Su 4:45pm
Petersb’g WPHR Su 8:55am
Su 10:25am	Mo 7:55am
We 7:55am	Fr 10:15am
Sa 7:55am
Richmond WKVA Su 12:15pm
WASHINGTON
Seattle KIRO Su 10:25am
Su 5:25pm Su 9:00pm
Spokane	KGA Su 9:25am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:25pm
Tacoma	KVI Su 9:30am
Su 2:00pm Su 9:00pm
WEST VIRGINIA
Huntington WSAZ Su 1:00pm
Su 2:00pm Su 3:00pm
Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
Su 12:30pm Su 6:10pm
WISCONSIN
Madison WIBA Su 9:30am
fflie WATCHTOWER. RADIO SERVICE The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time Is shown In each Instance.]
ARGENTINA
Bahia Blanca LU2Su 11:30am
Buenos Aires LR2 Su 10:50am Los Andes, San Juan
LV5 Su 10:30am
Havana CMQ Su 5:45pm Eastern Standard Time Also shortwave COCQ 9740kc Spanish Su 5:30pm Santa Cl’a CMH1 Su 11:15am (1st and 3d Sundays) ' Spanish Su 11:00am Spanish Th 11:00am (1st and 3d Thursdays)
AUSTRALASIA
FIJI
Suva VPD2Fr 9:00pm 9540 kilocycles (31.45 meters)
NEW SOUTH WALES Albury 2-AY Tu 9:45 pm Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Grafton 2-GF Tu 7:30pm Gunnedah 2-MO Su 7:00pm Newcastle 2-HD Su 10:30am Su 6:30pm Su 11:40pm We 6:30pm Sydney 2-UE Su 9:00am Su 4:25pm W’gaW’ga 2-WGSu 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane	4-BC Su	7:30am
Cairns	4-CA Su	7:00pm
Ipswich	4-IP Su	7:05pm
Su 7:25pm Su 7:55pm
Marybor’h 4-MB We 9:45pm Townsville 4-TO Su 9:15pm
FRANCE
Radio Lyon Sa 6:50pm
French We 7:25 pm
French Sn 7:25pm
INDIA
Rangoon VU2LZ Su 12:00jin
PARAGUAY Asuncion ZP1 Su 10:30am
SPAIN
Madrid EAQ We 7:15pm (Eastern Standard Time)
Sa 7:15pm
Spanish Su 6:45pm
URUGUAY Montevideo CX10 Su 12:15pm (Radio Internacional)
TASMANIA Launceston 7-LA Su 5:45pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat 3-BA Su 12:45pm
Bendigo 3-BO Su 7:00pm Hamilton 3-HA Su 6:45pm
Horsham 3-HS Su 7:00pm Su 8:00pm Su 8:45pm
Melbourne 3-AK Su 2:15pm Su 10:00pm
Swan Hill 3-SH Su 7:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA Kalgoorlie 6-KG Su 7:00pm Northam 6-AMSu 7:00pm Perth 6-ML Su 7:00pm
UNITED STATES ALABAMA Birm ’ham WAPI Su 10:15am Su 4:30pm We 5:15pm
ALASKA
Anchorage KFQD We 9:30am
Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
BELGIUM
Wallonia-Bonne Esperance (201.7 m) We 7:00am
CANADA
ALBERTA
Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
BRITISH COLUMBIA
Ke]owna CKOV Su 1:45pm
ONTARIO
Cobalt CKMCSu 3:15pm
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:00am
Su 1:30pm Su 8:00 pm Polish Su 6:20pm (1st and 3d Sundays)
ARIZONA
Jerome KCRJ Su 9:25am Su 12:05pm Su 4:05pm
Tucson KGAR Su 9:30am Su 12:55pm Su 5:45pm
Spanish Su 12:40pm ARKANSAS
Hot Sp ’gs KTHS Su 10:15am
CALIFORNIA
Bakersfield
W6XAI Su 10:30am
Su 1:15pm Su 7:00pm
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 6:45pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:00am
Su 2:00pm Su 7:00pm
Tu 9:00am Tu 2:00pm
Tull :00pm We 8:15pm Fr 9:30pm Sa 10:00pm
COLORADO
Col’o Spr. KVOR Su 10:30am
Su 12:15pm Su 4:00pm
Durango KIUP Su 1:00pm
Greeley KFKA Mo 9:30ara
Mo 1:00pm Mo 6:25pm
CONNECTICUT
CUBA Caibarien CMHD Spanish Mo 1:15pm Camaguey CMJFSu 11:45am
N.Britnin WNBC Su 8:00am Su 8:10am Su 10:00am
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Washington WOL Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 6:30pm
FLORIDA
Lakeland WLAK Su 9:30am Su 12:30pm Su 5:00pm
Orlando WDBO Su 11:00am Su 12:30pm Su 5:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens WTFI Su 9:25am Su 11:00am Sa 7:00pm
Atlanta WATLSul0:50am Su 2:00pm Su 9:25pm
Griffin WKEU Su 9:40am
Su 2:45pm Su 4:30pm
HAWAII
Hilo KHBC Su 10:00am
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:55am Su 6:00pm We 4:00pm
ILLINOIS
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 4:45pm
Su 6:45pm	Su 9:00pm
Tuscola WDZ Su 9:35am Su 11:55am Su 1:50pm
IOWA
C. Rapids WMT Su 10:00am Su 12:15pm Su 9:55 pm
MAINE
Augusta WRDO Su 10:00am Su 1:15pm Su 5:00pm
Bangor WLBZ We 9:55am IVe 12:55pm We 5:10pm
Presque I. WAGM Su 9:45am Su 12:30pm Su 1:55pm
MARYLAND
Baltimore WCBMSu 9:00am Su 12:15pm Su 6:15pm
Frederick WFMD Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm	Su 5:00pm
Hagerst ’n WJE J Su 10:25am
Su 1:40pm Su 9:15pm
MASSACHUSETTS
Boston WMEX Su 9:25am
Su 4:10pm Su 8:10pm
Boston WORLSu 10:05am
Su 2:05pm Su 3:05pm
MICHIGAN
Detroit WJR Su 10:00am
Kalamazoo WKZO Su 8:25am Su 9:55am Su 10:55am
MINNESOTA
F ’gusFalls KGDE Su 10:00am
Su 1:45pm Su 7:15pm
Min ’apolis WDGY Su 9:30am Su 2:00pm We 5:30pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb ’g WFOR Su 1:00pm Su 3:3Upm Su 5:30pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
St. Joseph KFEQ Su 10:00am
Su 1:35pm Su 3:40pm
NEBRASKA
Lincoln KF AB Su 9:30am
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Laconia WLNH Su 10:30am
Su 3:15pm Su 7:10pm
NEW JERSEY
Asbury P. WCAP Su 12:45pm
Su 2:45pm Su 9:00pm
Camden WCAM Su 11:00am
Su 12:15pm	Su 3:15pm
Mo 2:30pm	We 2:30pm
Newark WHBI Su 9:25am
Su 6:25pm Su 9:00pm
NEW YORK
Brooklyn WBBR Su 9:10am
Su 4:30pm Su 7:30pm
Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:15am
Su 6:30pm Mo 10:30am
Tu 10:30am Tu 6:30pm
We 10:30am We 6:30pm
Th 10:30am Th 6:30pm
Fr 10:30am Fr 6:30pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am
Su 10:45pm
Buffalo WKBW Su 5:55pm
Freeport WGBB Su 10:25am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:55pm NewYork WBNX Su 5:30pm White Pl. WFASSu 6:00pm
Tu 10:55am Sa 10:55am
NORTH CAROLINA
Greensboro WBIG Su 10:30am
OHIO
Akron WJW Su 11:30am
Su 3:25pm Su 10:15pm
Cleveland WHK Su 11:00pm
Tu 1:45pm Th 1:45pm
Fr 1:45pm
Columbus WBNSSu 7:45am
Su 12:30pm	Mo 3:15pm
We 3:15pm	Fr 3:15pm
Columbus WCOL Su 10:00am
Th 2:30pm Sa 1:45pm
Columbus WHKC Su 5:25pm
Mo 1:55pm	Tu 1:55pm
We 1:55pm	Th 1:55pm
Fr 1:55pm
OKLAHOMA
Tulsa KVOOSu 9:30am
Su 2:30pm Mo 4:55pm
OREGON
Portland KWJJ Su 10:45am
Su 4:15pm Su 9:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Easton \VhiST Su 10:25am
Su 11:55am Su 9:25pm
Greensb’g WHJB Su 10:15am
Su 4:00pm
Pittsburgh KQV Su 10:45am
Pittsb’ghWWSW Su 10:45am
Su 5:00pm Su 9:00pm
York WORK Su 12:25pm
Su 3:00pm Su 6:25pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Greenville WFBC Su 10:00am
Su 3:30pm Su 9:30pm
Spart’b’g WSPA Su 10:30am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:40pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Huron KGDY Su 9:25am
Su 12:30pm We 4:55pm
Pierre KGFX Su 10:00am
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Sioux Falls KSOO Su 9:10am
Su 9:45am Su 4:30pm (Continued on page 15)
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE O TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street « Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” -Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall livo on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges
systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Itemittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by Intel national Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian ...... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African ...... Boston House, Capo Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription puce may have The Watchtower tree upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, slating the reason for so le-questing it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the wntteu application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribe/s: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may he expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will bo sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postof/ice.
Act of March 3, 18't).
MEMORIAL
The date for the celebration to the name of Jehovah God and to the sacrifice of Christ Jesus in 1937 will be Friday, March 26, after six p.m. The book entitled Jehovah contains a detailed explanation of the Memorial. Carefully and prayerfully study chapters two and three thereof. Then on the 26th day of March, after six p.m., let each company of the anointed assemble and celebrate the Memorial. In doing so, use unleavened bread and real red wine. Unfermented grape juice or raisin juice will not meet the Scriptural requirements. The Lord and the apostles used real red wine, and we should follow their lead.
-JEHOVAH OF HOSTS”
The testimony period “Jehovah of Hosts’’ embraces the nine days February 6-14, 1937. This midwinter campaign will specialize on booklets, and all those on Jehovah’s side will oiler a 10c combination consisting of two booklets with colored cover and the latest self-covered booklet. Let Jehovah’s people take this coming campaign to heart, faithfully making all due preparation therefor. Consult forthcoming issues of the Infoimant for additional instructions. The “man with the inkhorn’’ promptly reported the matter, und likewise each one will report his activities and the results in this campaign.
“PROTECTION”
This new booklet, of 64 pages, is self-covered. It bears an attractive cover design, in color, and also the title and legend: “PROTECTION from those who seek to hurt or destroy me. How can I find it?’’ After reading it, you will surely want to distribute the booklet. Its release for general distribution will be duly announced. Meantime you may procure a copy, or copies, on a contribution of 5c each, and read up in preparation.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1937
This is to announce the Society’s issuance of a new year book for use during 1937. It contains the comprehensive leport by the president of the Society covering the work accomplished during the service year 1935-1936 by Jehovah through his witnesses and their companions throughout the world. The information included therein is most valuable, especially in view of the war now on with the religionists. There is also a brief discussion by the president on the 1937 year text; additionally a text for each day of the year together with an enlightening and encouraging comment taken from The Watchtower. In view of the special expense of publishing such a limited edition as that of the Year Book a contribution is asked of 50c a copy. Please order now, sending remittance with order. Groups will place individual orders with their local servant, so as to spare the Society much time and expense in shipping.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
Vol. LVIII	January 15, 1937	No. 2
MALACHI
PART 6
“My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.”—Ps. 89:34.
JEHOVAH is a covenant-keeping God. Having given his word, he always performs his word. “I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46:11) “My word . . . shall not return unto me void; but it shall accomplish that which I please.” (Isa. 55:11) When a creature enters into a covenant with Jehovah, he must perform that covenant faithfully. Otherwise he does not receive God’s approval. All whom God approves must be dependable. One who treats his covenant lightly is not dependable. A covenant-breaker is contemptible in the sight of God and is worthy of death. (Rom. 1:31,32) The course of religionists is therefore foolish and disastrous. Those who follow religionists are walking the broad way of destruction.
2 According to his covenant with Levi Jehovah took the priests from that tribe. The Levites pictured those in line for the royal house of Jehovah. Some of the Levitical priesthood were faithful, and some of them, moved by selfishness, were unfaithful. The same is true with the antitypical Levites, both priests and servants. Having stated what he required of the priests, Jehovah then addresses the unfaithful and to them he says: “But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the law: ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of hosts. ’ ’—Mal. 2: 8.
8 Jehovah had previously told the priests that they had not given honor to his name. On the contrary, they had dishonored his name, and Jehovah said to them: “0 priests, that despise my name.” (Mal. 1:6) They had departed and gone out of the way by offering imperfect sacrifices unto the Lord. The antitypical priesthood must offer “the sacrifice of praise to God [not to men] continually”. (Heb. 13:15) When the Lord Jesus appeared at the temple, there were those in line for the kingdom, and therefore of the priestly order, who were guilty of going out of the way and offering unto the Lord imperfect sacrifices. In fact practically all in the year 1917 were more or less contaminated and God was angry with them. They were somewhat excusable, however, because of their ignorance and of the erroneous teachings which they had received. Many never did get into the right way, even after they were informed by the Lord. The self
important and selfish ones not only went wrong themselves but “caused many to stumble in the law”. (Leeser) This they did by teaching the traditions of men and wrongfully giving the same as the interpretation of Jehovah’s law, and by assuming themselves to be teachers and interpreters of the Word of God, and which wrongful interpretations in time caused many to become bewildered and lose confidence in the organization of the Lord on earth. By the teaching of “character development” and adulation and praise of human leaders they dishonored God’s name and caused many to become discouraged, because such discouraged ones saw that they must fail in character development, that is, in bringing themselves to the point of perfection while in the flesh. They were constantly reminded of their imperfections and their inability to make themselves perfect. The self-exalted and very pious ones held themselves out as perfect patterns and tried to draw away after them followers, and this they did for their own aggrandizement and adulation. Doing that and otherwise working iniquity, it was needful for Christ Jesus to ‘send forth his angels and gather out of his kingdom those offenders and workers of iniquity’. (Matt. 13:41) Many have wondered why there should be such a division between various companies claiming to be in present truth. The Scriptures make it clear that from the time of the temple judgment the faithful and unfaithful priestly class must be separated, in spirit, if not entirely in person.
* The unfaithful became covenant-breakers, and hence Jehovah says: “Ye have corrupted the covenant.” Thus it was with natural Israel, and even so it has been and is with spiritual Israel. An example of natural Israel is found in this, that “one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, ,was son in law to Sanballat the Horonite” and was unfaithful; and Nehemiah chased him away; concerning which Nehemiah said: “Remember them, 0 my God, because they have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites.” —Neh. 13: 28, 29.
8	No man can serve two masters. One cannot be faithful to the Lord and in any manner compromise
20
<3T7e WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
with the Devil and the Devil’s organization. Some of the antitypical priesthood, spiritual Israelites, attempted to satisfy worldly demands and at the same time to please and serve Jehovah God. That was compromising with the world. Using their position in God’s organization in selfishly gaining personal advancement constituted unfaithfulness. Those selfish ones have assumed to hold the truth for their own selfish purpose and private enjoyment and have failed and refused to carry the truth to others, and they oppose those who do faithfully carry the truth to hungry souls. The unfaithful fear men and try to please men, and such makes them covenant-breakers. Continuing to pretend to serve the Lord, they bring blind and otherwise blemished sacrifices unto the Lord. Thereby they dishonor the name of Jehovah.
8	The disobedient include those who because of their disobedience are placed in the “evil servant” class at the judgment beginning at the temple, and also those of the “elective elder” class who refuse to heed the warning of the Lord. To such Jehovah by his prophet says: “Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law.” (Mal. 2:9) Jehovah caused Christ Jesus to cleanse his sanctuary and thus to make the unfaithful “priests” and corrupters of the covenant of Levi to be viewed from God’s standpoint with contempt and likewise viewed with contempt by all persons who have the spirit of the Lord God and who faithfully serve him. God does not use the unfaithful “priests” in his service, but he does get his truth to his faithful covenant people, and to all of good will, in spite of the stubborn and unfaithful ones who oppose the proclamation of the truth. The faithful Jehovah names as his witnesses; and to the Lord Jesus, his great Servant, he commits all “his goods”, meaning all his kingdom interests. Jehovah further says to the unfaithful: “Ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen [servants] : for the Lord God shall slay thee, and [honor] his [chosen and faithful] servants by another name.” (Isa. 65:15) From the slothful and unfaithful servant ‘the talents’ are taken away and given to the faithful. (Matt. 25:28,29) “For them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.” (1 Sam. 2:30) The Lord makes manifest the unfaithful of the priestly class and the faithful ones, using the latter to carry forward his purpose.
7	The self-important ones of the priestly class, says the Lord, “have been partial in the law.” They have “had respect of persons”. (R.U.) The self-important and negligent “elective elder” class have said and say, ‘The law or rule of the Lord requiring witnesses to go from house to house may apply to the ordinary members of God’s people, but that said law or rule does not apply to the “elective elder” class or “chief elders” in the congregation.’ Such self-important
ones occupy too high a position in their own estimation to perform what is thus called by them “menial service”. Those “elective elder” and self-important ones try to soften down the law of God, or put on the soft pedal, in order to appear not to be too hard on the clergy and others who practice religion, such as politicians, who use religion to accomplish their selfish purpose. When the law of God comes in conflict with the law of the land made by men, the unfaithful have bowed down to the human rulers on earth, claiming such human rulers to be “the higher powers”, and have let that be their excuse for declining to carry the message of the kingdom from house to house in obedience to the commandment or law of God. They have also tried to retain their high and honorable positions amongst the consecrated in order that they might lord it over others and appear to be wise and mighty, rather than submit to the rule of the Lord. They have murmured and complained against the action taken by God’s visible organization, and refused to conform themselves to the law of his organization.—Jude 16.
8	Those of the “elective elder” spirit have insisted on following their own selfish ways and have therefore opposed the united witness work of God’s people on the earth. The prophet now, in behalf of the faithful, addresses his words to those objectors and mur-murers and says: “Have we not all one father? hath not one God created us ? why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers?” (Mal. 2:10) Otherwise stated, these faithful ask: ‘ ‘ Have we not all made a covenant to do the will of God ? and that being true, why should there be any division amongst us? Why not all be obedient and work together? Why should there be opposition and treacherous dealing amongst those who profess to be the followers of Christ Jesus?” The Scriptures show that Abraham was used as a representative of Jehovah in the great prophetic drama disclosing God’s purpose, and that Abraham stood as the father of all of the members of the body of Christ; hence the faithful remnant now on earth are of the “seed of Abraham” according to the promise. To them the apostle says: “If ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.” (Gal. 3:29) Among such there must be no partiality shown, because all are brethren and all on a common level: “But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren. ’ ’—Matt. 23: 8.
8	Each one of the antitypical Levites is therefore a new creature in Christ Jesus, and hence all are fellow servants. They should all stand together and work ’ harmoniously together to the glory of Jehovah’s name, and not in dealing treacherously with his brethren. The faithful are pictured by Jacob, and concerning them it is written: “But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, 0 Jacob, and he that formed thee, 0 Israel, Fear not; for I have redeemed thee, I have called
January 15, 1937
Tfe WATCHTOWER,
21
thee by thy name; thou art mine. . . . Even every one that is called by my name; for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him. ... Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen. ’ ’—Isa. 43:1-10.
10	All of the servant class are equal members of one organization, which is Jehovah’s capital organization, with Christ Jesus as head; and this is especially true since Zion gave birth to the nation and has brought forth her other children. (Isa. 66:7,8) These facts the faithful call to the attention of the hinderers and ask: ‘Why, then, should any among us deal treacherously? Why profane the covenant of our Father?’ Even to this day there are those in some of the local companies who insist on strife and are constantly fomenting trouble amongst the company, and thereby they show that they are not at unity but are disturbers of God’s people; and this is proof that they are not in the temple. The same question above propounded may be properly asked of all such now. It is the selfish ones who fight against their brethren, insisting on having their own way. They fail to heed the admonition of the apostle to stand shoulder to shoulder and fight for the gospel of the kingdom and against the common enemy. They are out of harmony and not at unity. (Phil. 1:27; Eph. 4:1-4) In every company where there are disputes and where there is strife, let each one solemnly inquire of himself as to his own heart condition and search himself to see whether or not he is for peace and unity; and if he is not for peace and unity, that is positive evidence that he is not of the temple company. Those who are truly devoted to the Lord and are of the temple will earnestly endeavor to get on Jn peace and to avoid strife and controversy amongst themselves and to maintain the unity of the body of Christ.
11	The fathers in Israel, that is, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were consistently against intermarriage, because God had so commanded. (Gen. 12:1-5; 24:1-7) This position concerning intermarriage with the heathen foreshadows that spiritual Israelites must be a people separate and distinct from the world and must keep themselves aloof from and therefore unsullied by the world. The covenant inaugurated at Mount Sinai included the “covenant of Levi” and applied to all Israel, and the purpose thereof was to bring forth a pure and undefiled people for Jehovah’s name, and for that reason the law of God forbade intermarriage with the heathen. “Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice: and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods. ’ ’-Ex. 34:15,16.
12	The covenant made at Moab likewise declared against such intermarriage. (Deut. 7:1-4) This shows that the people chosen for Jehovah’s name, that is,
his witnesses called out for his name, must be separate and apart from the world and must refuse to compromise with worldly organizations or to have anything in common with any part of the worldly organizations. Faithfulness and dependability is required of those whom Jehovah approves. If one is hot dependable, is careless and indifferent, or opposes the united action of Jehovah’s organization in giving witness to the kingdom, such is evidence that he is not of the temple company.
13	Particularly during the period when Christ Jesus was preparing the way before Jehovah there was brought forth a people who covenanted to devote themselves to God and to his unqualified praise. Such people were pictured by Judah for the reason that the name ‘ ‘ Judah ’ ’ means ‘ ‘ Praise to Jehovah ”. The remnant of Israel delivered from Babylon was made up from the tribes of Judah and Levi, foreshadowing those who stood before the Lord at the beginning of the temple judgment. Now, says the prophet: “Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the Lord which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.”—Mal. 2:11.
14	The self-important and selfish ones of the Judah class “dealt treacherously”, in this, that they did not hold strictly to the covenant and to Jehovah’s organization and keep themselves separate from Satan’s organization. They broke their covenant and committed abominations amongst the chosen people of God. In this text of Malachi 2:11 “Israel” representatively stands for those taken out as a people for Jehovah’s name. Jerusalem’s being the capital city of God’s temple shows that all who stood before the Lord at the beginning of the temple judgment were in some measure guilty of coming short of keeping their covenant. These had been brought out of the world for the temple of God, and their compromising with Satan's organization and giving adulation to creatures was against their covenant, and it was a serious matter. “Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.”—1 Cor. 3:16,17.
13	Those who were called out to be of the temple company, and at the same time mixing with and compromising with the world, were thereby profaning the temple. Says the prophet concerning Judah: “Hath married the daughter of a strange [foreign (A.Z?.V.)] god.” This means the god of this world, Satan, whose “daughter”, that is, his organization created on earth, is a stranger and against God. The mixing up with religionists and following their formalism, while claiming to be the servants of God, is profaning his name. Unity with this crowd is marrying the strange or foreign god against God’s covenant.
22
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
The strange marriage of natural Israel pictured this unholy relationship that the consecrated had with the religious organizations of the world. There is nothing in common between God’s organization and Satan's organization, as Jesus said: “My kingdom is not of this world.” “The prince of this world . . . hath nothing in me [with me].” (John 18:36; 14:30) Any union of the antitypical Levites, that is, God’s covenanted and consecrated people, with Satan’s organization constitutes a violation of their covenant, because there is no concord or unity of God’s organization with that of the enemy. (2 Cor. 6:14-17) There must be a cleaning or a cleansing work done amongst the consecrated in order that the approved ones might be qualified to serve the Lord in a manner pleasing to him.
18	When the cleansing work began, those who failed or refused to “come clean” were completely rejected by the Lord, and concerning such it is written: ‘ ‘ The Lord will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offereth an offering unto the Lord of hosts.” (Mal. 2:12) It is written and declared that judgment is against both “teacher and scholar”. (Leeser, margin) There are those who have set themselves up as spiritual watchers and instructors over others, and those who lean upon and look to such human teachers or leaders and who thus lean upon the arm of flesh. There are those who assume to be teachers, even after the Lord has made it plainly to appear, since coming to the temple, that the teachers are God and Christ. There are those who look to and lean upon such presumptuous human teachers and continue to follow after them. It is certain from God’s declaration above quoted that none of these shall abide in his organization. In this text of the prophecy “Jacob” stands for all the ones called and chosen, and who are in line for the kingdom. Therefore to be ‘cut off from Jacob’s tents’ (R.V.) means to be entirely separated from God’s organization and pushed out or driven out into the world as unclean and as unfit for the Lord. The Levite shown in the prophecy as “him that offereth an offering unto the Lord of hosts” means those who are an abomination in his sight. The great Judge at the temple gathers out such and thrusts them away from him, as foreshadowed in the action of Nehemiah. —Neh. 13:28-31.
17	Some in line for the kingdom have thought to play the hypocrite and to get away with it. They have deceived themselves and deceived other creatures, and to such the Lord in this prophecy says: “And this have ye done again, covering the altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or receiveth it with good will at your hand.” (Mal. 2:13) On certain occasions those deceivers have attemped to appear very pious and very sorrowful and have shed many crocodile tears, expecting these to clear up their
crookedness before the Lord. But God cannot be deceived. Religious ceremonies do not count for anything with the Lord. With natural Israel this was tried and failed in Zechariah’s time. (See Preparation, page 107.) After the remnant of the covenant people of God were brought back in 1919 various ones tried to carry on in the same manner as before the captivity that took place in the years previous. They continued to look wise and pious and to go right on with the so-called “character development” and religious ceremoniousness, and with great mourning at the memorial time of the death of an earthly leader, and with tenaciously holding to a human teacher, and with soft-pedaling and pussyfooting before political rulers, that they might appear to be exemplary persons. All this they did, neglecting God’s instruction given by Christ Jesus at the temple, and thus they acted in utter disregard of the necessity of bringing forth the fruits of the kingdom. The Lord emphatically declares that such hypocritical offerings are displeasing to him, and concerning such he says: “I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand.” (Mal. 1:10) Such ultra-pious-appearing ones were not doing the will of God, but were proceeding in an unlawful manner, deceiving themselves and deceiving others. At this point it might be well said that obedience is better than sacrifice. Those who were disobedient do not have Jehovah’s favor. The faithful and dependable ones do receive the favor of the Lord.
18	Here it seems again appropriate to call attention to those who have taken another extreme course. The Watchtower on several occasions has mentioned that so-called “character development”, as that- was emphasized during the Elijah period, will never bring one to perfection and fit him for the kingdom, but that God requires more, that is, faithful obedience to his commandments. Unselfish devotion to God, which is love for God, is the principal thing. “If ye love me, keep my commandments.” (John 14:15) Without any reason or justification some have seized upon the statements made in The Watchtower concerning “character development” as an excuse for indulging in loose conduct. Such is entirely wrong. While one cannot develop a character and ever bring himself to perfection, and by this means alone qualify himself for the kingdom, yet he must strictly obey the commandments of the Lord and do his very best to walk perfectly with God. For the benefit of those in line for the kingdom it is written: “ Be not ye therefore partakers with them. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light; (for the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth ;) proving what is acceptable unto the Lord. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret. See then that ye
January 15, 1937
STe WATCHTOWER.
23
walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the spirit.” (Eph. 5:7-12, 15-18) “For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty ; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another. This I say then, Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. But if ye be led of the spirit, ye are not under the law. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these: Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another.” (Gal. 5:13-26) During the Elijah period the church received much instruction concerning the right course of living. Now there must be added to that a full obedience to the law of God in bearing the fruits of the kingdom before the world as he has commanded.
18	The temple judgment must be adverse to those unfaithful and who break their covenant, and this regardless of how pious they may appear to be or how much they claim to be servants of God. Jehovah God does not accept the offering of such deceivers, and these ask the question as to why he docs not receive their sacrifice or offering; and the Lord answers them: “Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the Lord hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.” —Mal. 2:14.
20	Those unfaithful “priests” have asked, and continue to ask, the foregoing question. They complain against the Watch Tom and its progressive activity in declaring the name of Jehovah, and wonder why their own offerings of ultrapiousness and inactivity cannot be just as acceptable as going from house to house and proclaiming the message of the truth. The unfaithful “priests” attempt to hinder the worthy work of carrying the message of truth to others, and
thereby they ‘turn the stranger from his right’, that is, those of the Jonadabs, from hearing the truth and participating in the proclamation thereof. These com-plainers object to the remnant’s using the sound equipment to announce the kingdom. They cite and quote in support of their objection the words of the prophet: “He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.” (Isa. 42:2) Then they say to the people of good will: “How do Jehovah’s witnesses explain that prophecy and get around it?” The above text from Isaiah’s prophecy cannot be properly construed as meaning that the servant of the Lord cannot speak the kingdom message in the street. Satan’s agents, with great self-display to attract attention to themselves, make a great noise about the adoration and worship of creatures, and much display before the people, such as the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other religionists do, to call attention to themselves and to their organization. It is properly said of them that they “rage in the streets”. (Nah. 2:43:1, 2) God’s people are not permitted to attract attention to themselves to advertise themselves, as do Satan’s agents. Jehovah, by his prophet, says of his servant: “ He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.” Manifestly this text means that the work of God’s servant is to be done with modesty and consistently, and always for the purpose of attracting attention to Jehovah and his kingdom, and never for the purpose of attracting attention to creatures. Jehovah’s witnesses must advertise the King and the kingdom and not individuals. The witnesses of the Lord must honor their Father, Jehovah, and their “mother”, his organization, and not honor men. This is the very thing they do by giving proclamation to the kingdom message by means of sound equipment, thus calling the attention of the people to the great Jehovah God and to his King, and by telling the people how they may learn the only way to life and happiness. A man who goes into the street or public place, dressed in a long robe, and covered with gold lace, and wears a Dagon hat, and is proceeded and followed by a blare of trumpets, manifestly is thus doing to advertise a hypocritical and blasphemous organization, and not to advertise the kingdom. Everyone knows that the religious organizations do these very things to attract attention to themselves and to extol the name of man. Jehovan’s witnesses are never heard to extol the name of any man, but arc always calling attention to the King eternal, and his kingdom, as the only hope of the world. This they do in obedience to the commandment of the Lord: “What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light; and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops [public places].” (Matt. 10:27) If Jehovah’s witnesses are doing contrary to God’s commandments, why not let the Lord judge them? Since they are doing this in obedience to his commandments, they arc doing exactly right. The Roman Cath
24
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
olic Hierarchy and their allies, the “evil servant” class, attempt to judge Jehovah’s witnesses adversely and to punish them under the laws of Satan’s world, and to do this for the reason that such opposers do not want the message of truth to be heard. In doing the work that the remnant are now doing they are subjected to all manner of abuse and are despised because of the name of the Lord, and they are glad to be made of no reputation and called the offscourings of the world, because they do honor and serve the Lord. Christ Jesus suffered for a like reason, and all the members of his body suffer as he suffered. In brief, then, the words of the prophet here mean that His servant shall not advertise himself in the streets, but shall advertise God’s kingdom and his King to the honor and glory of Jehovah and his organization, and do so in public places.
21	Jehovah then declares through his prophet that he has been a witness of the treacherous conduct of the unfaithful “priests” toward “the wife of thy youth”. In this prophecy “the wife of thy youth” stands for God’s organization, Zion. In the early days, or “youth”, of the church the apostles and their faithful co-workers were inseparably wedded and united to Jehovah’s organization under Christ, the Head thereof: ‘ ‘ Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ; that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. ’ ’—Rom. 7: 4.
22	For many years Jehovah has been a witness of the treachery against God’s organization under Christ Jesus by a class of men who have professed to be the followers of Christ Jesus but who have played with and connived with Satan’s organization, Babylon. The Watchtower has repeatedly called attention to this, and for that reason The Watchtower has been subjected to much opposition and cruel criticism. Then says the Lord to those unfaithful “priests”: “Yet is she thy companion.” The word “companion” here used means “one who is joined”. It is different from the word “companions” used in Psalm 45:14.
22	Jehovah did not accept the child of Abraham by Hagar as the promised seed. Jehovah made just one woman, the faithful Sarah, to bear the typical seed. “Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.” (Gal. 3:16) “But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman was by promise.- Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.”—Gal. 4: 23, 28.
24	Jehovah was picturing one pure and holy nation that he would bring forth. That nation must be in complete unity in the worship of Almighty God. There were twelve tribes in natural Israel, and yet there was but ‘one nation’. Thus were pictured the spiritual Israelites composed of many, yet forming but one.
Says the prophet Malachi: “And did not he make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit. And wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth. ’ ’—Mal. 2:15.
25	Out of the nation of natural Israel there came only a “residue” or remnant that had the spirit of the Lord and showed faith in and obedience to him. Out of the many who have covenanted to be the people of God as followers of Christ Jesus there has come only a remnant, and that remnant is made manifest with the beginning of the temple judgment. The faithful in Malachi’s day pictured the faithful spiritual Israelites, particularly the remnant now on the earth. (Rom. 11:1-5; Isa. 10:20,21; 11:11,16) This question is propounded in the prophecy: “And wherefore one?” What was God’s purpose in making of Israel only one nation without adulteration or heathen mixture? Was it because the Jews were of a different blood-stream than those of the heathen and God did not want their blood-stream contaminated? That was not the reason. God made all nations of one blood. (Acts 17:26) It was because Jehovah was foretelling his purpose to make one godly seed. This prophecy of Malachi therefore answers the question: “That he might seek a godly seed,” or, “a seed of God” {margin). This seed here mentioned by the prophet refers not to Christ, who is the real seed according to the promise, but foreshadowed that seed. The covenant made in Egypt, and confirmed at Mount Sinai and which was pictured by Hagar, bound natural Israel firmly to God’s typical organization. God did not recognize Hagar as Abraham’s wife. Sarah was his real wife, and her son Isaac pictured the real seed. The Israelites were not to mix or intermarry with the heathen nations, lest the ungodliness of such heathen nations would corrupt the Israelites. The typical “godly seed” was therefore preserved from ungodly mixture. That foreshadowed that the real godly seed must be entirely free and separate from the world, which is Satan’s organization. Consequently it is written in the prophecy: “Therefore take heed to your spirit.” And why was that admonition given? That the spirit of the godly seed be not spoiled by mixing with the spirit of the world or heathen. The real seed must have the spirit of entire devotion to Jehovah and his organization. There must be no union with any part of Satan’s organization. To taint or to lose that spirit would cause one to be entirely unfit to be of the real “godly seed”. That is a great calamity to the creature.
20	The mixing with Satan’s organization and imbibing the spirit thereof is treacherous dealing. Jehovah by his prophet therefore says to those who have covenanted to do his will: “Let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth,” that is, against Zion, which is God’s organization, and to which the priestly class are united or joined. And why not ? Be
January 15, 1937
tffie WATCHTOWER.
25
cause, as it is written, “evil communications corrupt good manners,” or, “evil companionships corrupt good morals.” (A.ff.V.) “Vicious intercourse corrupts virtuous habits.” (Diag.) (1 Cor. 15:33; Prov. 13:20) Fools are those who say by their course of conduct, “There is no God”; and to go along with them leads to disaster. Nehemiah, the servant of God, caused the Israelites to take an oath that they would not intermarry with the heathen: “And I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, saying, Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves. Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things 1 yet among many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel: nevertheless, even him did outlandish women cause to sin.”—Neh. 13: 25, 26.
27	There are but two organizations: the one righteous, which is God’s, and the other wicked, which is Satan’s. One who has been joined to God’s organization, and who then forsakes that organization, automatically joins Satan’s organization. No one can serve both God and Satan. Since the religionists and the “evil servant” class do not serve God, although operating in the name of God and Christ, it clearly appears that they are of the Devil’s organization. There can be no middle ground. One is either for God or against him.
28	Jehovah used the relationship of husband and wife to illustrate the relationship of those who become a part of God’s organization. For that reason the law of God with Israel was against divorce: “For the Lord, the God of Israel, saith that he hateth putting away [divorce (Roth.)]: for one covereth violence with his garment, saith the Lord of hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.”—Mal. 2:16.
29	The law was typical and prescribed the proper course for the typical organization and foretold and prescribed the proper course of spiritual Israel. God’s organization is pure and is guilty of no fornication or illicit relationship. It therefore follows that when one enters the covenant relationship with God and is united with his organization through Christ Jesus, he cannot divorce himself from that organization on the ground of uncleanness in that organization. It is not possible for God’s organization to be unclean. The uncleanness is in the one who mixes with Satan’s organization, which is unfaithfulness and rebellion on his part against God, and so therefore he deals treacherously. There is no excuse or justification for one to withdraw from God’s organization, and if he does withdraw he thereby shows his own uncleanness. Manifestly such is the meaning of the words of James addressed to those who have covenanted with God to do his will and who have become contaminated with the Devil’s organization. “Ye adulterers and adulteresses,
know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.”—Jas. 4:4.
80	All religionists are, as such, an unclean class, because they have a form of godliness but deny his power, draw near to him with their mouths, but their hearts are far removed from him, and they make themselves a part of the world, which is Satan’s organization. Likewise, those once in line for the kingdom who become unfaithful corrupt themselves by pursuing an unlawful course. “They have corrupted themselves; their spot is not the spot of his children; they are a perverse and crooked generation. Do ye thus requite the Lord, 0 foolish people and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thee ? hath he not made thee, and established thee?” (Deut. 32:5,6) The practitioners of religion therefore could not have God’s favor.
81	When one divorces himself or withdraws himself from God’s organization he identifies himself as a violent creature, for the reason, he does violence to his vows of faithfulness and obedience. To such Jehovah, by his prophet Malachi, says: “For one covereth violence with his garment.” “Him also who covereth with violence his own clothing.” (Roth.) Tnis leads to violence against God’s organization and against the faithful members, the servants thereof. Such a person violates God’s commandment and the law of his organization. (Prov. 6:20) Jesus described those in line for the kingdom and who become evil, separating themselves from God’s organization, and of them he said: “But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellowscrvants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; the Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”—Malt. 24:48-51.
82	Today there are those who are in opposition to God’s organization and his work he is doing in the earth, and such opposing persons were once fully identified with God’s organization. They therefore identify themselves as of the “evil servant”. They not only deny the presence of the Lord at the temple, but mock those who are of the temple and continue to denounce them and their work in the name of the Lord.
88	Jehovah by his prophet warns against such treacherous dealing, saying: ‘ ‘ Take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.” Dealing treacherously with God’s organization destroys the spirit of the Lord in one and makes him the servant of the Devil. Jehovah removes his spirit from such and casts him away into darkness. Those faithfully devoted to Jehovah therefore pray, as is written in the Psalms: “Create in me a clean heart, 0 God; and renew a right spirit
26
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
within me. Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit.” (Ps. 51:10-12) “But ye are not in the flesh, hut in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.” (Rom. 8:9,13) “And grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.” (Eph. 4:30) Those who are now of the ‘ ‘ evil servant ’ ’ class had the warning from the Lord, but they give no heed thereto. It behooves everyone in line for the kingdom to take heed to such warning and to ‘walk obediently with thy God’.—Mie. 6:8.
Those who are of the “elective elder” class, and those of the “evil servant” class, have uttered and continue to utter many words in an attempt to justify their course. They lay stumblingblocks in the way of others who are seeking to walk with the Lord. Jehovah is not pleased with such persons. By his prophet he says to such “mouthers”: “Ye have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied him ? When ye say, Every one that docth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighted in them; or, Where is the God of judgment ? ’ ’—Mal. 2:17.
85	Such persons are constantly uttering words of adverse judgment against those who are diligent in bringing the kingdom message before the people of good will. Those opposers are wise in their own conceits and listen not to the commandments of the Lord, and they positively refuse to walk lawfully with God’s organization. The Lord declares he is tired of them and of their senseless words, and tells them so, and says to them: “Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied [thee] ?” By such question those murmurers assume that God has no cause or reason to be tired at their words and their course of conduct. They are in this attitude when the day of God’s judgment at the temple eomes. The time of God’s forbearance with them is past. At the temple he makes known his judgment by and through Christ Jesus, and then no more can ignorance be pleaded as a defense.
88	To the question of those unfaithful ones Jehovah answers: “In that ye say, Every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them.” (R.V.) The opposers may not utter such words with their mouths, but by their course of conduct they speak louder than by words. They attempt to justify Satan’s organization and their association therewith. They attempt to show that it is not displeasing to the Lord Jehovah to make an alliance with religionists or other parts of Satan’s organization, or to compromise with that worldly organization. They say it is all right to put on the soft pedal and speak with honeyed words to those clergy who defame God’s name. They say of the representatives of Satan’s organization, “We
know God would have us to obey all of the laws of the land, and that we will do.” They insist that God has ordained these human rulers, as well as the invisible rulers of this world, to rule and that the human rulers are the “higher powers”, within the meaning of the Scriptures, and that we must obey every law, even though that law is in direct conflict with God’s law. Jehovah has no alliance with wrongdoers, and does not approve any who do ally themselves with wrongdoers. The so-called “higher powers” of the world frame mischief by legislation; which is an abomination in the sight of God. ‘ ‘ Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship [partnership] with thee [with God’s organization], which [throne of iniquity] frameth mischief by a law?” (Ps. 94:20) The ungodly organization that legislates laws, and causes them to be enforced, which bring reproach upon God’s name and punish his witnesses for telling the truth, is thus framing mischief by legislation, and God declares that his true children can have no partnership with that gang.
8T A striking example is that of present-day compulsory flag saluting. The commandment of Cod to his covenant people is that they shall make no image of any thing in heaven and earth and shall not bow down to any thing or to images. (Ex. 20: 3-5) Slaking an image and bowing down to that is attributing to that image, or what it represents, protection and salvation, and such is an insult to Jehovah. Salvation of man is possible only by the means which Jehovah has provided through Christ Jesus, and there is no other way. (Acts 4:12; Rev. 7:10) In the face of the plain commandments of the Lord God the religionists make images and bow down before them. They hang up a flag and command that men shall salute that, and thus attribute salvation to what the flag represents. They frame laws and by such laws attempt to compel the true followers of Christ Jesus to attribute protection and salvation to such images. What is the real purpose? and what is back of all this formalism? The real purpose of such religious ceremonies is to proselyte the people and bring them into subjection to the religious or devilish organizations. To be sure, there is no harm in the flag itself. But that is not the question involved. The flag is used to represent the visible, human earthly powers, and compelling one to salute the same means to compel a person to say: “That flag stands for or represents my protection and my salvation.” Anyone who wants to do this, it is his privilege, of course, to attribute salvation to what the flag represents. But one who has covenanted to do God’s will must obey God’s law, and to disobey it means an insult to Jehovah and a loss by the creature of everything. Each one for himself must determine whether he will obey God and remain true to him or not, or whether he will compromise by obeying the Devil’s organization. Of course, the faithful will be misunderstood and misrepresented and hated because of their
January 15, 1937
6Te WATCHTOWER.
27
faithfulness to the Lord; and Jesus said it would be even so. Therefore the faithful priestly class answer those who make such attempts, that ‘it is the will of God that we obey him and not man’. Every law of the land that is in harmony with God’s law the true follower of Christ must and will gladly obey. But the “evil servant’’ class mouth and make much noise about the saluting of the flag and about many other things concerning loyalty to God, and the Lord God answers their question and says: ‘ You make me tired with your senseless jabber.’ Quite recently one who used to be actively working with the Lord’s organization issued a tract which he calls ‘ ‘ Old Theology Tract ’ ’, in which he denounces those who stand out firmly against compulsory flag saluting. That is a concrete example of the “evil servant’’ class.
88 One may appear to be developing a “beautiful character’’ and to be outwardly very good and pious, but that is no indication whatsoever that God is pleased with that person, but rather the contrary. One who claims to be in the truth and who is so very “sweet” in appearance, and who has honeyed words upon his lips, may be doing real evil by neglecting to serve God, whom he has covenanted to serve, or by opposing those who are serving God as he has commanded. Adulation and worship of human leaders, and holding out that God committed all his truth to a human leader, is thereby doing violence to God and his organization. Such hypocritical, pious ones in very nice words will say, as the Lord states: ‘ ‘ Wherein have we wearied him ? ’ ’ These pious opposers say: ‘ Everyone that doth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he de-lighteth in him, because God is love and he wants us to see the good in everyone. ’ They go even to the point of saying that in due time God will save everybody, even the Devil himself. The Lord Jehovah makes it clear in his Word that he will save no one who is not devoted to him and his organization.
88 Those unfaithful “priests” once in line for the kingdom, but who have taken an unlawful course, by their course of conduct say, ‘There is no God of justice.’ The Lord tells them that they say, “Where is the God of justice?” (Roth.) That lawless crowd say, at least by their course of action, that there is no law against us and therefore it does not matter seriously if we do violate the rules of the covenant which we have made, and which rules it is claimed govern God’s visible organization. They follow their own selfish course, disregard the law of God and the commandments of his organization, and commit violence against his organization. It was that same kind and class of persons who took offense at God’s prophet Malachi for pointing out to them wherein they displeased God. Their counterpart of the present time is that unfaithful class, once in line for the kingdom, who become very angry against God’s witnesses for proclaiming the truth that is written in his Word, and which clearly points out the “evil servant” class. When it
is published that God requires full and complete obedience to him, and that those who take a course against his organization are taking a course against God, they become offended and hypocritically and with feigned piety say, “Where is the God of justice?” Such persons began to manifest themselves openly particularly in the years 1917 and 1918.
40Prior to the coming of Jehovah’s Messenger, Christ Jesus, to the temple, that great Messenger did a work, as described in the Scriptures as ‘preparing the way before Jehovah’. Christ Jesus taught the truth to his disciples, and his disciples likewise followed the commandments of God and completely ignored the traditions of men. Amongst the apostles that were last called was Paul, who had been following the traditions of the Jews’ religion; but when the Lord opened his eyes he turned completely around, repudiated the tradition of the religionists and became a faithful servant of the Lord. For that reason Jew religionists cruelly persecuted Paul. After the passing away of the apostles selfish men arose in the organization of the church and substituted the doctrines of men for the Word of God. Perverting the Scriptures, they taught their own ideas and introduced into the church organization, and taught, such false doctrines as the trinity, immortality of all souls, eternal torment, purgatory, the primacy of the pope, and like doctrines, none of which find any support whatever in the Scriptures. The men who introduced and taught such doctrines thereafter are designated “the fathers of our faith”. It will not be necessary to call into question the sincerity of those men. Their wrongful course may well be attributed to selfishness and the influence exercised over them by the adversary. Their own desire to shine amongst men and their own importance made them easy victims of Satan, and they soon convinced themselves that their construction of the Scriptures, and their doctrines, were correct. Formalism was introduced into the congregation, and many formal ceremonies were performed, and hence a religious organization came into action, and that organization was misnamed the “Christian religion”. Then the people who desired to find out about the future state of man, and what might be their hope after death, sought information at the mouths of such earthly teachers in the church organization misnamed the “Christian religious organization”. The real truth of the Bible was soon hid and Jehovah’s name defamed throughout the earth, and the doctrines of men were substituted for his Word. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, being formed, assumed to have and to teach the truth in the world and assumed that their religious organization was and is the true representative of the Lord on earth. The gross and flagrant practices in that organization in time led to the formation of another organization called “Protestant”. The so-called “Protestant organization”, however, never did get away from the traditions of men, and their leaders
28
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
taught the people many of the false- doctrines that had been brought forward by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Blindness to the truth was the result, and even the most honest and sincere ones were soon steeped in error. How many real Christians lived on the earth after the formation of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy until the coming of the Lord, no one can know; but it seems reasonable that there were not many who truly served God.
41	The apostles emphasized the great truth of the coming of the Lord Jesus. They loved his appearing, and those who walked with them likewise desired the coming of the Lord and his kingdom, and looked forward to it with great expectation. In more recent years a work has been carried on on earth, foreshadowed by the prophet Elijah, whom God used. The persons who studied the Bible and hoped for the coining of the Lord sought more diligently to know the truth. It was during this period of time that the Lord Jesus, as the great Messenger of Jehovah, prepared the way before the Lord. In that period of time he directed the minds and hearts of the sincere ones toward the Scriptures and began to unfold to them the true meaning of the fundamental truths that had been hidden by reason of the false doctrines taught by men in the religious organizations. During the Elijah period of the church, when the Lord was preparing the way before Jehovah, a goodly number of persons were drawn to the Lord and made a covenant to do God’s will. They began to understand somewhat the philosophy of the ransom sacrifice, the true state of the dead, the manner of selecting the church, the punishment of the wicked, and that there was hope for millions of others during the reign of Chrisf. Sincere and honest men were used by the Lord during that period to proclaim these truths, and their proclaiming them enabled other honest persons to seek after the truth. That work of the Lord Jesus was preparing a people for Jehovah and gathered them together preparatory to the test or judgment. The work is described by the prophet Malachi as ‘preparing the way before Jehovah ’; as it is written: ‘ ‘ Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me.” Manifestly this preparatory work was the gathering out from amongst the world a people hungering and thirsting for the truth, and who should be brought to a point and tested, that the approved ones might be the witnesses for Jehovah in the earth and used in connection with the vindication of his name. It is true that those who were then seeking the Lord understood that Jehovah’s.purpose was the salvation of the human race and that he was taking out his church, and that he would use this church to co-operate with Christ Jesus in ‘‘restoring obedient humanity”. The primary purpose of the vindication of Jehovah’s name was not understood because clearly it was not God’s due time for it to be understood by those on earth. Salvation from death to life in happiness was under
stood generally to be the purpose of the coming of Christ to his kingdom. Some who were brought to a knowledge of the truth were moved by a selfish desire to be saved from death, and to have and enjoy life in heaven, and to reign with Christ Jesus. They looked forward with great expectation to their exaltation to that place. Others, who were moved by an unselfish desire to do the will of God, loved him and sought to do his will in so far as they could understand it. The work the Lord Jesus performed in preparing the way before Jehovah resulted in bringing a goodly number out from the world, their begetting by the spirit, and forming them into the company of antitypical Levites. With the completion of this work of preparing the way before the Lord, says Jehovah by his propiiet Malachi, ‘‘the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple.”
42	In fulfillment of this prophecy the Lord did straightway come to his temple. All the consecrated and spirit-begotten ones on earth stood on an equal footing, and now the crucial testing time must come. This is made certain by the words of God’s prophet in Malachi 3:2; that the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple was for the purpose of purifying these antitypical sons of Levi. In 1918 the great Judge and Messenger of Jehovah appeared at the house of God. The prophecy uttered by Malachi at the command of Jehovah therefore discloses the condition of the consecrated and spirit-begotten ones at the coming of the Lord to the temple; discloses the judgment and its results, and makes known who constitutes the faithful sons of God, the antitypical Levites, and who are the unfaithful ones. This judgment, therefore, brings forth and makes known the ‘‘evil servant” class and the ‘‘faithful and wise servant” class. The ones that have been moved by selfishness and that did not realize their expectations by being taken to heaven in 1914 or thereabouts, because of their selfish heart condition were judged adversely and assigned to the ‘‘evil servant” class. The unselfish ones, who loved God and desired to do his will and who loved the appearing of Christ Jesus, were assigned to the ‘‘faithful and wise servant” class; and to this latter class the Lord commits all ‘‘his goods”, that is, all his kingdom interests on the earth. The faithful ones are admitted to the temple and are there enlightened. They are instructed by the Lord and sent forth to declare the day of the vengeance of our God, to give warning, and to give aid and instruction to those who are seeking to know the way into God’s organization. The duty and obligation is laid upon them to declare the whole counsel of God, which he has revealed to his people. The prophecy of Malachi, therefore, clearly shows the “faithful and wise servant” class and the reason why they are opposed by others who claim to be servants of the Lord, and shows what shall be the final result to each class. Only those who remain faithful and true to the Lord, walking humbly with God, and joyfully
January 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
29
obey his commandments, shall receive the final approval and exaltation with Christ Jesus. It is the duty of such to proclaim the message of truth to others of good Will, and this they delight to do in obedience to God’s commandments and to the law of his organization, and they delight to honor Jehovah, their Father, and their “mother”, God’s organization, and they are diligent in their efforts to prove faithful and are anxious to participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s holy name. The prophecy of Malachi is therefore present truth, meat in due season for those who love the Lord. The prophecy discloses clearly to all people of good will, the Jonadabs, who shall form the great multitude, that religion is of the Devil; and that those who desire to serve God will keep away from religion and be diligent in learning and obeying the commandments of Jehovah. Christ Jesus is their great Teacher and Leader, and these of good will delight to join together in attributing salvation to Jehovah and to his great King, who is upon his throne.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
T 1. When a creature enters into a covenant with Jehovah, will he ultimately have Jehovah’s approval}
H 2. Whom did the Levites picture? and how is this shown?
f 3-5. Apply Jehovah’s prophetic charge (Mal. 2: 8), (a) “But ye are departed out of the way.’’ (b) “Ye have caused many to stumble at the law.” (c) “Yo have corrupted the covenant of Levi.’’ What have been the chief causes of covenant-breaking?
K 6, 7. Who ‘ ‘ have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law” (verse 9), and how? With related scriptures, show how Jehovah ‘made them contemptible and base before all the people’.
U 8-10. W’ho is represented as speaking, and to whom, in verse 10? Explain the occasion for that inquiry. Show, with scriptures, why such situation should never have developed.
K 11,12. Why, for that time and for a prophetic purpose, did
Jehovah, at Mount Sinai and at Moab, command and warn -Israel against intermarriage with the heathen?
IT 13-15. How has “Judah” done as charged at verse 11?
f 16. Identify “the master and the scholar”, and “him that offereth an offering unto the Lord of hosts ’ ’, referred to in verse 12. Why and how will the Lord ‘cut them off out of the tabernacles of Jacob’?
T 17. How, further, have they done as charged in verse 13, with the result as there prophetically stated?
U 18. What other extreme course have some taken? With scriptures, show whether they have been justified or excusable in so doing.
K 19,20. Explain how and why the unfaithful “priests” “say, Wherefore?” as foretold in verse 14. Show whether their interpretation of Isaiah 42: 2 is in harmony with other scriptures. Compare their position in this regard with that of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
K 21-23. How have the unfaithful “priests” “dealt treacherously” with “the wife of thy youth”? When and how has Jehovah “been witness” thereof?
If 24-27. With scriptures, explain and apply verse 15.
V 28-31. Point out the prophetic purpose in the Lord’s saying that he ‘ hates putting away ’, and his mentioning no ground for divorce. Apply the statement, ‘ ‘ For one covereth violence with his garment.”
If 32, 33. Explain the warning, ‘ ‘ Take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.”
H 34,35. To whom are the words addressed, “Ye have wearied the Lord with your words”? Describe how they have done this, and then said, “Wherein have we wearied him?”
f 36-39. How do the opposers say ‘ ‘ Every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord ”? Describe their course of conduct by which they say, “Where is the God of justice?”
If 40. Since Christ Jesus and his disciples taught the truth and followed the commandments of God, account for the blindness and opposition to the truth now manifest by the “church” organizations of today.
If 41. Describe the work foreshadowed by the prophet Elijah and foretold in the opening statement of Malachi 3: 1. What was the purpose, and the outcome, of that preparatory work? Account for the result of the test attending the completion of that work.
U 42. What, then, are the prominent facts and conditions which Jehovah foretold by his prophet Malachi? What is here seen to bo the duty, and privilege, of those who remain true and faithful to the Lord?
THE SOUL, IMMORTALITY, AND HEAVEN
SINCE Adam was expelled from Eden billions of persons have died. Where did they go at death ? and what is the present state of the dead?
Two answers have been given to this question. They are exactly opposite to each other. If one of the answers given is true, then of necessity the other must be false. It is written concerning the Word of God: “Thy word is truth.” (John 17:17) Therefore in determining which answer is true and which is false both must be measured by the Word of God. For convenience in considering the proof and argument, one of the answers may here be designated the layman’s answer and the other may be designated the clergymen’s answer.
The layman’s answer is: Every man is a mortal soul. When death ensues the man is completely dead, out of existence, and not conscious anywhere. In that state he must remain for ever unless God awakens him out of death and affords him an opportunity for life. That is the true answer.
The clergymen’s answer is: Every man has an immortal soul; and when death ensues only the body dies, but the soul lives on. If the man is good, when he dies he goes immediately to heaven, and there remains for ever in endless bliss. If he is not good and has not satisfied the justice of God for sins already forgiven, he goes to purgatory, where he cannot help himself; but he may be aided by the prayers of faithful men on the earth. If the man is wicked at death he goes immediately to hell, the place of conscious torment ; and there he remains for ever, suffering torture, with no hope of relief. This is the false answer.
The true answer to the question must of necessity be consistent with God and in harmony with every part of his revealed purpose. The very essence of the divine purpose now revealed is that God is providing a way for man to gain everlasting life by and through the sacrifice of his beloved Son, Christ Jesus (John 3:16), and this is in harmony with his supreme purpose to vindicate his name before all creation. The
30
watchtower.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
teaching of the clergy concerning the dead, to wit, that every man has inherent life and cannot actually die and that at the time of the dissolution of the body the “good soul” goes to heaven and the “wicked soul” goes to hell, is wholly inconsistent with the divine purpose.
Men1 had been dying for four thousand years when Jesus came to earth and gave his life as a ransom for mankind. (John 6:51-53; 10:10; Matt. 20:28) The answer of the clergy to the question concerning the state of the dead is entirely inconsistent with God’s purpose, because if such millions were in heaven or torment the ransom would do them no good. If the clergy’s theory or answer is correct, then the death of Jesus was of no value.
What is man ? Is he a soul or does he possess a soul 1 The Scriptures answer: “And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.” (Gen. 2:7) The words “soul”, “being,” and “man” are synonymous terms. No man has a soul. Every man is a soul. The Scriptures declare that the beeves, asses and sheep are souls. (Num. 31:28) The preachers have made the people believe that man carries a soul around in him, and that when he dies the body decays and the soul “hikes off” to some other place. Their answer finds absolutely no support in the Scriptures.
To support their answer that the dead are conscious, in either heaven, purgatory, or hell, the clergy must find that man has an immortal soul. Immortality means that which cannot die. It is easy to be seen that no creature could be for ever in hell torment or in heaven or in purgatory if that creature could be killed. Therefore the master mind behind these false doctrines said: ‘We must teach that the man has an immortal soul.’ If the Scriptural proof is that man is a mortal soul, subject to death, then the purgatory and torment theories must be completely false.
When God made man and placed him in Eden he said to him: ‘ In the day that you sin you shall surely die.’ (Gen. 2:17) That was the plain statement of God’s law. Did he mean that only the body would die? The answer is: “The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” (Ezek. 18:4,20) “What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death ? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave ? ’ ’—Ps. 89:48.
Jehovah had told Adam the eating of a certain fruit would result in his death. Satan desired to alienate man from God and have the worship of man for himself. Fraudulently he approached Eve and said to her: ‘You can eat of that food; and if you do eat of it, you will be as wise as God himself. You shall surely not die.’ He induced Eve to disobey God.
The only support for the theory of immortality of all souls is what the Devil said. God stated: “Thou shalt surely die?’ The Devil stated: “Ye shall not surely die.” Whom shall we believe, God or the Devil ?
The clergy have accepted the Devil’s statement and rejected God’s; therefore their answer is false. The Devil was the father of lies, and this was his first. To the clergy of his time Jesus said: “Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.”—John 8:44.
The Devil himself is not immortal, because the Scriptures show that God is going to destroy him in due time. (Heb. 2:14; Ezek. 28:18) We might with propriety propound to clergymen this question: If hell is a place of eternal torment, and if the Devil is the chief fireman, who is going to keep up the fire when the Devil is destroyed?
A Christian is admonished to “seek” immortality. (Rom. 2:7) A man does not seek that which he already possesses. God alone possesses the quality of immortality, as it is written: “Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting.”—1 Tim. 6:16.
When Jesus was on the earth he was not immortal, but God gave him immortality at his resurrection. (John 5:26; Rev. 1:18) The faithful overcoming Christians are promised immortality as a glorious reward, as it is written: ‘ ‘ This mortal must put on immortality.” (1 Cor. 15:53) It would be inconsistent for the Lord to have put that into his Word if man were already immortal. Now these scriptures show that man is a soul; that he is subject to death; that he is therefore not immortal. (Job 4:17) And these things being true, it must follow that a man, when he dies, could not immediately go to heaven, purgatory or eternal torment.
The theory of purgatory is this: A man dies who professes to be a Christian and is a member of the Catholic church, but not a very good one. He then must go to purgatory, and can do nothing to help himself; but the priest or clergy remaining on earth may aid the poor fellow in purgatory, by praying for him.—See Faith of the Fathers, page 205, by Gibbons.
“Purgatory” has been a source of revenue for the clergy for a long period of time. Is it reasonable that God would permit the poor man to die, and go to a place of suffering, and then permit selfish men to use that condition for commercial purposes? Such is absolutely repugnant to the very name of Jehovah, and is wholly unreasonable and unscriptural. The clergy in Jesus’ time tried to use their religion, and did use it, for commercial purposes. As to how God regarded them may be determined by what Jesus said to them: “It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.” (Matt. 21:13) Then Jesus drove the seekers for filthy lucre out of the temple.
January 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
31
For many years the people have relied upon the statements of the preachers and priests, believing that they were teaching the truth. For this reason there is still a great amount of ignorance concerning “purgatory” and other doctrines taught by them. No one has ever cited a scripture in support of the “purgatory” theory, but has cited only such men as Dante, and other clergymen who lived years ago. Not only is the doctrine of “purgatory” without support in the Scriptures, but the Scriptures show that the teaching concerning it has operated as a fraud and a snare, and that it was invented by the Devil himself and is used by Satan’s agents against man’s interests, and to the defamation of God’s holy name.
People in sorrow like to believe that their loved ones have gone to a place of rest and peace, and so the clergy have told the people that all the good members of their church go to heaven when they die. They have found no support for this in the Scriptures. Heaven means high, lofty and exalted. Heaven is me habitation of Jehovah. No man ever has seen Jehovah God or ever can see him. “For,” said God to Moses, ‘ ‘ there shall no man see me, and live. ’ ’ (Ex. 33:20) Anyone who goes to heaven must be changed from a human to a spirit creature. Jesus was changed from human to spirit or divine creature at his resurrection.
At that time more than four thousand years had elapsed since death entered the human race. Great numbers had died, and amongst them men whom God approved. A long list of these approved ones is given in the eleventh chapter of the epistle to the Hebrews. Not one there mentioned went to heaven. Concerning all the good who had died when Jesus was on earth, he said: “No man hath ascended up to heaven.”— John 3:13.
Amongst those who were faithful to God was David. It is written concerning David that he was a man after God’s own heart. (1 Sam. 13:14; Acts 13: 22) David is used to foreshadow The Christ. The name David means “beloved”. At the dictation of Jehovah, he was the writer of many of the Psalms. Surely if any men were to be taken to heaven at death, David would be amongst them. But it is plainly written concerning him: “David is not ascended into the heavens.” (Acts 2:34) John the Baptist was a good man, and received the approval of God, and was the one selected to announce the coming of the Savior of the world. He was beheaded shortly after Jesus began his ministry. He died because of his faithfulness to God. Yet Jesus declared that John the Baptist would never be of the heavenly kingdom class; he said: “Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.”—Matt. 11:11.
Heaven is promised as a special reward to those who are faithful unto God as members of the new creation. It is written: “God . . . hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time.” (1 Pet. 1:3-5) It is wholly unreasonable, and inconsistent with God’s revealed purpose, that he will provide heaven for the “good” in general, whereas he specifically states that it is only for those who, after the giving of the ransom sacrifice of Jesus, are faithful unto death;—Rev. 2:10.
LET
JEHOVAH WILL SUSTAIN ALL FAITHFUL
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At the regular midweek meeting of the Winnipeg [Canada] company a motion was adopted to write you, assuiing you of our love and co-operation.
We desire you to know, for your encouragement, that we are wholeheartedly in harmony with the work being done by the Lord’s organization on earth now and are rejoicing in the truths being brought forth through The IVatchtowei.
Our sympathy goes out to our brethren who are being so cruelly persecuted in many parts, whom we continually remember at the throne of grace. We realize that Jehovah will sustain all who remain faithful, and in his own good time deal with his and their enemies.
We wish you the Lord’s richest blessings, and we will continue to stand with you shoulder to shoulder for the cause of our glorious King, until everything shall be done.
HERALDING IT TO THE WORLD
Dkvr Brother Rutherford:
Christian greetings from the Greenfield [Mass.] company of Jehovah’s witnesses, who wish to express their wholehearted sympathy with the Resolution passed at the Newark (N.J.) convention. It was certainly a fitting climax to a wonderful address; and we wish to do our part in heralding it to the world. It was voted unanimously at our little meeting last night to so advise you.
TERS
IN THE BATTLE TO THE END
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At a united assembly of the units ot the Toronto [Ont.] company, the following resolution was duly moved, and, without one dissenting voice, carried by a standing vote of those present.
Jehovah’s witnesses assembled in Toronto, on the final day of the “Battle Shout’’ period, send greetings.
As a company, recognizing your bold and fearless stand in holding high the banner of truth to the honor of the name ot Jehovah, and having in mind the coming convention at Newaik, N. J., at which the lecture “Armageddon” will be sounded forth right in the very heart of the enemy’s stronghold, we hereby assure you, dear brother, that your labor of love on our behalf, and on behalf of our brethren, the great multitude, is deeply appreciated; as is also the gracious provision of our heavenly Father in providing, to our entire satisfaction, meat in due season, through the channel which he is using, i.e., the Watch Tower.
We want you to know that your fearlessness in proclaiming the “judgments of Jehovah written”, against the wicked Hierarchy, is an incentive to us to more closely follow your example and more earnestly press the battle to the gates.
Further, we take this opportunity of extending to you our Christian love and further assuring you that the Toronto company of Jehovah’s witnesses are with you in the battle to the end, even unto death.—Phil. 1: 28.
32
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. y.
INSTRUMENTS FOR BREAKING DOWN PREJUDICE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
In the warfare as a group of five pioneers we send greetings! We were thrilled beyond -words to have the sweet privilege of attending the service convention just past in Newaik, N. J., and to participate with others of the Lord’s true fighters. To then have the further privilege of being at Bethel following the convention, and getting the latest type of sound equipment mounted on our car, in that way making it a real war chariot, thrilled each of us beyond words, and created in us a desire by God’s grace to press on in the warfare with grim determination to use our all, even our lifeblood, in sacrifice to our great Jehovah, by exposing every part of the Devil’s organization, and standing true and firm for the Lord and His united organization.
We, Brother Rutherford, are more convinced than ever that the Lord God has placed his King upon his throne to rule and destroy literally his enemies; and that Christ Jesus, the mighty Battle-ax of Jehovah, is at the helm of God-’s organization and is instructing his covenant people in matters pertaining to the warfare, and how each and every one may become more efficient in the work the Lord has entrusted us to perform.
We find, as business pioneers, that there is actually no end to the use of the phonograph machines and the sound equipment. If there ever was a method of breaking down prejudice and ignorance among the people it is by means of the phonograph and the sound equipment. We wish to relate briefly our experience with our new sound equipment in Fort Smith, Ark.:
In the Harding glass factory 425 men are employed. The office force were very much uninterested in our work. At lunch hour, two days after speaking to the office force, we returned to this factory, and, by the assistance of two men of the factory, soon found a suitable place in the center of all the buildings to play the sound equipment. Shortly after the lecture ou “Perilous Times’’ got under way, three of our party got out and went into the buildings and began speaking to the men. The one-o’clock whistle blew; and we thought sure we would have to leave then; but instead of that, the men went to their duties, and we made return trips to our car for more ammunition, and by the Lord’s help we completed witnessing to all the men by 3: 35 p.m., and found that we had placed upward of 30 Etches books and many booklets.
We also find in using the new phonographs that the Lord is
behind the witness work,‘and that this is the day he has made, and that we as his servants must be not only willing but eager to give our all in his service and make active use of all such avenues of service as we are being equipped with. As we continue to be instructed through The Watchtower and the Informant in how to use these instruments of warfare, for pioneers, auxiliaries or for company workers not to put their shoulders to the wheel and make use of this—surely we would be fooling ourselves and not taking advantage of what the Lord has entrusted us with. To see the improvement in the phonograph machines, and also in the sound equipment as manufactured by our brethren at the factory in Brooklyn, proves to us beyond a doubt that the Lord’s equipment speaks of beauty, majesty and grandeur, while almost all other equipment speaks of commercialism.
We are thankful for the privilege, therefore, to use the Society’s equipment in preference to anything else and to enjoy the many rich blessings that Jehovah and Christ Jesus, the Teachers, continue to shower upon all who are faithful to their post of duty. How happy and thrilled we can be, and are, to live in that day the Lord’s people have long looked forward to, in exposing the old “whore” and all of the organization attached to her, and standing faithful even unto death, watching the vindication of our Father’s name! What a thrilling privilege to now be used of the good Lord in any capacity!
Wishing you the Lord's richest blessing in the battle now on between truth and entrenched lies, we remain
Your fighting companions for Jehovah and his Vindicator, Glenn Gerber	Jack Lisle, Jr.
June Gerber	Ruth Lisle
Rosa May Dreyer
THANKS TO JEHOVAH GOD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Have read your lecture “Separating the Nations”. Thanks to Jehovah God for this wondeiful message of truth.
I have been taking my stand for Jehovah God and his kingdom with Christ Jesus as the world’s Ruler, and shall join Jehovah’s witnesses in making his great name known to others as opportunity affords.
A Jonadab,
Mrs. W. A. Perkins, California.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
J. C. BOOTH
Adair, Iowa _________Feb.	2
Anita, Iowa ...........“	3
Clarinda, Iowa --------“	4
Red Oak, Iowa “ .	5, G
Atlantic, Iowa --------"	7
Elk Horn, Iowa ________“	9
Audubon, Iowa _________“	10
Denison, Iowa _________“	11
Marathon, Iowa ________“	12
Milford, Iowa ---------“	13
Asli ton, Iowa 	Feb.	14
Inwood, Iowa .............. “	10
Hawarden, Iowa 	“	17,18
Alton, Iowa 	“	19,20
Sioux City, low a 	"	21. 22
S. Sioux City, Nebr. .. "	24
Missouri Valley, Iowa 44	25
Council Bluffs, Iowa . 44	20. 27
Omaha, Nebr	Feb. 28, Mar. 1	
Tekamah, Nebr	Mar.	3,4
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Salisbury, N. C. 	Feb.	3,4	Chapel Hill, N. C	Feb. 18
Winston-Salem, N. C. 44	5-7	Raleigh, N. C	“	19-21
Rural Hall, N. C	“	9	Clayton, N. C	—. “	23
Greensboro, N. C	“	10,11	Dunn, N. C	“	24
Burlington, N. C	44	12	Smithfield, N. C	“	25
Stem, N. C	“	13	Wilson, N. C	"	20, 27
Louisburg, N. C	“	14	Rocky iM’t, N. C. Feb. 28, Mar. 1 Enfield, N. C	Mar.	3. 4
Durham, N. C. 	“	10, 17	
M. L. HERR
Collinsville, Miss.		Feb. 2	Prairieville, La. ..		Feb. 18
Hattiesburg, Miss.	.... “	3. 4	Baton Rouge, La.			“ 19. 20
Lucedale, Miss. ...		“	5	Palmetto, La				“	21
Biloxi, Miss			“	0, 7	Folsom, La				" 23, 24
Mobile, Ala	_		“	9. 10	Bogalusa, Ln			“	2a
Silverhill, Ain			“ 11	Picayune, Miss. ...			“	20
Waveland, Miss.		“	12	Lumberton, Miss. .			 44	27
New Orleans, Ln.		•• 13. 14	Kokomo, Miss			“	28
New Orleans, La.		“ 10, 17	Magnolia, Miss. „.	....Mar.	2
A. H. MACMILLAN
Mineola, Tex.........Feb.
Grand Saline, Tex. ___
Terrell, Tex..........“
Dallas, Tex............“
Fort Worth, Tex.	—— "
Waco, Tex.............."
Mexia, Tex. ___________“
Corsicana, Tex.-------"
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Grants Pass, Oreg	Feb.	3,4	Bend, Oreg		.-..Feb. 17, IS
Brookings. Ore*:	44	5, 0	Siletz, Oreg				“	19
Crescent City, Calif. .. “	7	Dallas, Oreg			“ 20, 21
Myrtle Creek, Oreg	‘4 Roseburg, Oreg	44	9, 10	Salem. Oreg	_			“ 23, 24
	11.12	Newberg, Oreg. ...	..._. “ 25, 20
Reedsport, Oreg.	13	Portland, Oreg ....	“ 27, 28
Eugene, Oreg.	“	14, 15	Willamette, Oreg. .	....Mar.	2
A S. WRIGHT
14,15
Ennis, Tex............Feb.	17
Mabank, Tex.............“	18
Van, Tex...............*•	19
Oierton, Tex............“	20
Henderson, Tex..........“	21. 22
Jacksonville, Tex.......“	24.25
Rusk, Tex...............“	20
Garrison, Tex...........“	27. 28
Bennett, Mo. 		Feb.	2
Tiiajer, Mo	“	3.4
Hocomo, Mo. 	“	5
Ci Ider, Mo	 ••	0
Protem. Mo 	"	7
Springfield, Mo	44	9,10
Ash Grove, Mo.	11
Billings, Mo. 	"	12.13
Verona, Mo. ...		 “	14
Monett, Mo. 		....Feb.	IB
Larussell, Mo		M	17
Alba, Mo				“	18
Joplin, Mo				19-21
Pineville, Mo			"	23
Columbus, Kans. ..		24, 25
Coffeyville, Kans.	<4	20, 27
Parsons, Kans. ..Feb. 28,		Mar. 1
Pittsburg, Kans, —	...Mar.	3,4
fflie WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Butherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establisliment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges
systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material tor radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without icservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scnptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian.........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto B, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African.......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription puce may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postoffice.
Act of March 3, 1873.
MEMORIAL
The date for the celebration to the name of Jehovah God and to the sacrifice of Christ Jesus in 1937 will be Friday, March 26, after six p.m. The book entitled Jehovah contains a detailed explanation of the Memorial. Carefully and prayerfully study chapters two and three thereof. Then on the 26th day of March, after six p.m., let each company of the anointed assemble and celebrate the Memorial. In doing so, use unleavened bread and real red wine. Unfermented grape juice or raisin juice will not meet the Scriptural requirements. The Lord and the apostles used real red wine, and we should follow their lead.
“JEHOVAH OF HOSTS”
The testimony period “ Jehovah ot Hosts” embraces the nine days February 6-14, 1937. This midwinter campaign will specialize on booklets, and all those on Jehovah’s side will olfei a 10c combination consisting of two booklets with colored cover and the new booklet Protection. Let Jehovah’s people take this coming campaign to heart, faithfully making all due preparation therefor. Consult forthcoming issues of the Informant for additional instructions. The “man with the inkhorn” promptly reported the matter, and likewise each one will report his activities and the results in this campaign.
“UNCOVERED”
True to its title, “Uncovered,” this new booklet draws back the veil of lies covering the false position, claims and pretensions of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. This booklet was called forth as a result of the failure ot the Ilieiaichy and governmental and radio agencies to respond to the nation-wide petition in the United States for a public debate by radio, and presents the Scriptural side of the proposed debate by the Society’s president, against whom the Hierarchy laid its false charges. Uncovered is a booklet of 64 pages, and the campaign with it in the United States and territories begins February 15. But its usefulness and field for distribution is as wide as the expanse of the Hierarchy’s influence and control, to wit, world-wide. For campaign instructions, consult the Informant. Copies of Uncovered for your personal use may now be procured at 5c each.
“PROTECTION”
This new booklet, of 64 pages, is self-covered. It bears an attractive cover design, m color, and also the title and legend: “PROTECTION from those who seek to hurt or destroy me. How can I find it I” After reading it, you will surely want to distribute the booklet. It has already been released for general distribution. You may procure a copy, or copies, on a contribution of 5e each, and read up in preparation for your part in its distribution.
Vol. LVIII
February 1, 1937
No. 3
JEHOVAH’S PROVISIONS
PART 1
“For the ivages of sin is death; but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
—Rom. 6:23, R.V.
JEHOVAH at the very beginning knew that all humankind would reach the point of dire extremity and that they would seek life and that which sustains life, and he made abundant provision for those who would give heed to his Word. To the perfect man created in his own image God announced his law and made known that the transgression thereof would result in death. Satan led man into death and then flung a challenge into God’s face that no man could get everlasting life under the provision that God had made, because no man would obey or keep the law when put to the test. That challenge put in issue the word and the name of Jehovah. Necessarily all creation of heaven would know that the supremacy of Jehovah was defied by Satan, and therefore all would ask: Who will win? A part of the angelic creation pinned their faith to Satan and went with him in the way of defiance and wickedness. The others remained true and steadfast in faith and obedience to Jehovah God. Although God declared his purpose to destroy Satan and all his wicked rulers, and at the time entered judgment to that effect, he gave Satan a suspended sentence and permitted him to remain alive for a season and have full freedom of action, declaring that in due time He would exhibit his own supreme power and would cause his name to be proclaimed throughout all the universe and thereby fully vindicate his name. The Bible contains the record of God’s word or purpose and announces that what he has declared shall be accomplished. “I have purposed it, I will also do it.” “My word . . . shall not return unto me void.” (Isa. 46:11; 55:11) A few men have held steadfastly in faith to God and in obedience to his Word. The greater number have come under Satan’s rule and have followed in his way of wickedness. Now humankind have reached the point of dire distress, fear and perplexity. God’s provision is man’s only hope, and about this man should know. The testimony of his name must now be declared, to the end that all who are of good will and honest heart may know of his provision and that all may know that Jehovah is supreme, the almighty and eternal God.
2	For centuries God has caused to be proclaimed throughout the nations his unchangeable rule, to wit: ‘ ‘ For the wages of sin is death; but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.” (Rom. 6:23, R.V.) Comparatively few men have given heed to that rule. Most of them have followed the philosophy of men, which originated with Satan. All persons desire to live, but most of them have been made blind concerning the way of life by reason of Satan’s ministers ’ haranguing them and telling them that there is no death but that at the time of dissolution the soul of the one who is a member of “the church”, or of the “Catholic population”, and whose sins have not been expiated passes on to “purgatory”, where for a money consideration the term of suffering may be shortened, and that then the everlasting abode will be in the bliss of heaven.
3	Jehovah God is the fountain of life. No creature can live save by the permission of God. Jehovah sent his beloved. Son to earth, made in the likeness of imperfect man, and permitted the Devil to put upon Christ Jesus all manner of tests, even causing him to be wrongfully and wickedly charged with the heinous crimes of sedition and treason, put through a mock trial, convicted upon perjured testimony, and sent to the ignominious death of hanging upon a tree. Through it Jesus remained true and steadfast to God his Father, always maintaining his integrity toward God. Jehovah raised Christ Jesus out of death and bestowed upon him the greatest of all gifts. Concerning the Lord Jesus it is written: “For as the Father hath life in himself, even so gave he to the Son also to have life in himself.” (John 5:26, Zf.F.) Jehovah’s provision for the human race is that he has bestowed upon Christ Jesus eternal life and immortality with full power and authority to give life to those who obey God’s commandments. For this reason Jesus said: “I am the living bread which came down out of heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: yea and the bread which I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world.” (John 6:51, R.V.) “Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life:
36
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.” (John 14: 6) There is no other way to get life.
♦Jehovah has furnished an abundance of proof and recorded it in his Word that he knew the end from the beginning. Today the proof given, together with the understanding and appreciation thereof, is being made clear to those who love and serve Jehovah, and upon them is laid the obligation to make known those truths to others by proclaiming throughout the earth the name of Jehovah and making known his provisions for man.
PROPHETIC DRAMAS
’ Long centuries ago Jehovah caused men to play their respective parts in dramas which prophetically foretold his purpose and the manner of carrying it into execution, and which dramas God directed himself. Now he is unfolding the meaning of those dramas to his faithful and obedient servants. These prophetic dramas throw light from different viewpoints upon Jehovah’s purpose and his manner of carrying out the same, and this light shining into the face of Christ Jesus and reflected into the temple company causes them great joy. Among those prophetic dramas long ago performed and recorded is that of Joseph and his brethren, the revelation of which causes a flood of light to shine into the mind and heart of everyone who knows and serves Jehovah; and likewise he illuminates those who come to know God and Christ Jesus as the truth is proclaimed.
6	Every child who has received instruction in the Bible has been told of Joseph and his brethren, but none have understood the significance thereof, for the reason that no man can have an understanding and appreciation of such prophetic dramas until God’s due time to make them clear. God himself brings about the conditions that fulfill these prophetic pictures; and then, when all the players are upon the scene and the part that each one plays is observed, the prophecy is illuminated by the Lord so that those who love righteousness and meekness may understand. It seems well here to give a brief synopsis of the prophetic drama of Joseph and his brethren and then to examine the Scripture texts in detail. It is a beautiful picture, and thrills the heart of everyone who loves and serves Jehovah God. It discloses Jehovah's marvelous provision and loving-kindness toward creatures, and it is of the greatest importance to have a proper understanding and appreciation of the provisions God has made.
T Jacob was the grandson of Abraham, and by the grace of God had inherited the birthright from his grandparent. The circumstances surrounding the birth and early experiences of Joseph enable one to get a better view of the prophetic drama as it unfolds; and hence we give some consideration to his parentage. The earthly father of Joseph was Jacob, and Jacob’s father was Isaac. When Isaac was 131 years old and
his son Jacob was a man of mature years, Isaac gave Jacob the birthright blessing. Esau, the twin brother of Jacob, persecuted Jacob because Isaac had bestowed the blessing upon him, and Jacob fled to Laban, in the land of Syria, and there took to wife Leah, a daughter of Laban, Later Laban also gave Jacob Rachel to wife. Because of the barrenness for a time of his wives Jacob, with their consent, had two concubines. He had children by all four women. For a long season Rachel was barren, and in that time Leah had given birth to six sons by Jacob. The barrenness of Rachel had greatly distressed her. But in due time God heard her prayer and took away her reproach: ‘‘And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb. And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my reproach: and she called his name Joseph; and said, The Lord shall add to me another son. ’ ’—Gen. 30: 22-24.
8	Isaac was yet alive when his grandson Joseph was born, and lived for twenty-nine years thereafter. A few years after the birth of Joseph Jacob had another son by his beloved wife Rachel, and the birth of that son cost Rachel her life. As she was dying Rachel named her second son, calling him Ben-oni, which means ‘‘the son of my sorrow”. But Jacob his father begot his son and called his son Benjamin, meaning “the son of my right hand”.
9	Jacob had twelve sons by the four different women aforementioned. His sons by Leah were Reuben, the firstborn; and Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun. (Gen. 35:23) Jacob’s sons by his concubine Zilpah were Gad and Asher. (Gen. 35:26) His sons by his concubine Bilhah were Dan and Naphtali: and his sons by his beloved wife Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin. (Gen, 35:24.25) Joseph and Benjamin were full brothers. The other ten sons of Jacob were only half brothers to Joseph and Benjamin. The relationship of the two full brothers was, of course, closer than that of the other ten. Jacob was about 91 years of age when Joseph was born, and IOS years old when Benjamin was born; therefore both Joseph and Benjamin were sons “of [Jacob’s] old age”. (Gen. 37: 3) When Jacob was journeying to the land of his nativity after years of his absence in Syria, God sent his angel and informed Jacob that thereafter he should be known by the name Israel: “And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and bast prevailed.”—Gen. 32:28.
10	When Joseph was a lad of seventeen years he was a shepherd boy feeding his father’s flocks. His half brothers were feeding the flocks of his father at Shcchem. Jacob, now called Israel, sent his son Joseph to Shechem to ascertain the condition of his brethren and the flocks and to bring back a report thereof to his father Jacob. Arriving at his destination, Joseph learned that his brethren had gone to Dothan. Joseph
February 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
37
then went to seek his brethren at Dothan; and when they saw Joseph coming they immediately formed a conspiracy against Joseph that they might get rid of him. His half brothers hated Joseph because their father loved Joseph more than them and had manifested this love by his treatment of Joseph. Additionally, Joseph had dreamed two dreams and had told his brethren about the dreams, and that increased their envy and hatred against him. Carrying out their conspiracy, they seized Joseph and threw him into a well or pit. Jacob had provided Joseph with a beautiful coat of many colors. They took this coat and dipped jt in the blood of a goat, indicating that Joseph had been killed. Then they sold Joseph to merchantmen going to Egypt and returned to their father with the stained garment, representing to him that Joseph had been slain by wild beasts. Israel was convinced that his son Joseph was dead. Joseph was carried away to Egypt and sold as a slave to one of Pharaoh’s officers. (Gen. 37:1-28) Joseph then served as a slave for a time, and until God’s due time to use him in another way. He was exalted by Pharaoh to the highest place next to the king in Egypt and became the most important man of Egypt, saving that nation from starvation and death.
11	The name “Joseph” has a two-fold meaning, which the record discloses. At the time of his birth his mother Rachel said: “God hath taken away my reproach”; and she called his name “Joseph”, which means “remover”, that is, remover of reproach. And then Rachel said: ‘ ‘ The Lord shall add to me another son”; meaning “increaser”. Thus she foretold that the one whom Joseph foreshadowed would be the Vindicator of his Father’s name, would remove or take away the reproach of His name, and would be an increaser, and would increase the number of those who would maintain their integrity toward God and magnify his name.
PLAYERS AND PARTS
18	Away back in the centuries past, in the lands of Canaan and Egypt Jehovah staged a great prophetic drama by which he foretold the manifestation of his loving-kindness toward mankind. In that drama each person played his respective part, not knowing the real meaning of his acts. Jehova'h God directed the drama, and every part of it has a deep significance. The players and the parts that each one played, and the pictorial significance thereof, can now be understood, because it is God’s due time to reveal the meaning thereof to those who love and serve him. The revelation of this and other prophetic dramas makes glad the heart of the man of God and enables him to rejoice in the knowledge of the fact that “whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope ’ ’.—Rom. 15: 4.
18	In this time when darkness covers the earth and
gross darkness the people, when there is great distress and perplexity amongst men, the revelation of this prophetic drama to Jehovah’s witnesses and the transmission of that knowledge by them to those who mourn will bring joy to those of Zion and peace and gladness to those who hear and who seek righteousness and meekness, giving them assurance that Jehovah has made ample provision for every time of need for those who love and serve him. A brief synopsis of the opening part of the drama is set out first. Now the principal players are named, with a brief statement of the meaning of the parts played by them.
14	Jacob, later called Israel, in this prophetic drama pictures or represents Jehovah God. To him Jehovah said: “In thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed,” even as Jehovah had said to Jacob’s grandfather, Abraham.—Gen. 28:14.
15	Rachel, the wife of Jacob whom he specially loved and who for years was barren, in the drama pictured or represented Zion, God’s “woman”, that is to say, Jehovah’s organization, that gives birth to his beloved children.—Isa. 54:1-7.
16	Joseph, the beloved son and firstborn of Jacob by his wife Rachel, in the prophetic drama pictured or represented Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God. Joseph, during the seven years of famine in Egypt and in the land round about, in a typical or miniature way was the “seed” of Jacob in whom all the families of the earth who obey him shall be preserved alive and blessed. (Gen. 41:55-57) Joseph therefore particularly typified or pictured Christ Jesus, the “seed of Abraham” according to the promise. (Gal. 3:8,16) The church of God, which is that company of persons taken out of the world for the name of Jehovah and made members of the body of Christ, is included in the part of the drama played by Joseph, and this is particularly so with reference to the remnant. These, of course, appear in a subordinate way to the Greater than Joseph in the fulfillment of the prophecy. These are made a part of the seed of promise because they are members of the body of Christ.—Gal. 3: 29.
17	Benjamin, together with his full brother Joseph, in this prophetic drama played the part representing or picturing Jehovah’s royal family, of which Christ Jesus is the head son. At the birth of Joseph, and after Rachel had named him, she said: “The Lord shall add to me another son.” In that she spoke prophetic words concerning Benjamin’s birth, which would come later; therefore in the drama Joseph pictures not only Christ Jesus himself, but also the original remnant that survive the test at the coming judgment of the Lord at the temple, which began in 1918, resulting in bringing forth the “faithful and wise servant” class. That original remnant was also foreshadowed by Mordecai and Naomi. Benjamin more particularly played the part representing or foreshadowing that part of the remnant brought forth
38
*3Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
after 1922, and which part of the remnant was also pictured by Esther and Ruth, and these too are made a part of the elect servant or royal house. Hence Joseph and Benjamin together pictured Jehovah’s royal house in the entirety. Their mother, Rachel, was especially loved by Jacob, and gave birth to these two sons; and in this she foreshadowed Zion, God’s universal organization in its capacity of bringing forth Jehovah’s royal family. As Jacob loved Rachel most, so Jehovah loves most his organization Zion, for she brings forth the royal family, and he loves his royal offspring most, which is the kingdom of heaven class.
18	Until the birth of Benjamin Joseph was his father’s only begotten son by Rachel his beloved wife and was always the favorite son of his father. Likewise Christ Jesus is Jehovah’s “only begotten Son” and favorite (John 3:16), “the firstborn of every creature” (Col. 1:15), “my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.” (Matt. 3:17) “I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth.” (Ps. 89:27) According to Jehovah’s purpose Joseph was the logical one to be the typical seed of Israel, Isaac and Abraham, in whom all would be blessed who receive blessings. (Gen. 28:13,14) Christ Jesus is the only logical and qualified “Seed of Abraham”, in whom all the families of the earth who receive blessings must be blessed. That promised blessing began at Pentecost in A.D. 33 and continues unto the end of the thousand-year reign of Christ. The fact that Joseph and Benjamin were both sons of Jacob’s old age pictures the barrenness of God’s organization for four thousand years, from Eden till the baptism of Christ Jesus at the Jordan, when he was brought forth and acknowledged as the beloved Son of Jehovah, in whom he is well pleased. (Matt. 3:17) When Christ Jesus was begotten of the spirit at the Jordan, then Zion, that is, God’s organization, like Rachel could say: “God hath taken away my reproach.” There was born out of God’s universal organization Christ Jesus, his Father’s great Vindicator who would in time take away the reproach that had fallen upon the name of Jehovah and upon his organization also involved in his name. Thus Joseph pictured the greater One, Christ Jesus, who is ‘the remover of reproach’. The two sons, Joseph and Benjamin, foreshadowed the complete Christ, and the death of Rachel at the birth of the second son, Benjamin, seems clearly to picture that Jehovah’s organization completes her function in bringing forth the members of the royal family when she gives birth to the last members of the remnant, which last members were pictured by Ruth and Esther.
18	Joseph’s brethren, that is, the ten half brothers who in the first part of the prophetic drama envied and hated Joseph, appear to picture those persons in the religious organizations that have envied and ill-treated the true followers of Christ Jesus because they
observe that the true followers of Christ Jesus have had greater favor from God. In the latter part of the prophetic drama, when these half brothers became reconciled to Joseph and sought his favor, the part played by them pictures those who are not members of the body of Christ, and hence not spirit-begotten, but are of good will toward God and Christ Jesus; hence they picture the Jonadab class, the “great multitude” or “other sheep” that Christ Jesus brings into his Father’s fold. (John 10:16) These are the earthly children of God’s organization. Zion, which is God’s organization, in her capacity of bringing forth these earthly children was pictured or foreshadowed by the three other women of Jacob, that is, Leah and the two concubines, the mothers of the ten half brothers of Joseph and Benjamin. Those here specifically named are the principal players. The others, who were subordinate players in the drama, the part they played and whom they represented, will appear in the detailed examination of the text. The Biblical account of the drama should be first read. It appears in Genesis, chapters thirty-seven to fifty inclusive.
THE DRAMA
20	The statements hereinbefore made concerning the players and the parts pictured by them must appear to be somewhat dogmatic, and for that reason the detailed examination of the text should be had in order that we may more fully appreciate God’s gracious provisions. When the text of God’s Word is set alongside the physical facts which are well known to be true, and when both are in full accord and full harmony, then we may be sure that we have an understanding of the fulfillment of the prophecy. Jehovah had directed the drama long ago and made the record thereof for the benefit of the remnant, and we should confidently expect that he would give a revelation to his remnant before Armageddon, that the hope of such faithful ones might be made strong in these perilous times. The Lord at his temple, which is hidden from and hence dark to the people outside thereof, illuminates his prophecies, and illuminates the mind of the temple company, and gives them instruction. Therefore Jesus says to the temple company: “What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops.” —Matt. 10:27.
21	It follows that when the remnant receive from the Lord the truths illuminating the prophecies, then and there the obligation is laid upon the remnant, or Jehovah’s witnesses, to go out and make known these facts and the Scriptures showing the fulfillment of the prophecy to those who are hungering and thirsting for righteousness. Such are the ones that mourn and desire to be comforted and to whom the remnant are sent as anointed servants of God to bring them comfort. Such are the people of good will, and the obligation is upon the remnant to make known God’s provisions
February 1, 1937
Sfe WATCHTOWER-
39
for all those who diligently seek to know and to dd his will. The remnant will in obedience to the Lord’s commandment make known to the Jonadabs what they “hear in the ear”.
22	Consideration should now be given to the Scripture texts beginning with Genesis 37:1: “And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.” Jacob, like his grandfather Abraham, “looked for a city [the kingdom organization] which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.” (Heb. 11:10) Joseph dwelt in the land of Canaan with his father and was his father’s beloved son and, like his ancestors, would be looking for the kingdom of God’s building. His antitype, Christ Jesus, said to the Jews who were against him: “Ye are from beneath; I am from above; ye are of this world; I am not of t-his world.” “My kingdom is not of this world.” (John 8:23; 18:36) Concerning his disciples, who were like Benjamin to Joseph, Jesus said: “They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.” (John 17:14) Since Joseph and his brother Benjamin were, like their ancestors, looking for the kingdom, therefore all pictured by Joseph and Benjamin are “strangers and pilgrims” to the world under Satan, looking for that better day and a perfect government. —1 Pet. 2:11.
23	Jehovah, in directing the drama, moved each one of the parties to perform according to His own will. Israel, who pictured Jehovah God, showed his love for his beloved son in this, that he “made him a coat of many colours”. (Gen. 37:3) In this manner his father publicly identified Joseph his son as his favorite. The clothing supplied by the father identified the child as holding a certain position or place in the affections of the father. It was the custom amongst the Jews to show their favor to their children by the apparel they wore. “With such robes were the king’s daughters that were virgins apparelled.” (2 Sam. 13:18) Joseph’s coat of many colors identified and designated him as the typical “seed of Abraham” and as the future head of all the tribes issuing from Israel. That future exalted position of Joseph was confirmed by dreams that Jehovah caused him to have and to then relate to his brethren. Joseph’s first dream was in substance this: That while he and his brethren were binding sheaves of corn in the field, Joseph’s sheaf stood upright and the sheaves of his brethren stood round about and made obeisance to Joseph’s sheaf. (Gen. 37: 6, 7) Then Joseph had another dream, which he told to his brethren, and said to them: “Behold, I have dreamed a drcam more; and, behold, the sun, and the moon, and the eleven stars, made obeisance to me.” (Gen. 37:9) The dream told to his brethren angered them because they understood that the promise indicated that Joseph would be exalted above them and even above their own father and mother, and that all should bow down to him. (Gen. 37: 6-10) The envy
and hatred of those ten half brothers against Joseph increased. In this part of the drama Jehovah was foretelling the exaltation of Joseph above his brethren, and more particularly foretelling that Jehovah would exalt his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, above all and give him a name above every name and before him every knee shall bow. (Phil. 2:9-11) When Jesus was on earth Jehovah openly manifested his favor to his beloved Son and by that plainly testified that Jesus is the real promised Seed of Jehovah’s choice as the Ruler of the world. To Jesus, when on earth, the testimony of God’s kingdom was given, and he began his earthly work by preaching “The kingdom of heaven is at hand”. Jesus declared that he always spoke as he was instructed by his Father to speak, and thus he carried out his Father’s purpose. Jehovah backed up the declarations of his beloved Son by having the Son perform miracles, thus showing his supernatural power. Even the Jewish clergy, who claimed to be the “seed of Abraham”, and therefore the brethren of Christ Jesus, recognized Jesus as the heir, although they hated him. They saw that God’s favor was specially upon him, and that increased their hatred. Those religionists were like Joseph’s half brethren who hated Joseph. (Matt. 21:38; Jolin 8:39-43) Those Jewish religionists hated Jesus without a cause (John 15:25), even as the brethren of Joseph hated him without a cause. Likewise those of the “faithful servant” class are hated by the religionists because the faithful servants are true and faithful to the name of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. (Matt. 10:25) Those who hate the Lord’s remnant on earth the most are the ones who also claim to be the followers of the Lord Jesus.
24	Joseph was a faithful shepherd boy, looking well to the interest of his father’s flock. (Gen. 37:2) In this he foreshadowed the good shepherd, Christ Jesus. (John 10:11) The half brothers of Joseph, the sons of Jacob, were evil shepherds, and Joseph reported their wrongful conduct or evil deeds to his father. The truthfulness of Joseph increased the hatred of the others against him. Likewise when Jesus told the truth, he was hated the more by the religionists of his time and since. Jacob sent his beloved son Joseph from his home at Hebron a distance of seventy-five miles away to Shechcm to learn the state of his half brothers and the condition of the flocks that they wore tending.—Gen. 37:12-14.
25	In fulfillment of this part of the prophecy Jehovah sent Christ Jesus, the Good Shepherd, to earth to investigate the Jewish clergy, who were duty-bound to feed the covenant people of God on earth by informing them of God’s Word. Those Jewish religionists had become false shepherds and looked after their own selfish interests and neglected their duty to Jehovah and his covenant people. When Jesus came to earth he was, like Joseph, a young man, and the clergy
40
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the Jews were “the elders in Israel’’. Jesus found them to be wicked and neglecting his Father’s flocks, and he reported the matter to Jehovah his Father. Because of his faithfulness in so doing Jesus brought down upon his head the malicious hatred of the Jewish clergy, who also incited others to hatred and to persecute Jesus.—John 5:16-18; 8:13-44.
28 The two dreams which Joseph had were, of course, divinely arranged as a part of the prophetic drama, and they foretold the exaltation of Joseph above his brethren and others of his family relationship according to the flesh. Joseph did not manifest conceit because of these promises, nor did he deport himself in a proud and arrogant manner, but he spoke plainly to his brethren and told them; “and his brethren [aside from the infant Benjamin] envied him; but his father observed the saying [kept the saying in mind].”—Gen. 37: 5-11.
27 The dreams not only foretold the exaltation of Joseph, but foretold the opening to Christ Jesus of the heavenly things, that is, the unseen things of God’s holy Word, which told of the coming exaltation of Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s King and Vindicator, above every other creature in the universe. (Matt. 3:16) The exaltation of Christ Jesus was further foretold by the vision of transfiguration in the mountain. (Matt. 17:1-5) Jesus had told his disciples of his future glory and power. (Matt. 16:27,28) When Jesus stood before his accusers he said: ‘ ‘ Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.” (Matt. 26:64) The Jewish clergy hated Jesus and sought to kill him because he said that Jehovah was his Father, and that his Father loved him. (John 8:17-47) Faithfully obedient to Jehovah’s commandments, Jesus did “bear witness unto the truth” concerning himself and the kingdom of God, as foretold in the prophecies of God’s Word. Even the political ruler Pilate knew that the chief priests had “delivered him for envy”. (Mark 15:10; Matt. 27:18) All this was in fulfillment of that part of the prophetic drama showing the feeling of Joseph’s half brethren to Joseph. Those half brethren of Joseph had led the flocks of their father from Shechem some fifteen miles northwest to the place called Dothan, which means “two wells”. Joseph had been sent by his father to find them, and so he followed on in search of his father’s flocks then in charge of those evil shepherds. (Gen. 37:14-17) Likewise Jesus, “the Good Shepherd,” was faithful in carrying out his Father’s commandment, willingly facing danger, and giving liis life for the sheep. He went in search of his Father’s flocks then in charge of the Jewish clergy, who claimed to be the “seed of Abraham”.
28 Those unfaithful shepherds or half brothers of Joseph “conspired against him to slay him”, with the possible exception of Reuben and Judah. Even those
two were in the conspiracy, but they were not in favor of slaying the lad, but standing by and consenting to the others’ taking a wrongful action against Joseph made all of them parties to the conspiracy and the crime committed. They stripped Joseph, taking away his beautiful coat of many colors, and then cast him into an empty well or pit, their purpose being to kill him later. Having done this, then they had a feast together, congratulating themselves on their accomplishment in getting rid of Joseph. At the suggestion of Judah, instead of killing Joseph, they sold him ‘ ‘ for twenty pieces of silver” to a band of Midianites and Ishmaelites, merchants bound for Egypt. Their conclusion was that now they were rid of their brother who had tormented them with the truth and that they had also profited by receiving some filthy lucre from the merchantmen. In order that they might further carry out their conspiracy and deceive their father Israel, they killed a he-goat, instead of Joseph, and took the blood of that goat and smeared it over the beautiful garment, and then carried it in that condition to Jacob, representing to him that his beloved son, Joseph, had been slain by wild beasts.—Gen. 37:18-35.
29 Joseph, being less than twenty years of age, his selling price was twenty pieces of silver according to the law. (Lev. 27:5) During the twenty-two years following this selling, Joseph was to Jacob as though he were dead. His father had no knowledge that he had been sold into Egypt and was yet alive.
80 This part of the prophetic drama was fulfilled by what came upon Jesus. His Jewish brethren, according to the flesh, conspired to kill Jesus and repeatedly attempted to carry out that conspiracy, and finally did execute the conspiracy in bringing about the death of the Lord Jesus. (John 5:16-18; 11: 53; Matt. 27:1) Like Reuben toward Joseph, some amongst the Jews were not favorable to the killing of Jesus, and among them there was “a man named Joseph, a counsellor”, who had not consented to the murder of Jesus. (Luke 23:5-51) As it was suggested that Joseph be sold into Egypt, so Judas sold Jesus to the enemy clergy for thirty pieces of silver. Jesus being thirty-three years of age, and therefore at maturity, the price for him was thirty pieces of silver, which the commercial religionists paid for his lifeblood, and then delivered Jesus to the executioners of Satan’s world, which “spiritually is called . . . Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified”. (Rev. 11:8; Matt. 26:14-16; 27: 3-5) After stripping Jesus of his identity as God’s favorite Son, which they did by their malicious lies, the Jewish clergy then caused him to be murdered as a wicked sinner. As Joseph’s half brethren killed the he-goat and used its blood for deception, so the Jewish clergy brought about the death of the Lord Jesus Christ. Joseph’s brethren sought to effectually deceive their father, and for a time succeeded. Likewise
February 1, 1937
^'WATCHTOWER.
41
the Jewish clergy sought to deceive. Even though Jesus waa raised from the dead by the power of Jehovah and that fact was repeated amongst the people, the Jewish clergy vigorously denied that Jesus lived again, and schemed to induce all to believe him still dead. (Matt. 27:62-66; Luke 23:50-53; John 19:31-42) Joseph completely disappeared from the land of his nativity and was supposed by his father to be dead; and thus ended the first act of the great prophetic drama.
SECOND PART
81 The scene is now transferred from the land of Canaan to the land of Egypt, where Joseph was a slave or bond servant. Joseph’s career in Egypt requires a transfer in application of the prophetic drama from Jesus personally to Christ Jesus and the members of his body, the church, over which Christ Jesus is Head and Lord. The prophecy particularly now applies to “the feet of him”, otherwise called “the remnant”, his true followers yet on earth. Long after the selling of Joseph into Egypt one of God’s faithful witnesses wrote and the record of his testimony is this: “And the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt: but God was with him, and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he made him governor over Egypt and all his house.” (Acts 7:9,10) This is further proof that the drama was directed by Jehovah God, was and is a prophecy, and was recorded long ago for the benefit of the remnant now on earth, that they might be encouraged and have their hope increased. In corroboration of this Jehovah’s prophet wrote: “ He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a servant; whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron; until the time that his word came; the word of the Lord tried him. The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and let him go free. He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance; to bind his princes at his pleasure, and teach his senators wisdom.” (Ps. 105:17-22) Thus was foretold that the feet members of Christ Jesus would be bound and hurt with fetters, that they would be held in restraint and suffer until God’s due time to lift them up with their Lord and Head. The loving-kindness of Jehovah is manifested in this, that he caused these minor details to be recorded long ago and now makes them known for the benefit of his faithful ones on earth.
88 Arriving in Egypt, Joseph was made a slave in the house of Potiphar, captain in Pharaoh’s guard, that is, the man who was the chief executioner of the king: “And the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.” (Gen. 39:2) Joseph was a slave and a man of no reputation in Egypt at that time, yet he had God’s favor all the time. Likewise the faithful followers of Christ Jesus upon earth,
particularly of the remnant, have been made of no reputation among men and have suffered many indignities because of their faithfulness. They likewise have an assurance that God is with them, and this makes their burdens easy to be borne. Potiphar saw that Joseph was a good man and dependable, and he made Joseph a trusted slave for his service. Likewise worldly men have seen that those devoted to Jehovah are more trustworthy than other men and more dependable when assigned to a specific duty. These faithful followers of Christ Jesus have learned that whatsoever they do, they do as unto the Lord.
88 Applying now the well-known facts and the prophecy to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus on earth, mark how well the two harmonize. The application seems to be properly made during the period of time when Christ Jesus was ‘preparing the way before Jehovah’, and before he came to the temple. From about A.D. 1878 forward Jehovah’s faithful servants under Christ Jesus were engaged in a pre-kingdom service. They saw that the kingdom was near, and they went forth proclaiming the second coming of Christ and the kingdom of God under Christ Jesus, although the matter was not then so clearly understood by them. As Joseph was a slave in the house of Potiphar, so the faithful followers of Christ Jesus on earth were in subjection to men because of not discerning who constitute “the higher powers”. (Rom. 13:1) They have believed that the political rulers of earth constitute the powers ordained of God, and were hence the higher powers. They faithfully performed whatsoever was committed to them, and men of the world saw that these true Christians were more reliable and dependable than others. As Joseph was made a trusted servant because of his dependability and faithfulness, so during the period of time when Christ Jesus was preparing the way before Jehovah there was developed a class of men and women, the true followers of Christ Jesus, who honestly and faithfully performed whatsoever was committed into their hands and were noted as dependable. This class was on earth when Christ Jesus finished the work of preparing the way before Jehovah and at the time he appeared at the temple for judgment. It is to this class the words of Jesus are addressed: “Blessed is that servant [class], whom his lord, when he cometh [to the temple], shall find so doing.” (Matt. 24:45,46) At the time “the higher powers” was not particularly an issue and was not given very much consideration. But the time must come when the integrity of God’s people must be put to a test and when they must know who constitute “the higher powers” and devote themselves fully to the true higher powers.
84 No doubt Joseph was a well-developed and handsome young man as well as entirely trustworthy. He was strong, upstanding and vigorous. He had found favor in the sight of his master Potiphar and for that
42
THE WATCHTOWER.
BROOKLYN, N. Y.
reason had been given the freedom of his house. His integrity now was put to the test. Would he remain true and steadfast to God, or would he compromise himself? Potiphar’s wife was used to put Joseph to the test, even as Satan’s “woman", his organization, is used to put the sons of God now on earth to a severe test, affording the opportunity to prove their integrity. Potiphar’s wife attempted to seduce the young man Joseph and cause him to have intercourse with her. He resisted her, and yet she persisted in her efforts to seduce him. When Potiphar’s wife had failed to involve the young man Joseph and he fled from her when his garment was torn from his back by her, then she falsely accused him of the crime of assault with intent to rape. That was a serious charge; and the circumstantial evidence being against Joseph then, though wholly false, Potiphar the master caused Joseph to be thrown into prison “where the king’s prisoners were bound”. (Gen. 39:6-20) In this test Joseph had strictly maintained his integrity.
38	Fornication and adultery are typical of illicit spiritual relationship of the child of God with Satan’s “woman” or organization. (Jas. 4:4) Jehovah’s faithful servants under Christ Jesus have repeatedly repulsed the unclean and licentious advancement of Satan’s “woman”, that is, his organization. Although often enticed, they have kept themselves “unspotted from the world” by refusing to have anything in common with the organization that rules the world. They have refused to be seduced by Satan’s woman. They have persistently refused to join with the religious organizations and have anything in common with those organizations and to thereby commit spiritual fornication. They have shunned the corrupt political affairs of this world and have steadfastly held to their service of God and Christ Jesus.
“Potiphar’s wife was moved by revenge to make the false accusations against Joseph. For revenge, like the adulterous and wicked woman, the clergy have falsely accused God’s faithful children of violating their liberty and with the crime of assault upon the organization of the world. They delight to continue to accuse Jehovah’s witnesses as communists. This false accusation was particularly true in the time of the World War, and is still true. Although the “faithful servant” class adhere strictly to the truth, as commanded by Jehovah, and fight only for the truth and the vindication of Jehovah’s name, the clergy, like Potiphar’s wife, resort to lies and maliciously charge God’s people with crimes, causing them to be imprisoned and otherwise restrained. The clergy and allies, who are the “mighty men” of Babylon, have always refused to come into the open and fight, and that is particularly true now. Unable to meet the truth, as proclaimed by God’s people, the clergy resort to lies and strike in the dark. Potiphar’s wife knew that she had no just cause against Joseph and that she
must fight him by taking undue advantage by reason of her standing with her husband, and for envy and with express malice, she struck Joseph in the back. Likewise the clergy know they have no defense and they strike Jehovah’s witnesses in the dark, always hiding behind someone else and relying upon their reputation and standing amongst the political and commercial elements of Satan’s organization. Concerning the clergy and their allies of the present day, and their method of fighting, Jehovah says: “The mighty men of Babylon [Satan’s organization] have forborn to fight, they have remained in their holds; their might hath failed; they became as women.” (Jer. 51:30) The result is that Jehovah’s witnesses are cast into prison, charged with the offense of sedition, treason, obstructers of the governments, hostile and dangerous to the state or organization of the world. (Matt. 24:9; Mark 13:9) Particularly were, such false charges laid against God’s faithful people during the World War, and many of them were imprisoned because of their faithfulness to God and their maintaining their integrity toward him. At that time the “evil servant” class, having become a part of Satan’s “woman”, betrayed the faithful ones into the hands of the clergy, even as Judas betrayed Jesus into the hands of the Jewish religionists.—Matt. 24: 9-12.
37	The crime with which Joseph was charged by the woman was a capital offense. It was a charge easily made and easily proved with circumstantial evidence, and against which Joseph had no defense except his own honest word. Pharaoh’s baker was beheaded for an offense of less enormity than that charged against Joseph. Joseph doubtless would have been likewise executed, but God was with him and placed his protecting hand over him, preventing his execution. Jehovah maneuvered matters so that Joseph was placed in a higher-class prison, that is, in the royal prison. No doubt Joseph for a time was treated like other prisoners, because it is prophetically written of him: ‘They hurt his feet, and he was laid in irons.’ (Psr 105:17,18) The Lord showed his favor toward him, and then Joseph was made a trusted slave in the prison: “And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph’s hand all the prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it. The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand; because the Lord was with him, and that which he did the Lord made it to prosper.” (Gen. 39:22,23) In this prison house Joseph was a type of Christ Jesus representatively through his feet members on earth, who were restrained and thrown into prison, and this was particularly true during the World War.
38	Whatever punishment is inflicted upon the faithful feet members, the remnant, Christ Jesus counts that as inflicted upon himself. (Matt. 25: 36-40) During the World War Jehovah’s servants were subjected
February 1, 1937
ffKe WATCHTOWER,
43
to many indignities, imprisoned and ill-treated, even as Joseph was ill-treated at first. Then Jehovah relieved them of much of their suffering and preserved their lives, although his faithful ones had been imprisoned with the purpose of killing them and hence, as written, they were “appointed to die’’. (Pss. 79:11; 102:20) Christ Jesus, the beloved Son, was at that time at the temple. The holy spirit as comforter and guide had been taken away because of the Lord’s personal presence at the temple, who now guides and comforts his own whom he has gathered unto himself. (2 Thess. 2:7; John 14:16-18) Therefore God was with the antitypical Joseph class at this time and showed them favor, and he continues to show them favor, even to this day. As there were committed to the hand of Joseph as a trusted slave or bond servant all the other prisoners, even so the Lord has committed to his “faithful and wise servant’’ class the privilege and duty of ministering to all other prisoners, that is to say, to those pictured by Ruth and Esther first, and who have since been made a part of the servant class, and also to the people of good will, or Jonadabs, who are now being loosed and brought into the liberty of God’s kingdom. Thus the Lord has made the work of the “faithful servant” class, whom Joseph at this point of the drama pictured, to prosper. He has committed into their hands all his goods. They pray for prosperity and receive prosperity, as God had promised. (Ps. 118:25) Joseph maintained his integrity toward God. The remnant, the members of the body of Christ, who continue faithful, will maintain their integrity towards Jehovah, and, doing so, they are certain to have a part in the vindication of his holy name. The great prophetic drama proceeds, showing that Jehovah had much more in store for Joseph to perform, and foretells that God, through Christ Jesus, has committed into the hands of his faithful servant class much work to be done to the honor of his name. He now reveals these truths to the “faithful servant” class, that they may be strong in hope, knowing that, continuing in faithful service, they will in due time participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s holy name.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOK STUDY
If 1. Account for the provision made by Jehovah for those who would give heed to his word. How were the word and name of Jehovah put in issue? What has been Jehovah’s procedure in regard thereto, and why? With what result? What, then, is the testimony now to be given? and what is the purpose thereof?
If 2. When and to whom does the rule at Bomans 6: 23 apply? Have men given heed to that rule, and whyf
"If 3. How is eternal life- the free gift of God? Explain the phrase here, “in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
"If 4. To whom, and how, has Jehovah given proof of his foreknowledge and made known his provisions for man?'and for what purpose has this been done?
"If 5, 6. What was Jehovah’s purpose in the events directed by him in ancient times, and in his providing record thereof in his W’ord? When, and to whom, has Jehovah revealed the application of those prophetic dramas? How, and for what purpose?
T 7, 8. Relate the circumstances surrounding the birth and early experiences of Joseph. Of Benjamin.
If 9. Point out the parentage and relationship of the twelve sons of Israel.
"If 10,11. Relate the course of events by which Joseph became the most important man of Egypt. Point out the prophetic significance of the name “Joseph”.
"If 12,13. Show that this and other prophetic dramas and the record thereof serve the purpose for which Jehovah provided them.
"If 14,15. Whom does Jacob picture in this prophetic drama, and how? Rachel?
"If 16,17. Joseph, in his part of the drama, pictures whom, and how? Benjamin? Benjamin together with Joseph?
U 18. What was foreshown (a) in Joseph’s being his father’s favorite son, and, until the birth of Benjamin, being his father’s only son by Rachel? (b) In the fact that Joseph and Benjamin were both sons of Jacob’s old age?
"If 19. Who were pictured by Joseph’s ten half brothers? and how is this shown?
"If 20,21. To whom, how, for what purpose, does Jehovah give an understanding of his prophecies? How may we know that we have the correct understanding of a prophecy?
If 22. With related scriptures, show that in the circumstances seen in Genesis 37: 1 the position of Joseph and Benjamin was prophetic.
If 23-25. Explain the prophetic picture presented (a) in the record at Genesis 37: 3. (b) In the dreams had by Joseph, and the effect upon his brethren when told to them by him. (c) In Joseph’s being his father’s faithful shepherd son, and in the evil report by his brethren, who also were shepherds. (d) In Joseph’s commission from his father as recorded at verse 14.
"If 26. What was the significance to Joseph of his dreams here recorded ?
If 27. Point out the prophetic significance of Joseph’s dreams here on record, and of the hatred and envy manifested toward him by his half brethren.	.
If 28-30. Relate, in substance, the record concerning Joseph according to Genesis 37: 14-36. Apply the prophetic picture.
"If 31. The opening of the second part of the drama presents what change of scene, and requires what transfer in application of the prophetic picture?
If 32,33. Apply that part of the prophetic picture recorded at Genesis 39: 2.
U 34,35. How do the persistent efforts of Potiphar’s wife to seduce Joseph, and his maintaining his integrity, find application as a prophecy?
If 36. Potiphar’s wife, failing in her efforts to seduce Joseph, then pursued what course? Point out the course of affairs fulfilling this part of the picture.
U 37, 38. What is the evidence that at that time, also in the fulfillment of the prophetic picture, “the Lord was with Joseph”?
JEHOVAH IS RIGHTEOUS
in all his ways, and gracious tn all his works. Jehozah is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry and will save them. Jehovah raiseth up them that are bowed down; Jehovah loveth the righteous; Jehovah preserveth the strangers; he reheveth the fatherless and widen; but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down. Jehovah will reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations.
Praise ye Jehovah.—Psalms 145,146.
JUDGMENT
THE Lord God Almighty sitting upon his throne, over and above all the forces of his organization and coming out of the north and moving forward to the destruction of the unfaithful city of Jerusalem, was seen in vision by God’s prophet Ezekiel. Concerning this Ezekiel says: “And above the firmament that was over their [the cherubim’s] heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone; and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it. And I saw as the colour of amber, as the appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about. As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake. ’ ’—Ezek. 1: 26-28.
The duty of pronouncing God’s judgment and of the execution thereof is laid upon Christ Jesus, who is God’s Chief Executive Officer. That this vision refers to the time of the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of Jehovah for judgment is further supported by what the prophet later saw and about which he wrote, to'wit: “Afterward he brought me to the gate [of the temple], even the gate that looketh toward the east; and, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east, and his voice was like a noise of many waters; and the earth shined with his glory. And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw, even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city [prophesy that the city should be destroyed (margin)]; and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my face. And the glory of the Lord came into the house, by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east. So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court; and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house.”—Ezek. 43:1-5.
At the time of this, his first vision, Ezekiel pictured and foreshadowed those in the covenant with God and in line for the kingdom and whom the Lord Jesus Christ found faithful upon coming to his temple and to whom he committed his kingdom interests on the earth, and to which class he refers as the “faithful and wise servant”. (Matt. 24:45,46) This “faithful servant” class had its vision made clear concerning the Elijah and Elisha works of the church in the autumn of 1919. This was five years after Jehovah had placed his anointed King upon his holy hill in Zion and the “man child”, the new government, had been born. That new government was a part of God’s universal organization, and it was then, through the functioning of that government, that Jehovah began his reign over the earth. This was particularly shown
by Jehovah’s being seated upon his throne above all his organization, as described by Ezekiel. Therefore, five years after the beginning of the kingdom the “servant” class of the Lord on earth began to clearly see that God had another work for the ‘ * faithful servant” to do before the end. The kingdom had begun, and the first great work would be the clearing out of Satan’s organization, and before the Lord would do that he would cause the members of the “faithful servant” class on earth to give notice by a world-wide campaign of testifying to the Lord’s purposes. It is thus seen that the physical facts exactly fit the prophecy and show that Ezekiel had his first vision five years after his captivity and that the “faithful and wise servant”, whom Ezekiel foreshadow’ed, had his vision of the kingdom-Elisha-work five years after the King was enthroned.
For a number of years God’s people had waited for the vision to speak. Since about 1889, when Volume II of Studies in the Scriptures was issued and it was seen that there was a typical significance attached to Elijah and his work, the faithful had waited, expecting the year 1914 to mark the complete fulfillment of the prophecy. They had expected Armageddon to follow immediately after 1914 and the church to be glorified. Of course, it was not due time until after 1918 to have a clearer vision of the prophecy. Like the prophet Habakkuk, God’s covenant people had waited, and, while waiting, there were some curious speculations indulged in by them, which were’mere guesses, of course, and therefore not true, because it was not God’s time for them to understand. Habakkuk, referring to the “servant” class, wrote: “I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved. And the Lord answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.”—Ilab. 2:1-3.
It was in 1919 that the “faithful servant” class began to see the significance of the Elisha work. The “servant” more fully saw in 1922 the meaning thereof. It was in that year that God’s covenant people came to a realization that they had been negligent in giving the testimony to the Lord’s name and that ‘the Lord was angry with them ’, but that the time had come to ‘turn away his anger’. (Isa. 12:1) In that year the faithful saw the Lord had come to his temple, and with joy and zeal peculiar to the house of the Lord they went forward to do the Elisha work in advertising the King and the Kingdom.
The vision was so marvelous and awesome to Ezekiel that he ‘fell down upon his face, and heard a voice of one speaking to him’. (Ezek. 1:28) When the Lord, through the columns of The Watchtower, disclosed tho vision of the Lord’s coming to the temple, and its
February 1, 1937
fflie WATCHTOWER,
45
meaning, the faithful appreciative ones, designated as God’s “young men’’, like Ezekiel, fell down and worshiped in devotion to Jehovah. To these faithful ones the vision continued to increase in beauty and grandeur, and they have seen and now see that the great work of God’s anointed people on earth is to make a proclamation of the truth looking to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. The “faithful servant” has since continued to hear the voice of the Lord and to joyfully respond thereto in going forward with the work committed into their hands.
While the young man Ezekiel was prostrated before the Lord he heard a voice of one saying to him: “Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee.” (Ezek. 2:1) “And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me. And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day.” (Ezek. 2:2,3) Then and there Ezekiel was given a commission to bear a message to the people of Israel. Since anointing is symbolic of a commission granted and bestowed upon the anointed ones, this would represent the anointing of the faithful ones who were approved and taken into God’s organization. Those whom the Lord found faithful at the examination upon coming to the temple, as pictured by the parable of the talents, would here be pictured as receiving the anointing or commission.— Matt. 25:21.
When the Lord came to his temple in 1918 he found two classes of servants: one that was moved by a selfish desire to be honored in the kingdom, and another unselfishly devoted to the Lord in doing his will. The first he later designates as the ‘1 evil servant ’ ’, and the other as the “faithful and wise servant”. It is after the division and separation takes place that the “faithful and wise servant” is known and designated as “the remnant”. The “faithful and wise servant” is anointed and commissioned to care for the interests of the kingdom, and this is designated by the words of Jesus that ‘he would make him ruler over all his goods’. (Matt. 24:47) This prophecy would indicate that such anointing took place in 1919; and that the general outpouring of the holy spirit, according to the
prophecy of Joel, occurred in 1922, when all in the earthly division of the organization of the Lord were commissioned to go forth with the message of truth. —Joel 2:28, 29.
Ezekiel saw the Lord approaching to destroy Satan’s organization, and the “faithful servant” class saw in 1919 that the church, pictured by Elisha, must now do a vigorous slaying work in connection with the Lord’s destruction of “organized Christianity”. Shortly thereafter the Golden Age magazine was issued, and issue No. 27 of that magazine laid bare the wicked deeds of “organized Christianity”. Several million copies of this number of the magazine were placed in the hands of the people. The “faithful servant ’ ’ class then got on its feet and went to work. The anointing was a commission to speak God’s vengeance against those who had reproached his name. In the commission given to Ezekiel “there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe”. Likewise God’s anointed and commissioned people were now commissioned to speak the vengeance of Jehovah against those who had reproached his name. (Ezek. 2:10) The anointed people of the Lord were therefore commissioned to publish these truths so that they could be heard and read and understood.
Time was required for the organizing of the work, and it seems certain that the “servant” class might have been more energetic than they were. Doubtless many were held back because of fear and something was required for such that they might have their eyes fully opened to the responsibility of the work they were commissioned to do. It is well known that some of the groups of God’s covenant people at that time hesitated to distribute No. 27 of the Golden Age magazine, manifestly because of fear. It exposed the duplicity of the clergy, and some feared to incur their displeasure. In the latter part of 1920 the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society began the distribution of the message contained in No. 27 of The Golden Age. Companies that failed or refused to distribute that message lost the privilege, and others were sent into their territory to make the distribution. By 1922 God’s people had come to a clearer understanding of their duties and the work took on a greater impetus, and those who were privileged to do it went at it zealously and fearlessly.
PHONOGRAPH CAMPAIGN
BELOW are given reports received from members of the Bethel family engaged in the educational campaign with the portable phonograph:
Twenty-five hours of exclusively phonograph witness work, in December, yielded blessings beyond all comparison. In the preceding seventeen months there were 1.55 placements per hour in the 384 hours devoted to witnessing. By the phonogiaph method the placements, in the month just ended, were down to 1.14 per hour, but the blessings went up 100 percent.
The phonograph method removes prejudice, awakens the sleeping, reawakens the dormant, creates new interest, convinces the people of the unselfishness of Jehovah’s people, creates an excellent impression in the neighborhood, causes tho people to read the books they already have, changes the witness work from racing to visiting, makes the territory last several times as long, and blesses the worker with beautiful and oft-repeated truth.
Four weeks, to the day, after a Polish farmer near Madisonville, Pa., refused to talk about the truth or to receive the
46
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
witness into his home he and his wife and two grown sons listened to four records with great interest and appreciation and promised to read a free booklet. Their prejudice is gone, probably for over.
In the same neighborhood, a young farmer and his wife, members of a church the pastor of which is particularly vicious in his attacks on the truth (even to the extent of following witnesses down the street and openly warning against reading the literature), heard six records and obtained four bound books. He is only just now working, after many months ’ idleness.
In the same neighborhood, where a woman claimed she had most of the books, did not read them, did not intend to, and would give them away at the first opportunity, her husband heard six records and manifested intense interest and appreciation. Indications were he will now read the books.
In Kempton, Pa., a man and wife, Lutherans, resented anybody calling with spiritual food: they already had all they needed or wanted. Neither chair nor table was offered. Two records were played on the floor of the porch. One mentioned Preparation, and when the book was then shown, the man, though out of work, obtained it.
In Friedensburg, Pa., a woman who had many of the books declined to hear the phonograph or to obtain more literature. At the roadside stand, alongside, her husband (and four of her children) heard six records, and the man obtained the itches combination, and went into the house from which the witness had just been excluded, to get the wherewithal to contribute.
In the same neighborhood a man sore on the world, and particularly on the Devil’s churches, after grudgingly hearing two lectures, said the biggest hypocrites are in the churches and, as for him, he listens every chance he gets to “the man from Brooklyn’’. He promised to read a booklet, even though his wife protested.
At Oceanside, N.Y., a woman had just joined the Lutheran church and did not wish to get “mixed up’’, but when she heard two lectures she concluded the Lord had sent the witness. She already had Uches, and obtained Creation.
In same neighborhood where a most capable witness had just called and left nothing by the usual methods, along came the phonograph witness, by accident, thirty minutes later. The playing of seven records resulted in placement of a itches combination.
At Jericho, N.Y., a Sunday morning call in an antique shop resulted in a most enjoyable half hour, playing the phonograph before an open fire. Two bound books were placed. Playing the records placed the books here also.
In same neighborhood an Irish Catholic gentleman, a watchman, demurred that he already had 250 phonograph records of his own and every night, all night, listened to the radio, as he had nothing else to do. He finally consented to hear one record, “Purgatory.” At its end he said, “Well, now, that would make you think; wouldn't it?” and obtained the itches.
At Flushing, N.Y., an Irish Catholic woman granted admission to the witness “from the Watch Tower, with choice male quartettes and lectures from the best radio programs in New York city”. She was puzzled and kept wanting, to know the objectives; but, by taking a hint from Esther (Preservation, pages 120-122), this information was withheld until the right time. When she had no more time to spare, she was shown four bound books, itches, Creation, Government, Preparation, with the information that these were the books mentioned in the lecture. She promptly obtained them, and, two minutes after the interview was closed, came out on the sidewalk to know if she might have another set on the same terms 1
The stirring call of the year text, together with the instructions to make good use of the phonograph, should be a great stimulus and blessing to the Lord’s people and a great blessing in the witness work. At the same time it is becoming a terrible
plague to the clergy and their allies. They are cowards who cannot stand being exposed. In a home where I was the other evening, a “reverend” came in and sat down. I turned to him, saying, “We are having a Bible study; will you wait?” Just then he had caught sight of the Uches books and quickly grasped the situation and jumped up as though someone had stuck a pin into him, saying, “No, no! Oh no!!” and out of the house he went. That was all I saw of him.
It never dawned on me the help the phonograph can be, although, since the first time they were suggested by the Society, I have carried one almost every time I went to the territory.
Two weeks ago I stepped into a home, but as soon as the lady realized who I was she went into a fit, shouting at me to ‘ ‘ get out! get out I ’ ’ Her two daughters ran to her asking “Mother—what’s wrong?” Her reply was “Bootherford! Rootherford! Our worst enemy!”
Thinking over this incident on my way home that evening, I could remember lots of cases where the people were bitter against “Rootherford and Jehovah’s witnesses” in geneial, but I don’t remember a single instance where people were rude or disrespectful after hearing the phonograph records. On the other hand, there is a ring of sincerity and authority that commands respect, setting the people thinking to their own good, and causes them to take literature where with ordinary witnessing methods they would simply say “no” and that would be the end of the matter.
In the past two months, above my regular work, I have put in fifty hours in witnessing and evening calls; and I must say the phonograph has taken me into more homes in that time than in a whole year previously and, as for giving testimony, I am sure it is even more effective than the radio, because of the personal contact and also having the literature right there.
A few days ago, while witnessing, a man refused to listen and then said, “Don’t go to that house: the lady wouldn’t be bothered; and besides, she is blind.” I wasn’t taking instructions from him, and went to the door in question. The lady was not only blind, but sick in bed, too; a neighbor let me in. There was no radio in the home, and this poor soul had no way of hearing the message of truth and could not even read the Braille system.
She gladly heard the phonograph and expressed appreciation and her desire that I should come again, which I will do, considering it a privilege to bring a little comfort to such a one; and what better method than by phonograph?
As in this case, the phonograph adapts itself to almost every circumstance, and my report shows that more than 200 people have listened quietly to Brother Rutherford’s clear, masterly explanations of their favorite texts and, problems that have puzzled many for years—this number in the past two months. Words cannot express what was behind the nods, smiles, remarks and gestures that accompanied the playing of the records. One lady’s face, last Saturday, was a study in itself. Her face was hard, and she let me talk and talk till I had to ask her if she knew what I was saying, and I was surprised to hear her say, “Yes, perfectly.” She remained cold as ice, and shrugged her shoulders when I asked her to let me put on a record. I opened up the machine anyway, and started it going. When halfway through she came over and sat down by the machine. When it finished she picked up a itches and asked, “Does this book explain what the record has said?” “Why, certainly; and much more.” She took the book and agreed that I call back.
When Jesus said, “My yoke is easy, and my burden is light,” he did not mean that we can serve by just relaxing and sitting at home. Making good use of the phonograph calls for a lot of hard work, and although we don’t always see the results of our labors right away, we do indeed get immediate results to our own good, because such work as this can only sharpen our own appreciation of the service and is therefore something that
February 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
47
we need' as well as the people to whom we carry the message. I find it good -to keep the names of all who have had back calls, and call on them as new books and booklets come out, taking the phonograph along, too, of course. Bain spoils the phonograph, but some of the brethren are sewing up a little cover made out of some waterproof material—even an old raincoat. I have such a cover; and it lets one make back calls, as well as witness, in bad weather.
I have also found that some who are attending meetings and taking part in the witnessing took many months to wake up to their privileges; so it would be a mistake to make one or two calls and then forget all about them. One gentleman, a Mr. S., heard the phonograph a few times but remained tangled up in his church activities. I lost track of him when he changed his address. About nine months later, I called on two people (a couple I had contacted months previously) to try to get them to come along to a meeting, and, to my surprise, Mr. S. had invited them to one of our study meetings in the neighborhood and they went there. I find that I handicap myself by moving around to different territories that are not convenient to each other, and intend to confine my activities as near one locality as possible, and as enough interest is worked up it is easier for a study to be started; and, after all, that is the aim we should have as we start witnessing.
For Catholics I find a happy combination with the “Purgatory” record is the use of the Douay Bible. The scriptures are
about the same, and to anyone who can think at all, a few pointed texts from it shakes their dependence on the priests greatly. I show them the large embossed cross on the cover, then the endorsement by Cardinal Gibbons, then read from tha preface, which states that this is considered the most genuine and authentic Bible there is. The more prominent texts I use are Genesis 2: 7, Ecclesiastes 9: 5,10; 3: 19-22; Psalm 146: 4 (which is Psalm 145: 4 in the Douay), Revelation 12 (re war in heaven and woe to earth), Revelation 14 (re church, etc.), etc.
It is evident that the past two years have been a preparation period for this grand instrument and only now are the Lord’s servants realizing the effectiveness of letting well-prepared records tell the message, instead of stammering lips, and I again express my gratitude to Jehovah for the privilege of using one of the new light portables, so easily carried.
The most interesting run of phonograph back calls I have had was when a party of eight worked a few blocks, taking as many names as possible for the purpose of calling back. I followed up about twenty such names, practically all of which showed interest, took the "Riches and some other literature, and had at least three weekly back calls. A study was started with as many as eleven at one meeting; and I feel sure that if such a system were worked out and adopted, in city territory especially, the results would be gratifying and enthuse the workers to more evening work and help them to realize the advantages of the Lord’s new instrument, the portable phonograph.
NEW JERSEY
Asbury P. WCAP Su 12:45pm
Su 2:45pm Su 9:00pm
Camden WCAM Su 11:00am Su 12:15pm	Su 3:15pm
Mo 2:30pm	We 2:30pm
Newark WHBI Su 9:55am
Su 6:25pm Su 9:00pm
NEW MEXICO
Carlsbad KLAH Su 10:55am Su 1:00pm Su 5:00pm
NEW YORK
Brooklyn WBBR Su 9:10am Su 4:30pm Su 7:30pm
Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:15am Su 6:30pm Mo 10:30am Tu 10:30am Tu 6:30pm We 10:30am We 6:30pm Th 10:30am Th 6:30pm Fr 10:30am Fr 6:30pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am
Su 10:45pm
Buffalo WKBW Su 5:55pm
Freeport WGBB Su 10:25am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:55pm
NewYork WBNX Su 5:30pm
White PI. WFASSu 6:00pm Tu 10:55am Sa 10:55am
NORTH CAROLINA
Greensboro WBIG Su 10:30am
High P’t WMFR Su 10:45am
Baleigh WPTF Su 3:15pm
We 3:15pm Fr 3:15pm
W’ilm’gton WMFDSul0:30am Su 12:25pm Su 4:30pm
NORTH DAKOTA
Valley C ’y KO VC Su 12:30pm Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
OHIO
Akron WJW Su 11:30am Su 3:25pm Su 10:15pm
Cleveland WHK Su 11:0 0 pm Tu 1:45pm Th 1:45pm
Fr 1:45pm
(Continued from page 48)
Columbus WBNS Su 7:45am Su 12:30pm	Mo 3:15pm
We 3:15pm	Fr 3:15pm
Greek Su 8:30am
Columbus WOOL Su 10:00am
Tu 3:45pm Th 2:30pm Sa 1:45 pm
Columbus WHKC Su 5:25pin Mo 1:55pm	Tu 1:55pm
We 1:55pm	Th 1:55pm
Fr 1:55pm
Portsm’th WPAYMo 11:00am We 11:00am Fr 11:00am
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 10:50am
Su 12:25pm Su 5:00pm
Enid KCRC Su 10:15am
Su 1:25pm Su 3:00pm
Muskogee KBIX Su 10:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 5:55pm
Oklah’a C. KFXR Su 12:25pm
Su 6:15pm Su 7:25pm
Ponca City WBBZ Su 9:55am
Su 1:25pm Su 4:55pm
Shawnee KGFF Su 1:30pm
Su 3:55pm Su 5:55pm
Tulsa KVOO Su 9:30am
Su 3:55pm Mo 4:55pm
OREGON
Astoria KAST Tu 7:00am
Th 2:55pm Sa 11:55am
Portland KWJJ Su 10:45am
Su 4:15pm Su 9:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Easton WEST Su 10:25am
Su 11:55am Su 9:25pm
Greensb ’g WHJB Su 10:15am Su 4:00pm
Hariisb’g WKBOHu 12:45pm
Su 3:55pm Su 5:55pm
Philad ’a WTEL Su 12:30pm
Su 1:25pm Tu 5:30pm
Pittsburgh KQV Su 10:45am
Pittsb’gh WWSWSu 10:45am
Su 5:00pm Su 9:00pm
Wilkes-B. WBRE Su 10:40am Su 2:45pm Su 6:30pm
Williamsp. WRAK Su 6:15pm Su 7:45pm Th 7:30pm
York WORK Su 12:25pm
Su 3:00pm Su 6:25pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Greenville WFBC Su 10:00am
Su 3:30pm Su 9:30pm
Spart ’b ’g WSPA Su 10:30am Su 2:00pm Su 4:40pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Huron KGDY Su 9:25am Su 12:30pm We 5:55pm Pierre KGFX Su 10:00am
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Sioux Falla KSOO Su 9:10anj Su 9:45am Su 4:30pm
Watert ’n KWTN Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 1:55pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPI Su 10:45am
Su 1:10pm Su 4:25pm
Jackson WTJS Su 10:30am Su 12:15pm Su 2:30pm
Knoxville WNOX Su 10:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 9:45pm
Memphis WNBR Su 12:40pm
Su 3:25pm Su 5:10pm
Memphis WREC Su 10:00ain
Su 3:55pm Su 10:15pm
TEXAS
Brady	KNEL Su 9:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 4:30pm
Dallas	WRR Su 9:30am
Su 4:00pm Su 9:00pm
El Paso KTSMSu 9:10am Su 1:15pm Su C :30pm
Ft. Worth KT AT Su 10:15am
Su 3:00pm Su 7:00pm
Lubbock KFYO Su 10:55am
Su 1:55pm Su 4:25pm
Midland KRLII Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 5:15pm
Pecos	KIUN Su 11:00am
Su l:00pni Su 5:00pm
Pt.Arthur KPAC Su 9:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 4:30pm
San Angelo KGKL Su 9:30am
Su 10:40am	Su 1:30pm
SanAntonio KABC Su 9:00am
Su l:00pin Su 5:00pni
S.	Antonio KMAC Su 7:55am
Su 2:55pm Su 7:55pm
Weslaco KRGV Su 9:45am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:45pm
UTAH
Price KEUB Su 11:45am
Su 1:25pm Su 3:15pin
Salt L. City KSL Su 8:30am
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Mo 8:30pm
We 8:30pm Fr 8:30pm
VIRGINIA
Harrisonb. WSVA Su 12:15pm
Su 2:30pm Su 4:45pm
Petersb’g WPHRSu 8:55am
Su 10:25am	Mo 7:55am
We 7:55am	Fr 10:15am
Sa 7:55am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15 pm Roanoke WDBJ Mo 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Everett	KRKO Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 3:00pm
Seattle KIRO Su 10:25am
Su 5:25pm Su 9:00pm
Spokane KG A Su 9:25am
Su 12:30pm Su 5;25pm
Tacoma KMOSu 9:00am
Su 1:00pm Su C :00pm
WEST VIRGINIA
Fairmont WMMNSu 10:30am
Su 1:45 pm	Su 3:00pm
Huntington WSAZ Su 1:00pm
Su 2:00pm Su 3:00pm
Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
Su 12:30pm Su 6:10pm
WISCONSIN
Madison WIBA Su 9:30am
fffe WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time Is shown In each Instance.]
ARGENTINA
Bahia Blanca LU2 Su 11:30am
Buenos Aires LR2 Su 10:50am Los Andes, San Juan
LV5 Su 10:30am
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AY Tu 9:45pm Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Grafton 2-GF Tu 7:30pm Gunncdah 2-MO Su 7:00pm Newcastle 2-HD Su 10:30am
Su 6:30pm	Su 11:40pm
We 6:30pm
Sydney 2-UE Su 9:00am Su 4:25pm
W ’ga W ’ga 2-WG Su 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane	4-BC Su	7:30am
Cairns	4-CA Su	7:00pm
Ipswich	4-IP Su	7:05pm
Su 7:25pm Su 7:55pm Marybor’h 4-MB We 9:45pm Townsville 4-TOSu 9:15pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Su 5:45pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat	3-BA Su 12:45pm
Bendigo	3-BO Su	7:00pm
Hamilton	3-HASu	6:45pm
Horsham	3-HS Su	7:00pm
Su 8:00pm Su 8:45pm
Melbourne 3-AK Su 2:15pm
Su 10:00pm
Swan Hill 3-SH Su 7:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlie 6-KGSu 7:00pm
Northam 6-AM Su 7:00pm
Perth 6-MLSu 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Wallonia-Bonne Esperance (201.7m) We 7:00am
CANADA
ALBERTA
Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
BRITISH COLUMBIA
Kelowna CKOV Su 1:45pm
ONTARIO
Cobalt CKMCSu 3:15pm
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:00am
Su 1:30pm Su 8:30pm
Polish Su 6:20pm (1st and 3d Sundays)
CHINA
Shanghai XHHE Su 5:00pm
CUBA
Caibarien CMHD
Spanish Mo 1:15pm
Camaguey CMJFSull:45am
Havana CMQ Su 5:45pm Eastern Standard Time Also shortwave COCQ 9740ke Spanish Su 5:30pm Santa Cl ’a CMHI Su 11:15am (1st and 3d Sundays) Spanish Su 11:00am Spanish Th 11:00am (1st and 3d Thursdays)
FRANCE
Radio Lyon Sa 6:50pm
French We 7:25pm
French Sa 7:25pm
PARAGUAY Asuncion ZP1 Su 10:30am
SPAIN
Madrid EAQ We 7:15pm (Eastern Standard Time) Sa . 7:15pm
Spanish Su 6:45pm
URUGUAY Montevideo CX10 Su 12:15pm (Radio Internacional)
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm’ham WAPI Su 10:15pm
Su 4:30pm We 5:15pm
Decatur WMFO Su 12:00 nn
Su 2:00pm Su 4:00pm
Dothan WAGF Su 9:30am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:00pm
Gadsden WJBY Su 1:15pm
Su 3:00pm Su 5:55pm
M ’tgomery WSFA Su 4:00pm
We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Selma WHBB Su 10:10am Su 12:25pm Su 4:10pm
ALASKA
Anchorage KFQD Mo 9:10pm
We 9:10pm Sa 9:10pm
Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Jerome KCRJSu 9:25am
Su 12:05pm Su 4:05pm
Phoenix KOY Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 5:30pm
Tucson KGARSu 9:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 5:45pm
Spanish Su 12:40pm
ARKANSAS
Hot Sp ’gs KTHS Su 10:15am
Jonesboro KBTM Su 8:30am
Su 1:55pm Su 3:55pm
CALIFORNIA
Bakersf nd KPMC Su 10:30am
Su 1:15pm Su 7:00pm
El Centro	KXO Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 6:45pm
Merced KYOS Su 8:45am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:00pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:00am
Su 2:00pm Tu 9:00am Tu 11:00pm
Fr 9:30pm
Su 7:00pm
Tu 2:00pm
We 8:15pm
Sa 10:00pm
COLORADO
Alamosa KGIW Tu 7:30pm
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Col ’o Spr. KVOE Su 10:30am
Su 12:45pm Su 4:00pm
Durango KIUP Su 1:00pm
Greeley KFKAMo 9:30am
Mo 1:00pm Mo 6:25pm
Sterling KGEK Su 2:30pm
CONNECTICUT
N. Britain WNBC Su 8:00am
Su 8:10am Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilmington WDELSu 1:15pm
Su 5:45pm Su 9:30pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Washington WOL Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 6:30pm
FLORIDA
Jacksonv. WMBR Su 9:55am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:30pm
Lakeland WLAK Su 9:30am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:00pm
Orlando WDBO Su 11:00am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:00pm
Tallahassee WT AL Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 4:00pm
GEORGIA
Albany WGPC Su 10:00am
Su 12:05pm Sa 7:00pm
Athens WTFI Su 9:25am
Su 11:00am Sa 7:00pm
Atlanta WATL Su 10:50am
Su 2:00pm Su 9:25pm
Augusta WRDW Su 11:00am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:30pm
Griffin WKEUSu 9:40am
Su 2:45pm Su 4:30pm
Rome	WRGA Su 10:50am
Su 5:00pm Su 8:50pm
Waycross WAYX Su 9:15am
Su 10:45am Su 12:45pm
HAWAII Hilo	KHBC Su 10:00am
IDAHO
Boise	KIDO Su 10:55am
Su 6:00pm We 4:00pm
Idaho Falls KID Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 4:00pm Nampa	KFXD Su 10:00am
Su 11:40am Su 7:15pm Pocatello KSEI Su 10:15am
Su 3:10pm Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 4:45pm
Su 6:45pm Su 9:00pm
Rockford WROK Su 9:15am
Su 12:55pm Su 3:45pm
Tuscola WDZ Su 9:35am
Su 11:55am Su 1:50pm INDIANA
Evansville WGBFSu 9:30am
Su 2:40pm Su 3:55pm
Hammond WWAESulO:15am
Su 3:25pm Su 10:00pm
New Albany WGRC Su 9:25am Su 12:25pm Su 4:15pm
T.	Haute WBOW Su 12:00 nn
Su 2:00pm Su 4:00pm
IOWA
Council Bluffs KOIL Su
Davenport WOC Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm We4:l5pm
Des Moines KRNTSu 10:00am
Su 4:00pm Su 10:00pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:55pm
Su 2:55pm Su 3:55pm
KENTUCKY
Louisville WGRC Su 9:25am
Su 12:25pm Su 4:15pm
Paducah WPAD Su 10:00am
Su 2:45pm Su 8:30pm
MAINE
Augusta WRDO Su 10:00am
Su 1:15pm Su 5:00pm
Bangor WLBZ We 9:55am W'e 12:55pm We 5:10pm
Presque I. WAGMSu 9:45am Su 12:30pm Su 1:55pm
MARYLAND
Baltimore WCAO Su 10:30am
Su 12:45pm Su 10:45pm
Baltimore WCBM Su 9:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 6:15pm
Frederick WFMD Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 5:00pm
Hagerst’n WJEJ Su 10:25am
Su 1:40pm Su 9:15pm
MASSACHUSETTS
Boston WMEX Su 9:25am
Su 4:10pm Su 8:10pm
Boston W’ORL Su 10:05am
Su 2:05pm Su 3:05pm
MICHIGAN
Detroit WJR Su 10:00am
Kalamazoo WKZO Su 8:20am
Su 9:00am Su 9:55am
Muskegon WKBZ Su 10:30am
Su 3:15pm Su 5:55pm
MINNESOTA
F ’gus Falls KGDE Su 10:00am
Su 1:45pm Su 7:15pm
Min ’apolis WDGY Su 9:30am
Su 2:00pm We 5:30pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’g WFOR Su 1:00pm Su 3:30pm Sir 5:30pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
St. Joseph KFEQ Su 10:0()am
Su 1:35pm Su 3:40pm
NEBRASKA
Lincoln	KFAB Su 9:30am
Omaha KOIL Su
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Laconia WLNH Su 10:10am
Su 2:10pm Su 6:55pm
(Continued on page 47)
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah S4^3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven, and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man. for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, .$1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Dealt. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Older Only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian.........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African ...... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once eacli year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postoffice. Act of March 3, 1879.
MEMORIAL
The date for the celebration to the name of Jehovah God and to the sacrifice of Christ Jesus in 1937 will be Friday, March 26, after six p.m. The book entitled Jehovah contains a detailed explanation of the Memorial. Carefully and prayerfully study chapters two and three thereof. Then on the 2(ith day of March, after six p.m., let each company of the anointed assemble and celebrate the Memorial. In doing so, use unleavened bread and real led wine. Unferniented grape juice or raisin juice will not meet the Scriptural requirements. The Lord and the apostles used real red wine, and we should follow their lead.	-----------------
“UNCOVERED"
True to its title, “Uncovered,” this new booklet draws back the veil of lies covering the false position, claims and pretensions of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. This booklet was called forth as a result of the failure ot the Hierarchy and governmental and radio agencies to respond to the nation-wide petition in the United States for a public debate by radio, and presents the Scriptural side of the proposed debate by the Society's president, against whom the Hierarchy laid its false charges. Uncovered is a booklet of 64 pages, and the campaign with it in the United States and territories begins February 15. But its usefulness and field for distribution is as wide as the expanse of the Hierarchy’s influence and control, to wit, world-wide. For campaign instructions, consult the Informant. Copies of Uncovered for your personal use may now be procured at 5c each.
“PROTECTION”
This new booklet, of 64 pages, is self-covered. It bears an attractive cover design, in color, and also the title and legend: “PROTECTION from those who seek to hurt or destroy me. How can I find it?’’ After reading it, you will surely want to distribute the booklet. It has already been released for general distribution. You may procure a copy, or copies, on a contribution of 5c each, and read up in preparation for your part in its distribution.
HELP RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION WITHOUT DELAY
For the convenience of the subscriber, a renewal blank is sent with The Watchtower one month before expiration (on foreign subscriptions, two months). Renew your subscription promptly and fill in the renewal blank which is mailed to you with your Watchtower. Sign your name uniformly; give street and number, city and state; date your renewal blank, and please use the blanks sent to you enclosed in The Watchtower. These subscription blanks tell us which numbers will be necessary with your renewal order. Always read carefully the reverse side of the renewal blank. When you change your address it is always necessary to give the old as well as the new address. This should be done two weeks before change of address becomes effective.
SfeWCHTWEJ
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
Vol. LVIII
February 15, 1937
No. 4
JEHOVAH’S PROVISIONS
PART 2
“For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell; for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread.” —Ps. 132:13-15.
JEHOVAH’S provision is first for his Beloved, Christ Jesus, and his body members. These constitute his temple or dwelling place, and abundant is his provision made for them. Primarily Joseph pictured Christ Jesus, and secondarily those who constitute his faithful followers, including the “faithful and wise servant” class now on earth. In this day of stress it is of great comfort and hope to the remnant to receive from God’s hand the abundance of spiritual bread upon which they may constantly feed and be strong. For this purpose Jehovah is now unfolding to them his prophecies, including the drama long ago directed by him, and which was played by those who served him. Joseph was confined in prison, although entirely innocent of any wrongdoing. God permitted him to remain for a season in that condition to play his part in the drama foretelling future and greater things that must come to pass, and how Jehovah would perform his expressed purpose.
2 The cupbearer, or butler, and the baker of the king' Pharaoh were confined in the same prison with Joseph because they had committed some offense against their lord and king. Joseph ministered unto these prisoners. Both of those men dreamed dreams, which dreams Joseph interpreted for them. By the interpretation of the dreams of those two men Joseph disclosed to them that one of them would be executed and the other would be reinstated to his former position in the king’s service. Joseph took occasion to inform them that the interpretation of the dreams was not of his own knowing, but that it came from God, and thus he gave honor to Jehovah and took none of the honor to himself. Joseph made request of the chief butler that when he was released from prison and reinstated in his official position with the king, he should inform the king Pharaoh of Joseph’s imprisonment and tell him that he was wrongfully stolen away from his own people and sold as a slave, and was now imprisoned without a cause. The interpretation of the dreams of these two men proved true; but the butler, when he was released and reinstated, forgot about Joseph, and noth
ing was done for him for a period of two years.— Genesis 40.
8 The physical facts which fit this part of the prophecy show its fulfillment began to come to pass about 1918. The two prisoners who dreamed were on a common level as prisoners, but the dream of the cupbearer or butler showed unselfishness, in this, that the wine which he received into the cup he then poured to the king Pharaoh. The baker’s dream showed that he had baskets of meats, and although his dream stated that these were ‘ ‘ bakemeats for Pharaoh ’ ’ the king, he permitted the birds to eat that food. As Joseph foretold in interpreting the dreams, the cupbearer or butler was released from prison and restored to his former position, and the baker was hanged by the neck until he was dead. The cupbearer here foreshadowed the “faithful servant” class, and the baker foreshadowed the “evil servant” class. Those who constitute both classes were, at the time of the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, on a common footing and they stood before the Lord for judgment at that time. All of these antitypical Levites, servants of the Lord, were gathered before the judgment seat of Christ. At and prior to that time all the antitypical Levites had offended Jehovah, the great King of Eternity, and he was angry or displeased with them because of their unlawful conduct in the years 1917 and 1918, and for that reason God had permitted them to be restrained of their liberty, or imprisoned by Satan’s organization. As the butler was glad when he was restored to his former position, even so the faithful were glad when their restraint was removed and God’s anger was removed from them.—Isa. 12:1; 60:10; Zech. 1:14,15.
* The prophecies which Jehovah had long ago sent, and which foretold the fate of the consecrated, were due to be fulfilled, and the consecrated were interested in their interpretation and were disturbed because of their inability to understand them; and this was shown by the prisoners’ being disturbed by their inability to understand their dreams. Several of the consecrated attempted to interpret the prophecies according to
52
Tfo WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
their own views, including the prophetic drama of Joseph and his brethren, and therefore they did not wait until God’s due time for him to interpret them. When the two prisoners spoke to Joseph about their dreams Joseph said to them: “Do not interpretations belong to God?” (Gen. 40:8) This foretells that Jehovah’s prophecies cannot be interpreted by men, but interpretation is from Jehovah and he gives it in due time to those who love and serve him. Christ Jesus at the temple is Jehovah’s great Servant and Interpreter, and by God’s permission and direction he gives to the faithful ones an understanding of God’s prophecies and his coming to the temple. Those who attempt to run ahead of the Lord and try to interpret prophecies to suit their own ideas never get the proper interpretation thereof. The meek are those who wait upon the Lord and seek to learn. “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.” (Ps. 25:9) The dream of the cupbearer or butler pictured the faithful, unselfish and meek ones, who bear the fruit of the vine and bring joy to the great King of Eternity, Jehovah God. (John 15: 5-8) It is this class to whom God showed his favor and restored them to his favor. In relating the dream to Joseph, the dreamer said: “And in the vine were three branches: . . . and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes: . . . and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand.” Joseph said to the cupbearer: “The three branches are three days, ’ ’ that is, they represent three days. (Gen. 40:9-12) The three days corresponded to three years, which three years began in 1919, when the Lord began to release his prisoner class, and 1919 plus three years equals 1922, when the Lord made known to the faithful class that they had been reinstated in his favor, and they greatly rejoiced, and at which time they were anointed with the outpouring of the spirit of God.—Joel 2: 28,29.
5	The anger of the Lord was then removed from the faithful, and they rejoiced greatly. Those who were privileged to be at the Cedar Point convention in 1922 will well recall that time of rejoicing. Approximately at the same time the “evil servant” class, which had permitted the fowls of the air, or “birds”, to steal the truth from them, were made manifest. (Matt. 13: 4,18,19) By reason of their selfishness, looking to salvation and not to the honor of God’s name, they were cast away from the Lord and were “accursed of God” as though hanged on a tree, and which was foreshadowed by the hanging of the baker of the king Pharaoh. (Dcut. 21:23) While it appears from the prophecy that the clear division between the ‘ ‘ faithful servant” class and the “evil servant” class was fully accomplished by 1922, it was not until the issue of The Watchtower of February 15,1927, that the “faithful servant” class even saw the fulfillment of the parable concerning the two servants, as uttered by the
Lord. In an article of that issue, entitled “Servant— Good and Evil”, the distinction between the two classes was first made known to the Lord’s people on earth. The “evil servant” class have never seen the truth of the fulfillment of that prophetic parable. Even to this day they say, ‘ ‘ The Lord was never angry with us during the World War,” and they still recognize the political rulers of this world as the higher powers.
HIS GOODNESS
6	Men often forget their true friends. Even the mother may forget her child. God never forgets those who serve him faithfully. (Isa. 49:15) Jehovah’s prophet, representing Christ Jesus the Head of the true spiritual Israelites, says: “I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving-kindnesses. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was their Saviour. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them: and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.”—Isa. 63: 7-9.
7	Joseph, the forgotten man, lingered in prison for two full years after he had interpreted the dreams of the men aforementioned. He was forgotten by the man whom he particularly favored, but he was not forgotten by Jehovah God. Without doubt Jehovah had permitted him to remain in prison to perform the further part of this great prophetic drama. In his own due time Jehovah caused another part of the drama to be played, and which is now here considered.
8	Jehovah caused Pharaoh to have two drcams in one night. It was the practice of the wise men of the world at that time to interpret dreams, and Pharaoh called before him all his magicians and wise men of Egypt. But none of them could interpret his dreams. Then it was that his cupbearer, the butler, woke up and remembered Joseph had done him a great favor but he had forgotten all about it until that time. ‘1 Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day. Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard’s house, both me and the chief baker. And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream. And there was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret. And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.”—Gen. 41: 9-13.
8	Hearing this report from his butler, Pharaoh im
February 15, 1937
fffie WATCHTOWER.
53
mediately sent for Joseph, who was yet in prison; and doubtless at that time Joseph had the appearance of all the other prisoners, bearded and clothed with filthy clothing. Joseph shaved himself and put on some clean clothes and was brought before the king, and the king told Joseph of his dreams and asked Joseph if he could interpret the same. Again Joseph was faithful and true to give all honor and praise to Jehovah God: “And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.’’— Gen. 41:16.
10	Jehovah had put these dreams into Pharaoh’s head, and now Pharaoh repeated them to Joseph. At this point in the prophetic drama Pharaoh played the part representing Jehovah God, revealing his purpose to Christ Jesus and through him making known the meaning to his “faithful and wise” servants remaining on earth, who are the feet of Christ Jesus, “whose feet they hurt with fetters” during the period of martial law. (Ps. 105:18) The dreams as had and as repeated to Joseph are told in the scripture at Genesis 41:17-24. The facts now well known, and which show fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama, are as follows:
11	During the Elijah period of the Lord’s work the opinion had been freely expressed by those followers of Christ Jesus that Armageddon would be a strife or battle between the elements of labor and capital, resulting in anarchy throughout all the earth. In the year 1914 the world was in the grip of the great war and it was expected that that war would ultimately lead to anarchy or Armageddon. Many difficulties at that time beset the consecrated by reason of the world conditions and Satan’s activity against them. What would be the future of God’s consecrated or visible part of God’s organization? and how would any survive anarchy ? were questions then in the minds of the consecrated. The prophecies which Jehovah had caused to be uttered gave the answer to those questions, but it was in cryptic phrase and Jehovah’s time had not arrived to make those prophecies understandable to the consecrated, and hence they could not understand them. Those prophecies, like dreams, were in the record, but there was no interpretation thereof that could be understood, even though some attempted to interpret them.
12	The World War having passed, Jehovah brought into prominence the prophecies and the physical facts in fulfillment thereof, and, like the double dream of Pharaoh, the meaning of the prophecies was now made doubly certain. Christ Jesus had defeated Satan in the war in heaven and had ousted Satan from heaven and cast him down to earth, and Christ Jesus was now the qualified one to open the books of the “dreams” or prophecies and loose the seven seals thereof, and he, as the Greater Joseph, now before Jehovah, the Greater Pharaoh, who held the book in his right hand
as he sat upon the throne, was given the power to break the seals and open the prophecies. (Rev. 5:1-7) Then Jehovah straightway sent his Messenger, his Interpreter, Christ Jesus, to his temple. The Interpreter being at the temple, it was time for him to gather unto himself his faithful ones in the temple and, gathering them, to then reveal to them the meaning of the prophecies. Prior to that time none of the * ‘ worldly wise”, nor any of the “elective elders”, coming amongst the consecrated, and who thought themselves qualified to interpret prophecy and who tried it, were in fact able to tell the meaning thereof. Some of those “elective elders” tried to interpret the prophecy of Joseph and his brethren and other prophecies, but their interpretations fell flat. Those attempted interpreters afterwards took their place in the “evil servant ’ ’ class. At that time the outlook both for the people of the world and for the consecrated was very dark. That was in 1918 and the early part of 1919. But the great King Jehovah found and brought forth the Interpreter, Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph, and in 1919 he began to bring “his prisoners” out of the “prison house”, even as Joseph was brought out of the prison house and stood before Pharaoh. The original “faithful and wise servant” class, foreshadowed by Mordecai and Naomi, came forth and were groomed for service, and these were represented in Joseph. It was in 1922 that Jehovah’s witnesses began to see the interpretation of the prophecies and the work of these witnesses began to take on an organized form and forward movement.
13	Having in mind these physical facts or conditions, note now that Pharaoh told his double dream to Joseph and that Joseph was enlightened by the spirit of Jehovah God to give the interpretation thereof. (Gen. 41:17-32) Although the remnant did not know the meaning of the prophecies, including the one here under consideration, yet the Greater Joseph sent them forth early in 1922, having poured “upon all flesh” of the remnant even his spirit to carry forward the witness work in the earth. In doing this work these faithful ones have a part in the fulfillment of the prophecy, and the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater Joseph, revealed to them the meaning and the spiritual understanding of the prophecies; and the remnant in turn, having received these interpretations from the Lord, give them out to others in “Egypt”, that is, the world, as they receive and understand the same. Otherwise stated, the Greater Joseph at the temple informs the remnant of the meaning of the prophecies of God, and these in turn tell the meaning thereof to the Jonadabs or “other sheep”, whom the Lord is gathering into the fold.
PHARAOH’S DREAMS
14	It was not possible for Pharaoh to interpret his dreams, because he was merely a sinful man. It was not possible for his wise men and magicians to inter
54
fflie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
pret them, because they were merely sinful men and foreshadowed the “evil servant” class that attempts to interpret prophecy and cannot. Pharaoh was merely playing the part assigned to him in the prophetic drama, and that was all. It was necessary for someone to play that part as representing Jehovah God revealing to his beloved Son, the Greater Joseph, the meaning of prophecies, and Pharaoh was used merely to play a part. In the first dream of Pharaoh he beheld seven “ fatflesh ed and well favoured” cattle coming up out of the river Nile, and they fed upon the luscious grass growing in the valley of the Nile. Then came up out of the river seven other cattle, which were poor, ill-favored and very lean. The lean-fleshed cattle, instead of eating grass, ate up the seven well-favored or “fatfleshed” cattle. This part of the double dream disclosed a striking contrast in the provision of Jehovah God, made by and through his organization under Christ Jesus, and that provided for the people under the organization of Satan ruling this world, and particularly including the so-called “spiritual” provisions administered through the religious elements of Satan’s organization. Mark well now this contrast.
15	The provisions of Jehovah’s organization are pictured by the seven well-favored and fat-fleshed cattle. These, coming up, fed upon the abundance of grass provided for them, and, being warm-blooded creatures, pictured the complete fullness of sin atonement for mankind and the spiritual “strong meat” to be found only in the provisions which Jehovah has made, and which he administers through his organization under Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph. This means the kingdom has come and the Chief Corner Stone and Foundation Stone of God’s organization, which is Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph, has been laid in Zion. (Isa. 28:16) Christ Jesus is now upon his throne, the rightful Ruler of the world. The “pure river of water of life” is flowing forth from “the throne of God and of the Lamb ’ ’, and is the provision God has made for those to live who will obey him. (Rev. 22:1,2) An abundant provision is made by Jehovah for those who will come to him and prove their integrity toward him, and such is the way to life, as there is none other. The fat-fleshed cattle therefore pictured those abundant provisions.
19	Contrast now the bountiful provisions of Jehovah with the miserable excuse for spiritual provisions made by Satan’s organization, and particularly the so-called “spiritual food” served up by the religious elements of the so-called “Christian religionists”. The seven ill-fed and lean-fleshed' cattle pictured the spiritual condition of all prisoners held in Satan’s organization at the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, that is to say, the consecrated outside the temple, and all those of good will and who sigh and cry because of the abominations done in “Christendom” and the miserable food upon which they have to feed. Their condi
tion was a starved one. They were greatly in need of spiritual food to keep them alive. With the gathering of the faithful servants of Jehovah God into the temple such became a part of God’s organization and constituted a part of his provision for ministering to each other and to others who desire truth and righteousness. In the temple they are a part of the Greater Joseph, being fed by him. The lean and ill-favored cattle at this point picture the people of good will, held in the prisons of Satan by reason of his religious agents and who are starving for want of nourishing food. These prisoners must be fed. The seven lean cattle’s eating the seven well-fed cattle here shows that the people of good will toward God, the prisoners, must feed upon and consume the provisions which Jehovah has made for them by and through his organization. The sin atonement has been provided, which they must learn about, and they must exercise faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus. They must learn of and do the will of Jehovah God in order that they may be hid and escape the sword of slaughter at Armageddon, and then ‘inherit the kingdom [blessings] prepared for them from the foundation of the world ’.—Matt. 25: 34.
17	It is noted in the prophetic drama that after the lean cattle had consumed the fat cattle they were still lean. That could not mean that Jehovah’s provision is insufficient for those who eat at his table, but certainly it means that those of good will, and who feed upon God’s provisions, do not now get fullness of life, but they receive that which sustains them now and will sustain them through Armageddon, and that after Armageddon they will still be dependent upon Jehovah’s provisions through Christ Jesus, by and through whom they shall receive life everlasting. (Rom. 6:23) This also proves that the Bible contains spiritual food and is used as spiritual food to be consumed before and during Armageddon. The spiritual food provided by Jehovah through the publication of his Word must be used before the saints are taken from the earth, and not after the thousand-year reign of Christ has ended. The Bible must be used now; and because it is being used to feed the souls of the hungry and thirsty who hunger and thirst for righteousness, Satan and his agents desperately attempt to keep the people away from feeding upon God’s provisions for them. There is no reason to conclude that the publications which God’s visible organization now publishes and distributes amongst the people will be found of use during the thousand years of the kingdom reign, nor that even the Bible will be used during that time. Those publications are for present-day use to inform the people. When Christ Jesus has brought all the “other sheep” into the fold of God, then some other provision of the Lord will certainly be employed for them.
18	Seeing, therefore, that the Bible and the books published making known the contents and meaning of the Bible must now be used, because such is God’s
February 15, 1937
Slie WATCHTOWER.
55
provision, the obligation upon those who have these truths is therefore greater. Jehovah has taken out a people for his name, and these are sent forth from the temple to make known to others his name, which is the chief matter involved in his Word. Such is his provision for mankind to live. He warns the witnesses that they must carry this message to the people of good will, and he tells those who are of good will that when they hear this message the obligation is up<>n them to join with the anointed to carry the truth to others that they may hear. Such is exactly the command contained at Revelation 22:17: “ And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. ’ ’
18	Jehovah sends forth his witnesses under Christ Jesus, the Greater, Spiritual Joseph, and they must carry out the work that Jesus Christ tells them to do. These witnesses must inform the people of and concerning Jehovah’s provisions for them and say to the people, ‘Come and partake of God’s gracious provisions, if you will. ’ Those who hear and who are of good will, and who are otherwise called “Jonadabs”, must take up the glad message and say to others within their hearing: “Come.” Together, all who love God and his kingdom will say, ‘Come and partake of the water of life, which is God’s provision to give and sustain life, and which he gives to those who love and serve him.’
SECOND DREAM
20	Pharaoh, after he had one dream, slept and then had a second dream, and in the second dream he beheld seven full and fat ears of corn on one stalk. Then he beheld that seven ears came up after them and these latter were withered and blasted by the east wind. All the seven lean ears then proceeded to devour the seven good and fat ears of corn. Joseph said to Pharaoh: “The dream of Pharaoh is one.” (Gen. 41:22-29) The two dreams are two parts of one drama, meaning one and the same thing. The seven good ears of corn pictured the abundance of provision, that is, “the bread of life,” in Jehovah’s kingdom organization under Christ, the spiritual, life-giving and life-sustaining food which Jehovah has provided for those who love and serve him. Particularly since 1922 the faithful on the earth have seen and appreciated God’s gracious provision and have fed upon his provision so graciously made for them.
21	Concerning these faithful ones and the condition in which they find themselves, it is written: “He maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the finest of the wheat.” (Ps. 147:14) Every one of the faithful can testify joyfully to the fulfillment of this Psalm, prophetically foretelling peace in their borders, and that they have been filled with the finest of wheat, that is, the most precious truths, which have gladdened their hearts. These are God’s ‘other chil
dren ’ by his woman Zion, now brought forth, and these are abundantly fed upon God’s gracious provision administered through Christ Jesus; and great is their peace. (Isa. 54:13) Such marvelous provisions and blessings have been especially appreciated during the last few years by those who are of the temple company.
22	Consider in contrast now the seven thin and withered ears of corn upon one stalk. Those withered ears pictured the condition of the people of good will on earth while yet held in restraint by Satan and his agents, operating through the religious organizations of this world. They picture the miserable provisions made by that organization for mankind. Those of good will, and who desire the truth, have been fed upon husks, and whatever good things they have been enabled to discern from God’s Word the clergy have trodden down with their feet and messed it all up so that God’s provisions have not been seen, and the provision which the clergy organization has brought forth has been of the very meanest kind. In the dream prophecy the devouring of the good ears of corn by the thin and withered ears of corn surely means that the people of good will toward God, who desire to know and learn righteousness, must come to Jehovah’s organization, under the Greater Joseph, Christ Jesus, and must eat the fruits of the kingdom, the bread of life, which Jehovah has provided through his organization, in order that they may exist in this evil day and in order that they may seek righteousness and meekness and be hid and survive during the day of the expression of God’s wrath against Satan and his organization at Armageddon. After the battle of the great day of God Almighty they will, if continuing faithful and obedient, find life in abundance. Again this emphasizes the absolute necessity for Jehovah’s witnesses to now make haste to carry the fruits of the kingdom to those who have the hearing ear. It means that they must not slack their hand in this day of Jehovah, but must put forth their best endeavors to bear these fruits of the kingdom to others who may receive them. This must be done both by Jehovah’s witnesses and by all who hear and who rely upon God’s gracious provision for mankind. The Jonadabs join with Jehovah’s witnesses in proclaiming this blessed provision which God has made for those who would find life in abundance.
SEVEN
23	The seven cattle and seven ears of corn apply to one and the same thing: “And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do. The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good cars are seven years: the drcam is one. And the seven thin and ill favoured kine, that came up after them, are seven years; and the seven empty cars, blasted with the cast wind, shall be seven years of famine. This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is about to do, he sheweth unto Pharaoh. Behold,
56
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt: and there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land: and the plenty shall not be known in the land, by reason of that famine following; for it shall be very grievous.”—Gen. 41:25-31.
24	The prophecy refers to two opposing organizations. In the fulfillment of the prophecy the same organization is not visited first with a great abundance from God and thereafter with a devastating famine. It could not be that Jehovah would supply an abundance of spiritual food for his remnant on the earth and then stop that supply and compel them to live on old supplies of the past by stopping the progress and unfolding of his prophetic truths. It could not be that God would supply all that food for his people prior to 1917 and that thereafter his anointed people must feed only upon things of the past. Such was the thought during the Elijah period. But that conclusion was incorrect. The facts show fully the very opposite. This prophetic drama is in exact accord with Proverbs 4:18: “But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” God’s people once anointed and brought into the temple progress in an understanding and appreciation of his Word. The typical fulfillment of the dreams was in Egypt, and it was very necessary that the sevenyear period of famine should follow the seven-year period of good and abundant crops, because that was a part of the prophetic drama. In the modern fulfillment of that prophetic drama, however, the two periods or conditions run along side by side, the one condition in one organization, and the other condition in the other organization, that is to say, “seven years” on each organization concurrently, and not one period of seven years after the other to make a total of fourteen years.
25	The seven-year period upon each organization applies to the total or complete period of time from the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple and the gathering unto himself those faithful ones, and continuing until the vindication of Jehovah’s name at Armageddon. The coming of the Lord to the temple was in 1918, and the gathering into the temple and the outpouring of the spirit of God upon all the remnant were in 1922, and Armageddon is yet future. It was on the 4th day of April, 1936, that the book Riches, provided especially for the benefit of the people of good will, began to be circulated in many languages; but the prophecy does not mean that seven years thereafter the prophecy is completely fulfilled. The number seven is a symbolic number, and “seven years” here symbolically represents the entire or complete period of time from the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple until Armageddon, when the vindication of Jehovah’s name is completed.
26	The Scripture text at this point reads: “And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is established by God [(margin) prepared of God], and God will shortly bring it to pass.” (Gen. 41: 32) The many prophecies of Jehovah, recorded in the Scriptures, fully support the fact that all such prophecies proceed from Jehovah, and that includes the prophetic drama here under consideration, and that it is “prepared of God”, and that God will bring it to pass and to a complete fulfillment in his own due time. Now God’s anointed people behold the prophecy being fulfilled, and therefore it is God’s due time to make the meaning thereof known to those who love and serve him. Jehovah through Christ Jesus is now unfolding his prophecies and making them clear to the remnant, that the remnant may have an abundance of food upon which to feed, and that they may have their faith and hope strengthened. To reap the benefit of this unfolding of prophecy Jehovah’s witnesses, and all others who come to his organization, must continue to study the prophecies, that they may show themselves approved unto God, meaning that they must exercise faith in his Word and perform the service assigned to them; and performing such service faithfully calls forth God’s approval.
ORGANIZING
21	Joseph, moved by the spirit of Jehovah, made recommendation to Pharaoh as to the best way to organize the resources and meet the conditions of affairs that were just ahead. Addressing Pharaoh he said: “Now, therefore, let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.” (Gen. 41: 33) Then Joseph proceeded to suggest to the king how to complete the organization for the gathering in and storing food and preserving it against the evil day then approaching. “Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years. And let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities. And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.” —Gen. 41:34-36.
23	In the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama Joseph pictured Christ Jesus, who, having come to the temple after being enthroned, is the “man discreet and wise” and is the one set over all the world, antitypical Egypt. Christ Jesus then, in harmony with his Father’s revealed will, directs and organizes the kingdom work, and organizes his faithful ones on earth to participate in that work and in preparing and storing up food and carrying it to the people, which spiritual food is so necessary for the maintenance of those who are seeking the Lord. Note
February 15, 1937
6Te WATCHTOWER-
57
that Joseph did not recommend to Pharaoh what the people should do to prepare for the coming famine, but his recommendation was what the king’s servants should do in perfecting the organization and carrying it to a successful end. The people could believe and accept it and abide by the arrangement or not; therefore each one must choose his own course of action or conduct. Likewise in the fulfillment of the prophecy the provision for the relief and life of mankind does not at all depend upon what men may do. There is but one hope for the world, and that is through Jehovah’s organization, of which Christ Jesus the Greater Joseph is the Head. “And in his name shall the Gentiles hope.”—Matt. 12: 21, R.V.
29 In the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama the organization of God’s remnant on earth must begin and be carried forward as Jehovah directs by and through the one chosen by him for that purpose, and that chosen one is the Lord Jesus Christ. The facts show that this has been done and is still being done by the Lord himself, directing his people as to what they shall do.
"The king recognized Joseph as a man ‘in whom the spirit of the Lord is’, and he exalted Joseph to the highest place in Egypt, next to the king himself. ‘ ‘ And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt. And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph’s hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck; and he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had: and they cried before him, Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt. ’ ’—Gen. 41: 41-43.
81 Joseph was put over all Egypt, and only in the throne was Pharaoh greater than Joseph. The people so recognized this arrangement. Joseph was fittingly clothed for his high office and given a signet ring and a gold chain to wear and was made to ride in the chariot immediately behind the king. As he rode amongst the people they “cried [out] before him, Abrech [margin] ”, which word doubtless meant that now Joseph was recognized by them as a great one of Egypt. No longer was he considered as a Hebrew foreigner, sold as a slave into Egypt; no longer was he a vile “jailbird”, to be despised; but now he was an honored and honorable citizen, worthy to be of the official family of the royal house, and rtext to the king himself. Likewise Jehovah exalted Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph, and gave him a name above every name, and commanded all creation in heaven and earth to worship him, and that every knee should bow before him. Thus Jehovah owned and acknowledged Christ Jesus as “his King”, of his own appointment, and next to Jehovah himself. Also Jehovah entrusted all the interests of his kingdom to Christ Jesus, his Greater Joseph. Jehovah, acting by and through Christ Jesus, entrusts his kingdom interests on the earth to
the faithful remnant because they are part of The Christ, and the Lord Jesus Christ, in harmony with his Father’s will, so declares unto the “faithful and wise servant”. (Matt. 24:47) Christ Jesus brings these faithful ones into the temple and clothes them with the “robe of righteousness”, which Jehovah furnishes, and gives them the seal of his authority to represent him. The golden chain upon Joseph foretells that God makes Christ his elect servant and the faithful members of his body a part of the servant. Christ Jesus fills the high office next to Jehovah God, and he carries forward his organization in the earth, as well as in heaven, and gives opportunity to his faithful servants on earth to participate in the work that is carried forward.
MUST OBEY HIM
32 Pharaoh made Joseph his chief representative, and all the people of Egypt were commanded to obey him. “And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt. And Pharaoh called Joseph’s name Zaphnath-paaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath, the daughter of Potipherah, priest of On. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.” —Gen. 41: 44, 45.
83 The name which Pharaoh gave to Joseph means “saviour of the world” or “food of the living”. (McClintock & Strong’s Cyclopcedia) The wife that was given to Joseph was not a commoner, but the daughter of a priest. Jehovah approved that union. From this union of Joseph and his wife resulted the birth of two sons, and these two sons were Manasseh and Ephraim. They were made a part of the twelve tribes of Israel according to the will of Jehovah. Joseph was now thirty years of age, the age of maturity. (Gen. 41: 44-46) Likewise, all power in heaven and earth was given to Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph. He is made a “higher power” with Jehovah, and to whom every soul must render full obedience or else suffer destruction, and this particularly applies to the remnant. (Acts 3: 23) He, the Greater Joseph, is ‘the Savior of the world’ and “the bread of life”. (Matt. 1:21; John 6:35) Jehovah selects for Christ Jesus a bride and sends Christ Jesus to the temple fully authorized and empowered to gather unto himself and take his bride. (Rev. 21:9) The remnant of this bridal company is yet on earth, the resurrection of those that died faithful having preceded them. All of these, like Joseph’s wife, are of priestly connection, being God’s “royal priesthood”.—1 Pet. 2:9,10.
34 The time to make provision against the oncoming famine was limited. Joseph lost no time, but immediately began to faithfully and zealously carry forward the organization work, making ready the royal granaries and storehouses for food to sustain the people during the seven years of famine that was to follow: “And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the
58
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
sea, very much, until he left numbering; for it was without number.”—Gen. 41:49.
85	Joseph looked well to the facilities at hand and made ample provision to feed all who complied with the terms that would be announced. It was during that period of seven years that the two sons aforementioned were born to Joseph and his wife Asenath. In fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph, since his enthronement, and particularly since coming to the temple, has been organizing and carrying forward his work to provide life for those who obey him, and directs the work that they must do, and which work must be finished before the wrath of God is expressed against Satan and his organization at the battle of Armageddon. The first of that work is to supply Jehovah’s witnesses, the people taken out for the name of Jehovah, with an abundance of spiritual food and to teach them how to use it, and then to organize them and send them forth to minister ‘the fruits of the kingdom’ thus provided to the people of good will who desire to be fed.
88	The bride of Christ, consisting of the faithful who waited for a long while for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ and who have now been resurrected and gathered unto the Lord, together with the faithful on earth who have been ‘‘caught up ... to meet the Lord in the air”, was foreshadowed by Joseph’s wife. As Asenath, the wife of Joseph, was fruitful, bearing him two sons, that completed the twelve tribes of Israel. This indicates that Jehovah’s twelve tribes of spiritual Israel, the 144,000, now are completed. (Rev. 7:1-8) The names of Joseph's two sons are significant and show that all blessings of Jehovah’s remnant on earth are such as to ‘‘make to forget” all the afflictions they must endure as pilgrims, aliens and strangers in this world in order that they might enter into the kingdom. The faithful followers of Christ Jesus know that they must suffer with Christ Jesus and be made of no reputation amongst men. They gladly bear such and forget these sufferings, well knowing that they are not worthy to be compared with the glory that follows. “Manasseh,” the name of one of Joseph’s sons, means to ‘make to forget’. The name of the other son, Ephraim, means “fruitful” or “double fruit”, and shows that the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses are loaded with the fruits of the kingdom, by which they first feed themselves and then bear the fruits of the kingdom to others that they may be fed, and this they joyfully do, despite the afflictions Satan through his agents heaps upon them. Thus Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph, and the one like Joseph, can say in the language of the prophet: “Behold I and the children [including the remnant] which God hath given me.” (Heb. 2; 13; Isa. 8:18) The two sons of Joseph seem to picture the remnant. Those boys’ carrying forward the name of Joseph and his family indicates that Satan does not get rid of the remnant from the earth before
Armageddon, although he desperately wars against them. The Greater Joseph has committed to them his testimony, and to the honor of his Father’s name they obey the commandments of God.—Rev. 12:17.
3T	This part of the prophecy is a great comfort to the remnant, because it is an assurance from the Lord that he is with them and his hand is over them, and hence they go forward in the land of the enemy, holding high the banner of the kingdom and pointing the peoples of earth to what that banner means and that it represents God’s kingdom under Christ, which is the only means of salvation for mankind. During the remainder of their earthly pilgrimage they have the assurance from the Lord’s Word that he will feed them abundantly upon the spiritual food necessary for their maintenance and support and by which they may continue strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.
THE FAMINE
38	The seven years of bounteous crops ended and the seven years of famine in Egypt set in, even as Joseph had interpreted the dream of Pharaoh: “And the seven years of plenteousness that was in the land of Egypt were ended. And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.”—Gen. 41:53, 54.
33	The famine was sore upon all the world, but in the royal granaries and barns under Joseph’s management and control there was no leanness or scarcity of food. That was a part of the prophetic drama; and mark now the facts that have come to pass showing the fulfillment thereof. Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph, was enthroned in 1914, and since then “the kingdom of the world is become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ”. (Rev. 11:15, A.R.V.) From that time onward all things on the earth belong to Christ Jesus, by him cither to be destroyed, such as Satan’s visible organization that rules, or to be mercifully spared, such as the people of good will who seek righteousness and meekness. But upon even those of good will Christ Jesus permits Satan to continue in power and rule for a time and to bring about terrible conditions of spiritual famine upon them and to threaten all with death. There is no spiritual food in any part of Satan’s visible organization, which was pictured by the seven years of famine. The fact that the famine did not hurt Joseph and those under him in Egypt shows that this famine for spiritual food in the earth does not exist in God’s organization, and that during the period of famine upon Satan’s organization God docs not stop feeding his people, but brings to them meat in due season during all the period that the famine is upon the world. There are those who claim to be followers of Christ Jesus, and who claim that when Charles T. Russell died God’s supply of food for the spiritual sustenance of those on earth must and did stop. Such a position is entirely unreasonable and
February 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
59
unscriptural. We must keep in mind that Jehovah God, through Christ Jesus, is carrying forward his purposes. The facts show that since 1919 many more have been brought to a knowledge of the truth and have been received into the temple and made a part of God’s organization and a part of his remnant on earth. Also those of good will who will compose the great multitude must be fed and they must come to God’s organization under the Greater Joseph to receive their food, and Jehovah has provided an abundance to feed them.
40	Satan’s religious organizations on earth imprison many of the people. This imprisonment consists largely in restraining them by fear and keeping them in ignorance of their privilege of seeking God’s provisions for them. These people of good will in prison find old musty and rotten food and nothing else upon which to feed. There, as the prophet Ezekiel puts it, they cry out because of the abominations done and the miserable conditions that exist. Satan’s river of commerce fails to bring any satisfying food to these prisoners. They are almost famished. Those who love that which is right, and who have faith in God and in Christ Jesus, hear of God’s government under the control of Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph, and learn that the granaries of that gracious government are full of good, nourishing spiritual food to those who seek the Lord. The cries of the people were heard by Pharaoh, and so likewise the cries of the people in distress are heard by Jehovah: “And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do. ’ ’—Gen. 41: 55.
41	Likewise God now commands the people who are hungry and thirsty for spiritual food to go to Christ Jesus. Jehovah now says to the people who desire the life-sustaining food: “Behold, my servant [Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph] whom I have chosen; my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall declare judgment to the Gentiles. . . . And in his name shall the Gentiles hope.”—Matt. 12:18-21, A.R.V.
42	Jehovah sends forth his witnesses today to declare this message of consolation to the hungry souls, and says to them: ‘Go unto my Servant, Christ Jesus, and whatsoever he saith unto you, do it, and ye shall live.’ Only those who do go to Christ Jesus and obey his commandments shall live. There is no other means of getting life. Here the commandment and admonition is given to the people of good will who shall form the great multitude, which is now being brought forth by the Lord. Concerning them that do go to the Greater Joseph, and who obey his commandments and remain faithful and true, it is written: “They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall
lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.” (Rev. 7:16,17) Thus God shows to those who seek him the abundant provision he has made for them. Seeing this, the faithful remnant must appreciate not only their privilege but their great obligation to lift up a standard for the people and point them to the granaries and barns of Jehovah, which are packed full of an endless supply of spiritual food. The “famine” is now upon Satan’s government of this world and will continue with ever increasing soreness and distress, ending in the battle of the great day of God Almighty. During all that famine period those persons of good will who receive protection and blessings must go to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater Joseph, and feed upon the abundance of spiritual food which he under God’s command has prepared for them. These physical facts are now before the people, and every sane person will rejoice to see them.
43	Jehovah is now making- known to the obedient creatures on the earth the relationship of himself and his royal house to those “other sheep” whom Christ Jesus is gathering, and who form the “great multitude ’ ’ company. It is written in the Scriptures: “ A great multitude, which no man could number,” or without number. Jehovah determines the exact number that shall be of the royal house, but as to the great multitude there appears to be no reason why he should determine the number thereof. He could know in advance, to be sure, just how many will be in it, but manifestly he withholds that from himself. He causes the people to hear about his gracious provision for them, and without partiality or undue advantage every one is permitted to accept that provision and live or reject it and remain under condemnation and perish. The way to life Jehovah God has opened, and that one way is for the people to seek the Greater Joseph, Christ Jesus, and feed upon the food which Jehovah provides for them and to learn the truth, and put themselves completely under the control of the Lord, remain there, and joyfully obey him. All those who do as directed and who maintain their integrity toward Jehovah God by remaining true and steadfast will receive his blessings. Such not only will now delight to feed upon Jehovah’s gracious provision, but will rejoice to have a part in carrying this good news to others, that they too may join in the praise and honor of Jehovah’s name.
44	It is then written: “And the famine was over all the face of the earth. And Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt. And all countries came unto Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in all lands.” (Gen. 41:56,57) This is further proof of the absolute impartiality of the Lord. God’s provision is opened for all the countries of the world. This is further proof
60
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that the feeding of the people during this time of famine is now particularly for the benefit of the great multitude. Concerning them it is written that the great multitude is “of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues”, and stands before the throne of Christ Jesus, hailing him as King, Deliverer and Savior of the world, “and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.” (Rev. 7: 9,10) Now we know that the angels in heaven, the resurrected members of the body of Christ, and the remnant on earth are rejoicing and singing praises to Jehovah, and the great multitude are now mingling their voices with those others of praise and all are saying: “Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever.”—Rev. 7:12.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS EOR STUDY
H 1. For whom has Jehovah made provision? Whom did Joseph here picture? What is Jehovah’s purpose in now unfolding his prophecies? Account for Joseph’s being confined in prison, and for his being held there for a time.
H 2. Relate what took place in the prison, which later contributed to Joseph’s being placed in an ofiicial position with the king.
H 3. Point out the prophetic significance of the dreams of the two prisoners.
U 4, 5. Describe the situation in which Genesis 40: 7 was fulfilled. Apply verse 8. Who are the meek? How were these pictured in the dream of the cupbearer, and in the time and manner of his release? How does the dream of the baker, and the coming true thereof, find fulfillment?
U 6, 7. Account for Joseph's being permitted to linger m prison even after the release and reinstatement of the cupbearer. By whom and for whom were the words of Isaiah 63: 7-9 written? and when do they apply?
If 8-10. Relate how Joseph came into favor with Pharaoh. How has this part of the picture had fulfillment?
T 11,12. Relate the dreams had by Pharaoh. How has Genesis 41: 8 had fulfillment? Describe how, in fulfillment of the
prophetic picture, ‘Joseph the interpreter’ was brought forth and put in position to ‘interpret the dreams of the king ’.
7 13. When and how have the remnant been given a part in the fulfillment of the prophecy?
T 14,15. Referring to the dream by Pharaoh: Apply that part concerning the seven well-favored and fat-fleshed cattle and their feeding “in a meadow”.
U 16,17. How does that part concerning the seven lean-fleshed and ill-favored cattle, and their consuming the others, with the result as stated, find fulfillment?
If 18,19. Point out (a) the purpose of Jehovah’s providing the Bible and the publications making known the contents and meaning of the Bible, (b) The obligation upon those who have been favored with an understanding of these truths, and the importance of their carrying out the work assigned to them.
If 20, 21. What was foreshown by the 'seven full and good ears of corn on one stalk’?
If 22. What was pictured in the seven thin and withered ears of corn, and in their devouring the good ears?
H 23. Relate Joseph’s interpretation of the dreams.
If 24,25. Explain whether in the fulfillment of the prophecy the two periods of ‘seven years each’ run consecutively and apply to the same organization. To what do they apply ?
If 26. What important instruction to God’s anointed people, and to others who come to his organization, is seen in Genesis 41: 32?
T 27-29. What did Joseph recommend to Pharaoh as to the best way to provide for the condition of affairs there foreseen? Describe the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama.
If 30, 31. How does that part of the drama recorded at verses 41-43 have fulfillment?
If 32, 33. Apply verses 44, 45.
If 34, 35. What is now seen to have been foreshown in the ample provision made by Joseph during the seven years of plenty, and in the matter recorded at verse 50 in this connection?
1f 36,37, Who was foreshadowed by Joseph’s wife? In her bearing Joseph two sons, and in the names of these sons, is seen what prophetic significance? How does this part of the prophecy serve the purpose for which it was provided?
If 38-40. What was pictured by the seven years of famine, and its being ‘ ‘ in all lands ’ ’ ? Apply the statement that ‘ ‘ in all the land of Egypt there was bread”.
1f 41-43. Describe the situation foreshown at verse 55, and the provision made for those who ‘ go unto Joseph, and do what he says to them’.
H 44. What prophetic significance is seen in that part of the picture presented in verses 56, 57 ?
THE CHURCH IN EPHESUS
JEHOVAH GOD gave to Christ Jesus The Revelation, and he in turn communicated it to the aged apostle John, saying, “What thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. . . . Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write: These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks ; I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars: and hast borne, and hast patience, and for my name’s sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love. Remember therefore from whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I tvill come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nico-laitanes, which I also hate. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God.” —Rev. 1:11; 2:1-7;
Unto John the message “to the seven churches which are in Asia” is sent, “from him which is, and which was, and which is to come [that is, from the eternal Jehovah God] ; and from the seven spirits [the holy spirit of Jehovah, seven picturing completeness] which are before his throne; and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness,” whose blood cleanses us from our sins. (Rev. 1:4,5) John pictured God’s remnant.
The word “Asia” does not mean the Asiatic con-
February 15, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER.
61
tinent, but refers to Asia Minor, particularly that part that lies along the western coast, which in John’s day was a Roman province. The isle of Patmos, to which John was banished, is about twenty miles off the coast of such province. The name “Asia” means “boggy”, and would well represent the churches at the time when ‘darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the people’ and at which time God says to his people: ‘ ‘ Thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.”—Isa. 60:1.	•
There are a number of reasons why the “seven churches” could not (as was once thought) refer to epochs of time or to the churches covering a period of time from the apostles unto the present. In the messages Jesus gives warning to Ephesus, Pergamos, Thya-tira and Sardis that unless they clean up and improve their condition he will come upon them and judge them. The judgment of the Lord must begin when he comes to his temple for judgment, and not prior thereto. All seven churches or congregations mentioned as being in Asia existed at the same time. Doubtless the unsatisfactory conditions described actually existed among the seven congregations in Asia Minor; but what would be the use of warning these particular congregations of the coming of the Judge if they represented periods of time covering the entire church from Pentecost of A.D. 33 to the kingdom? The seven congregations in Asia Minor went out of existence long before the coming of the Lord to judgment. Also from Pentecost till now the greater number of the professed churches or congregations have existed and have passed away long before the Lord comes to his temple for judgment. History shows that the professed church of Christ never cleaned up or ridded itself of the unsatisfactory conditions mentioned, but that such unsatisfactory conditions were found even in the true church when the Lord came to his temple.
The warning is: “Behold, I come quickly.” If the churches or congregations receive benefit from the message sent to them through John, then they must all be in existence at the same time and at the time of the existence of the remnant whom John represented. Furthermore, if the Lord uncovers the meaning of these messages to the churches or congregations after coming to his temple, and after pouring out his spirit, then whatever “the seven churches” represent must be contemporaneous with the life of Jehovah’s servant class during the “day of his preparation” for the final battle which will destroy Satan’s organization. Jesus said that the wheat and the tares would be permitted to grow together until the end of the world, at which time he would come for judgment and for separating one from the other. There would have been no reason for the message of The Revelation to the congregations which went out of existence centuries before the end of the world, and therefore there does not seem to be any reason why these messages were intended for the church over that long period of time.
If John pictures the servant class at the end of the world (and there seems to be no doubt about that fact), then it follows that “the seven churches” or congregations do not embrace a period of time during the Middle Ages or Dark Ages or the time prior to the Lord’s ‘sending of his Messenger before his face to prepare the way before him ’.—Alai. 3:1.
There were more than seven congregations or churches in Asia Minor at the time John wrote The Revelation. Seven is a symbolic number meaning completeness in matters pertaining to spiritual things, and therefore “seven churches” would represent all the congregations existing at the same time and in which the conditions described doubtless in fact existed. The irresistible conclusion therefore is that “the seven churches” picture aspects or states of affairs or conditions existing at one and the same time in all the congregations embraced within the message given in the divine record. Every spirit-begotten one is marked by these conditions which have existed among the children of God within that period of time during which ‘the way was being prepared for the coming of God’s Messenger to the temple’, and marked by that which follows when he does come to the temple. This period of time would begin with the beginning of the Elijah work, or preparation of the way before Jehovah, and would end when the Lord is at his temple. Therefore the message to “the seven churches” applies from 1879 on and thereafter. These wretched conditions or states of affairs among the spirit-begotten ones have been such as were illustrated by conditions actually existing among the churches in the Roman province of Asia Minor above mentioned. The Revelation manifestly is intended for the spirit-begotten ones on earth at the second coming of the Lord. Some of these would then meet with the approval of the Lord, while others in the congregations would be less pleasing or wholly disapproved. Let chapters two and three of The Revelation, then, be carefully studied with the thought in mind that the messages therein contained apply specifically from approximately 1879 until the kingdom of God is in full sway.
The church at Ephesus is first addressed, and the angel thereof doubtless is one of the deputies assigned by the Lord to convey the message to the servant class. “Ephesus” (from the Greek) means “permitted”. Being the capital city of the province of Rome above mentioned, it may well represent conditions existing in the chureh from the beginning of the preparing the way of the Lord until the coming to his temple, such conditions applying particularly to the leaders or elders (including “elective elders”) of the church. Paul warned the elders of Ephesus and emphasized the importance of their being ensamples to the flock. (Acts 20:17-35) From 1879 until the pouring out of the spirit upon all flesh the elders occupied the peculiar position of service to the Lord in the congregations. Some were faithful, and others came far short.
62
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
These leaders would include those described as “pilgrims” (traveling speakers), who distributed tracts, gave public lectures, instructed the classes, and traveled from place to place, enduring long and wearying journeys, poor lodgings, ill-prepared food, and many other inconveniences. To these the message says: “I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil.” These doubtless were the approved ones amongst the leaders. The term 'evil ones’ describes those who say they are servants of God but who are found to be liars.
Among the organizers of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society there were some who were wholly devoted to the Lord and continued faithful unto death and were examples of those who met the approval of the Lord. It was the privilege and duty of the original organizer of the Society and president thereof to take the lead in the preaching of the gospel in his time. He and those who stood faithfully with him came in contact with those who claimed to be preachers of the truth and some of whom accepted the truth and went about preaching it and yet afterwards were shown to be liars.
The faithful ones could not bear the ‘evil ones’. The known facts fully support this conclusion. The president of the Society, upon whom the responsibility rested for the management thereof, tried these professed ones and found them unfaithful. The ‘trying of them’ would be testing them according to the Word of God. The faithful ones patiently bore the trials that resulted, for the sake of the Lord’s name, and earnestly pressed on with the work committed to them. In that period of time the name of Jesus was emphasized more than the name of Jehovah. Therefore says the message: ‘For my name’s sake hast thou labored.’
To those among the leaders who were less pleasing to the Lord the message is: “I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love.” Some of them set their hearts on going to heaven in 1914 and, this failing, they were disappointed and the test was too great for them. Prior to that time they had been laboring in the congregations under the direction of and in harmony with the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, but when 1914 passed the zeal of some of these cooled quickly, and upon the death of the president of the Society and “editor” of The Watchtower others ceased to identify themselves with the Society and they ‘left their first love’. As the apostle Paul had previously said: “They received not the love of the truth.” They no longer loved God’s organization, but, being selfish, began to try to disrupt the Society and to obtain followers for themselves. They having a love of prominence and desire for a soft job, and being unable to obtain either, their zeal quickly cooled off. Prior to 1914 they expressed themselves as fulfilling the commandment of Jesus in Matthew 24:14 in preaching
the gospel of the kingdom, but after 1916 they had no zeal therefor and no interest therein. The warning of the Lord was: “Repent, and do the first works; or else I will . . . remove thy candlestick out of his place.” —Rev. 2: 5.
One of the last articles written and published by the original “editor” of The Watchtower was a special warning to the elders and leaders. From that article is quoted the following:
“It causes real grief to write that much of the difficulty and danger to the church seems to lie at the door of the elders and deacons—not all, thank God, but apparently a small minority of them, judging from the queries which come to the office from time to time from the bewildered sheep. . . . The true, loyal servants in the church should be all the more appreciated by the Lord’s people in proportion as they realize the difference between true elders and . . . those who are untrue.”—The Watchtower November 1, 1916, page 327.
This is proof as to the Lord’s manner of directing the publication of his truth at the appropriate time. Within less than a year of the publication of the foregoing there was a great falling away amongst the elders.
The “candlestick” mentioned manifestly means the opportunity for service to the Lord. The candlesticks (or lamp-stands) were not attached one to another, but were removable. This is agreeable to the parable of the “talents”, which talents represent opportunities of service, and which were taken away from the unfaithful when the Lord came to his temple and were delivered to the faithful. (Matt. 25:28) When the test came upon the church in 1917 and 1918 many of those who had been leaders in the church dropped out and they were no longer permitted by the Lord to hold forth their lamp-stand or candlestick ■ that is to say, their opportunity for service came to an end. “The seven candlesticks” manifestly refers to all opportunities of service having to do with the kingdom interests on earth.—Revelation 1:12,13; 2:1.
Then the faithful amongst the leaders were told: “Thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitanes, which I also hate.” The word “Nicolaitanes” has the thought of “boss”, or one who lords it over God’s people and uses them for a selfish purpose. Both the clergy in the nominal churches and the “elective elders” in the congregations of the Lord who pursue such a course would be included herein.
Then the message is addressed not merely to the elders but to all in the congregation, to wit, “He that hath an ear [to hear], let him hear what the spirit [the spirit of Jehovah using Jesus as his mouthpiece] saith unto the ehurches.” Those who would heed the warning and overcome were told, “To [you] will I give to eat of the tree of life.” The “tree of life” is associated with the kingdom. The warning of the Lord is that “if any man shall take away from the words
February 15, 1937
fffie WATCHTOWER,
63
of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part from the tree of life, and out of the holy city”. (Rev. 22:19, R.P.) It represents everlasting life by means of the unfailing sustenance which the Lord provides for his own. Divine wisdom is likened unto a tree of life. (Prov. 3:13-18) Jehovah is the fountain of life,
and even the body of Christ, the 144,000 immortal ones, will depend upon him that they may not ‘‘be hurt of the second death ’ ’. Hence the tree of life may well refer to the privilege which the church will enjoy in beholding the beauty and glory of Jehovah and inquiring continuously in his temple.—Psalm 27:4.
LET
Further reports from members of the Bethel family engaged in the educational campaign with the portable phonograph:
Since the first of December I have carried the phonograph with me constantly while witnessing, and during twenty hours of door-to-door work have played the records in thirty-two homes, with a total attendance of 63. I have found it much easier to get in by introducing the phonograph before presenting the testimony card, rather than afterwards. I usually approach the people something like this:
“May I come in for a few minutes, please?’’ (Sometimes it is not necessary to say any more than this before I am invited in.) As soon as I say this I pick up the phonograph as though I were sure they will let me come in. If they hesitate, then I continue: “I have a phonograph here and a very interesting record I’d like to play for you. I am not selling phonographs or records, but I have some short lectures with me on Bible topics that you will listen to with much profit.’’ (If they still hesitate I explain a little more about our work, and assure them I am not selling anything.)
In case they will not let me come in, then I ask if they won’t please read the card, which I hand to them, as it explains in a few words why I am calling. By following this method I get more people, on the average, to read the card than I did before, as they seem to be curious to know what I have. I find, too, that the longer I work with the phonograph, the easier it is to get in, as I learn how to overcome their objections. Yesterday, for instance, in nine culls I got in at seven homes and four of them took literature.
When I get inside I try to make myself right at home immediately, and it puts the people at ease. I look for the most convenient place to play the phonograph, and unless there is a good steady table I set it on the floor in front of a chair, and sitting on the chair I can easily operate it. After a little practice one can set up the phonograph very quickly and start the record to playing. While I am getting ready to start I hand the three discs to the party and suggest he pick out the subject he is most interested in. I find more people interested in “Purgatory’’ than in any other record. If they leave it up to me to make a selection, then I say: “Most people like to hear this record on ‘Purgatory’, and you will probably find it interesting, too.’’
After the lecture is over I introduce the literature, mentioning that these books are the ones the speaker tells about. I seldom play more than one record in a home, unless they seem specially interested and want to hear another.
Using the phonograph in the above manner has not lessened my placements any. During the above twenty hours I placed 11 books and 44 booklets, which is about the same aveiage per hour as I had before using the phenograph. However, the ratio of placements to the number of persons called on has increased considerably.
Have had a number of interesting experiences, and one never knows in advance how much can be accomplished in any particular place. When you go in there are often other-members of the family or visitors present who turn out to bo more interested than the one who meets you at the door. Often, too,
TERS
people will drop in after you start playing the lecture, and you have an opportunity to witness to these. For instance, at one place a girl of about 15 or 16 came to the door and said all her folks were out. I offered to play the phonograph for her anyway. Said she didn’t think it would be of any use, but that I could come on in if I wanted to. Had hardly started the lecture when a gentleman came in and, on invitation, sat down to listen. He became quite interested. After hearing the record he began asking a number of questions, and stated that lie had been a Catholic all his life but he was going to find out from his priest why Catholics couldn’t lead the Bible, and said, further, he was going to get a Bible and see if the priest was really misrepresenting the Bible. He agreed to let someone call back on him, and after a couple of back calls with the phonograph he and his wife are well on the way to joining themselves with Jehovah’s organization.
Here are some experiences with the phonograph lately. I’ve been using it mostly on ships, and find it a fine means of giving the witness, as the men are generally ready enough to hear it and don’t interrupt.
During the last campaign I had the chance to play the phonograph to 88 men, on five ships, and as a result many took Etches books who weren’t interested otherwise. The men in some cabins were opposed, and, to get rid of me, would send me to other cabins where they knew the men were somewhat tough. But there was always at least one person of good will there; so it was always worth while to go. I found that subjects of general interest to all were best, as “Satan’s Organization”, “Permission of Evil,” etc. Also found a new use for the “Golfer's Pal”: it is quite easy to tick off the attendance on this while the record is running.
On one ship a Malay crew of about 30 listened very attentively to the record, nodding their heads as each point was made. Clad mostly in gaily-colored loincloths, they clustered round the machine. I had with me just one Malay booklet, which one of their number volunteered to read out loud to the rest.
Usually the captain of the ship is the least interested. In one case it was the reverse, for he took me up to his stateroom, heard the lecture, took the combination, and gave his card with instructions to come back when the ship was in again.
I played a couple of Spanish lectures the other day on a South American ship, with the result that in addition to taking a book and half a dozen booklets one man took the record itself, as he got such a kick out of it. This is not the first time that they have taken the records, and I know they use them plenty, too, and discuss the work amongst themselves, so that they’re ready for more literature on the next trip.
Last Sunday, on a Belgian boat, I was able to play “Armageddon” both in French and in German, and although the winches were rattling away overhead, all could hear. The baker thought I was from the mission, and didn’t thaw out till the end of the lecture, when he got so interested he almost left his dough.
The watchmen and customs men also like to hear, and the phonograph is very useful in thus breaking down prejudice on ships for which we have no pass.
64
*F6e WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
NOTHING FOR US BUT OBEDIENCE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
It is my privilege again to send you the report of attendance at the Bethel study held each Monday evening at Toronto by the family. During November, 1936, the attendance was 15, 15, 14, 14, 15, respectively.
The Watchtower dealing with the work of the Lord’s anointed, and which shows how each phase of work harmoniously leads up to the vindication of Jehovah’s name, was very impiessive. In its study it was seen that, having taken the irrevocable step of absolute and complete allegiance to Jehovah and Christ Jesus, there remains nothing for us but obedience to all the commands of ‘‘our parents”, Jehovah God and his organization. Again, it is necessary that we never refuse or neglect the commandments, so that we may be worthy always of beholding the beauty of the Lord and inquiring in his temple. We were much impressed with the clear way with which every point in this Watchtower was presented.
May Jehovah’s rich blessing be constantly your good portion, is our continual prayer for you.
Your brother and fellow servant,
F. C. Wainwright.
FIRMLY FOR JEHOVAH AND HIS KINGDOM
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Jehovah’s witnesses assembled at Toledo, Ohio, at the divisional campaign, adopted the following resolution:
Jehovah’s witnesses of this division assembled at Toledo wish to convey our love to you, and wish to state that we are firmly for Jehovah and his kingdom, and that we are thankful to Jehovah for the opportunity of declaring his purpose to the people, and that we are glad to bring to light the works of the enemy, especially the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
We are happy to co-operate with the Lord’s arrangements here on earth in giving testimony concerning the kingdom.
WILL CONTINUE TO PUSH FORWARD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The Evansville (Ind.) division of Jehovah’s witnesses assembled in campaign at Evansville November 8, 1936, desire to let you know that we are with you 100 percent in the great fight.
After hearing the Newark ‘‘Declaration and Warning” read we unanimously adopt it and desire to have a part in publishing it throughout the earth. With the help of Jehovah we will continue to push forward regardless of any or all opposition.
May Jehovah continue his blessings on you henceforth to the honor and glory of his name.
JEHOVAH ALONE CAN SHOW US
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Probably the most extremely difficult thing for an extremely selfish person to do is to publicly confess wherein he has been wrong.
The Watchtower for December 15 has clearly pointed out wherein the writer has been offering very blemished sacrifices —sick, and lame and blind. I love a sentence in paragraph 18 which says: ‘‘As long as one permits selfishness to control him he cannot see and appreciate the revealed Word of God”; and also the sentence following, for it is Jehovah God who alone can show us the right. The word which he has spoken, saying, ‘ ‘ Prov e all things; hold fast that which is good, ’ ’ has also caused me, through actual experience, to realize that The Watchtower is the receptacle from which the ‘ ‘ household of faith ’ ’ partake of ‘‘meat in due season”; that there actually is an element in our make-up that fits the picture of an evil-disposed servant, selfishly inclined, not charitably believing all things (1 Cor. 13: 7) until facts prove pro et contra.
Anyone of a hypercritical, sneering disposition had better take heed.
May Jehovah through his strong Son continue to bless and keep you and all who love his name, is the prayer of
Your little brother,	.
Pete Stickler, Quebec, Canada.
“GIFTS OF JEHOVAH”
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We want to express our thanks to Jehovah and to you, his instrument, for the riches of his grace in entrusting to us the beautiful book so well named Riches.
It seems to us that in this is combined the wealth of all the other.books pressed down, heaped together, and running over with additional compound interest. The friendly, conversational style in which the book is written, with its clear-cut explanations, will, we feel sure, be used of the Lord in taking away the veil of unbelief from many faces.
For the gifts of Jehovah in the Year Book as well as his wonderful provision for the pioneers in connection with the literature we find no outlet for our appreciation save in joyful service.
That the riches from Jehovah’s ample storehouse may be yours increasingly, is the wish and prayer of three Oakland pioneers who love you for your work's sake.
With warm Christian love,
Mary C. Jewell
Helen L. Jewell
Anna H. Brooks
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
J. C. BOOTH
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Fremont, Nebr. ______Mar.	5
Columbus, Nebr.........“	0
Norfolk, Nebr........“	7, 8
Clearwater, Nebr.......“	10
Grand Island, Nebr.	.. “	11
Wood River, Nebr.......“	12
Litchfield, Nebr....... “	13
Sargent, Nebr.......... “	14
Lexington, Nebr........“	1G
Hastings, Nebr.........“	17
Fairmont, Nebr........Mar. 18
Osceola, Nebr..........“	10
York, Nebr.............“	20, 21
Lincoln, Nebr..........“	23, 24
Unadilla, Nebr........“	25
Nebraska City, Nebr. .. “	20
Table Rock, Nebr......“	27
Humboldt, Nebr........“	28
Pawnee City, Nebr.....“	30
Beatrice, Nebr. -Mar. 31, Apr. 1
Scotland Neck, N. C.	Mar. 5, 6
Vanceboro, N. C...........“	7
Kinston, N. C.............“	9
Magnolia, N. C............“	10,11
Hayne, N. C...............“	12,13
Fayetteville, N. C........“	14
Cumberland, N. C..........“	16
Boardman, N. C............“	17
\\ ilmington, N. C........“	18
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Hemingway, S. C......Mar.	19
Bonneau, S. C..........“	20
Charleston, S. C.......“	21,	22
Cope, S. C.............“	21
Columbia, S C..........“	25,	20
Camden, S. C...........“	27
Great Falls, S. C......“	28,	29
Gaffney, S. C..........“	31
Spartanburg, S. C.- ....Apr.	1, 2
M. L. HERR
Summit, Miss.________Mar.
Wanilla, Miss. _______“
Braxton, Miss......— “
Bolton, Miss. ________“
Pickens, Miss. _______“
Chester, Miss.......  “
Houlka, Miss..........“
Blue Mountain, Miss. “ Memphis, Tenn.......— “
Tunica, Miss...........“
Sledge, Miss----------"
Sardis, Miss. ________ “
3
4
5
6 7
9
10
11 12-14
10
17
18
Marks, Miss. ________Mar.	10
Belen, Miss............“	20
Clarksdale; Miss.......“	21
Tutwiler, Miss.........“	23
Glendora, Miss....... "	21
Holcomb, Miss.......... “	25
Cleveland, Miss........“	20
Shelby, Miss...........“	27
Mound Bayou, Miss. .. "	28
Greenville, Miss. ______“	30
Longwood, Miss.........“	31
Swiftown, Miss.......Apr.	1
Camas, Wash.........Mar.	3
Hood River, Oreg.....“	4
White Salmon, Wash.	“	£>
Longview, Wash.........“	6
Chehalis, Wash........“	7, 8
Rochester, Wasli.....“	10
Elma, Wash..........“	11,12
Raymond, Wash.......Mar. 13,14
Aberdeen, Wash......16,17
Tacoma, Wash......... “	18, 19
Puyallup, Wash.......“	20,21
Enumclaw, Wash.......“	23, 24
Seattle, Wash....Alar. 25-Apr. 4
A. S. WRIGHT
Westphalia, Kans.	....Mar.	5
Iola, Kans			u	6,7
Eureka, Kans		u	9
Emporia, Kans. ...	««	10,11
Ottawa, Kans		4i	12
Louisburg, Kans. .		 U	13
Lawrence, Kans. .	ii	14,15
Atchison, Kans. ....	«4	17
Netawaka, Kans.....Alar. 18
Topeka, Kans..........“	19-21
Manhattan, Kans. _____“	23.2 4
Randolph, Kans........“	25. 20
Jamestown, Kans.......“	27
Abilene, Kans........ “	28. 29
McPherson, Kans......"	31
Hutchinson, Kans....Apr. 1, 2
WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Eutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” -Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all tilings; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge m controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
■United States, S1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, 51.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and south Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian ...... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African..........Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
{Translations of this journal appear in several languages.}
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price mav have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the rea-oa for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on addters label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) -Mill be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. T., Postoffice.
Act of March S, 1ST9.
“FAITHFUL WARRIOR”
The “Faithful Warrior’’ Testimony Period, specifically referred to in Brother Rutherford’s letter ‘ ‘ to the faithful in all the earth’’, embraces the nine-day period March 27 to April 4 inclusive. This campaign will be world wide, and will be marked by the offer of a six-booklet combination: four colored-cover booklets and the two latest booklets, to wit, Uncovered and Protection, where these are available, all on a contribution of 25c. Full details on the campaign you will find in current issues of the Informant. Let there be the usual promptness on the part of all kingdom publishers in making report of their time in the field and the results.
“UNCOVERED”
True to its title, “Uncovered,’’ this new booklet draws back the veil of lies covering the false position, claims and pretensions of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. This booklet was called forth as a result of the failure of the Hierarchy and governmental and radio agencies to respond to the nation wide petition in the United States for a public debate by radio, and presents the Scriptural side of the proposed debate by the Society's president, against whom the Hierarchy laid its false charges. Uncovered is a booklet of 64 pages, and the campaign with it in the United States and world-wide begins February 15. For campaign instructions, consult the Informant. Copies of Uncovered for your personal use may now be procured at 5c each.
MEMORIAL
The Lord’s people everywhere are advised to carefully study chapters two and three of the book Jehoiah immediately preceding Memorial on the 26th of March. This explanation will help you to appreciate the meaning and purpose of the Memorial.
Brother Rutherford will be at San Francisco for the Memoi ial season and will address the friends of the Bay City countiy at that time.
“PROTECTION”
This new booklet, of 64 pages, is self-covered. It bears an attractive cover design, in color, and also the title and legend: “PROTECTION from those who seek to hurt or destroy me. How can I find it?” After reading it, you will surely want to distribute the booklet. You may procure a copy, or copies, on a contribution of 5c each.
IMPOSTORS
Persons going about the country, and claiming to be in the truth and Jehovah’s witnesses, present themselves at different places and collect money and get other favors of the brethren. Wo warn the brethren everywhere to have nothing to do with these impostors.
Vol. LVIII
March 1, 1937
No. 5'
JEHOVAH’S PROVISIONS
PART 3
“Behold, these shall come from far; and, lo, these from the north and from the tvest; and these from the land of Sinim.”—Isa. 49:12.
JEHOVAH has opened the way to life, and those who diligently seek that way may find it. There is just one way to life and its attending blessings, and that way is through Christ Jesus, whose shed blood makes atonement for many, that is to say, for as many as comply with God’s terms. (John 14:6; Matt. 20: 28) There is no other way. “Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.” (Acts 4:12) Satan’s religious practitioners for hire restrain persons of good will within their “prison houses” and attempt to make them believe that their salvation depends upon their fidelity to a religious organization called a “church”. Those poor prisoners are sad of mind and heart; and when they meet together on Sunday mornings, which is their habit, and mingle their voices together in songs, those songs are all in the minor key. They are starving for need of spiritual food, and like a wail of despair they make their voices to be heard, while inwardly they cry out for a better day. God will hear the cry of the sincere ones. Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, now opens his Father’s storehouse and sends forth from the temple the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses with the message that Jehovah’s provision is abundant to give and sustain life and bring boundless happiness to those who obey the command of his Governor. The prophetic drama, together with other prophecies, shows that those who do hear and give heed shall come from the far ends of the earth, from all nations, kindreds and tongues, and shall lay hold of and partake of the provision which Jehovah has so graciously made. Those who do obey and maintain their integrity toward God shall to that extent be a vindication of Jehovah’s name.
2 The old world is in darkness, because it is under the oppressive hand of the enemy, and the religion mongers are the chief agents that keep the people in ignorance. But the Lord Jesus, the great and righteous Judge, is now upon his throne of judgment and before him are gathered the nations, and he is affording an opportunity to such as desire righteousness and
67
life to find the way and to find refuge in Jehovah’s organization. When the famine was upon Egypt and over all the land round about, Joseph sold food to those who came to seek it. That selling of food does not mean or prophetically foretell that Jehovah’s witnesses may commercialize the kingdom message for selfish gain, but it does mean that it is right and proper for the people who have some means with which to buy that they shall show their appreciation of God’s provision by contributing something towards the further spreading of the message of the kingdom that others may hear. For this reason Jehovah’s witnesses take a small contribution from those who desire and are able to contribute for the literature; and when those who are unable to do so desire the message of truth in printed form, it is freely given to them. When the people learn that the provision is not that of man, but that it is God’s gracious provision, they want to make a little sacrifice to show their appreciation of God’s goodness, and therefore their hearts’ sincere desire is that their fellow man may have an opportunity to learn of that gracious provision and receive its blessings.
8 All of Egypt was under Joseph as the rightful ruler. Likewise all the world is now under Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, as the rightful ruler, but Satan is still permitted to exercise his power; and during such short period of time preceding Armageddon those persons of good will may have an opportunity to show their preference for God and his kingdom of righteousness, and thus the dividing of the people proceeds. Satan’s organization is now entirely barren of spiritual food. The religious organizations, being a part of Satan’s visible organization, have no spiritual food for the people. All persons of good will may go to God’s organization under Christ, the Greater-than-Joseph, that they may find spiritual sustenance there. Therefore in the prophetic drama at this point Pharaoh, picturing Jehovah, said unto all the Egyptians: “Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.” Likewise now in fulfillment of that part of the drama Jehovah, acting by his witnesses, makes
68
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
known to the people that he is God, whose name alone is Jehovah; that he has made provision by and through Christ Jesus for the blessings of the people, and that therefore those who will live must go to Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph. They must do what the Lord Jesus tells them to do or else they will die. (Acts 3:23) The obligation is now laid upon Jehovah’s witnesses to tell the people of God’s provision, and if they fail or refuse to obey that commandment of the Lord they also must die. Jehovah’s witnesses cannot save anyone, but they can obey God’s commandment given to them and thereby enable others to learn the way to life. The “faithful servant” class will do that very thing, and, doing it, they shall live and for ever praise the Most High.
4	It is heart-cheering to God’s people to now see how simply yet marvelously Jehovah long ago directed the minute parts of this drama, which he is now making plain to those who diligently seek to know. Jacob at this point comes upon the stage and plays a part picturing Jehovah God: “And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.” (Gen. 42:2) As Pharaoh had commanded the Egyptians to go to his governor, Joseph, and to obey his orders, so likewise Jacob directed his ten sons, the half brothers of Joseph, to go to the governor of Egypt for needed supplies. In this Jacob pictured Jehovah, who directs all persons of good will to go unto Christ Jesus, his duly constituted governor, that the people ‘ ‘ may live, and not die ’ ’. Since the gathering of the remnant to the temple Jehovah has caused his witnesses, the remnant ‘seed of his woman’, to go through the land and to ‘cast up a highway for the people’, and to tell them the truth concerning his provisions, in order that such might travel to the great Governor, upon whose shoulders the government rests, and to him who is “The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace”, who serves to the hungry souls the bread of life. (Isa. 9:6; 62:10) “This is the bread which cometh down from heaven that a man may eat thereof, and not die.”—John 6: 50.
8	When Jacob sent the ten sons into Egypt he kept Benjamin with him and, as he stated, “lest peradventure mischief befall him.” (Gen. 42:4) Jacob thus manifested his special love for Benjamin, and by this part of the drama Jehovah foretold his love and gracious provision for those who came to know of the truth from and after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, and the gathering of them into the “faithful servant” class, making them members of his own household. This part of the drama docs not picture that the people of good will seek to receive the favor of God before those represented by Benjamin receive his favor. Jacob, in sending his ten sons into Egypt for corn, was making provision for Benjamin also to have food upon which to sustain life, and it was not necessary that Benjamin should go then to Egypt in person.
Benjamin here pictured the younger spiritual group coming into God’s organization from 1922 and on to 1931, and thus God was showing his love for them.
8	Benjamin was then a young man in his early twenties and pictured here those who from and after 1922, at the outpouring of the holy spirit, were joined to Jehovah’s original remnant, their spiritual brethren. Benjamin therefore represented the same class as did Esther and Ruth, made known in other prophetic dramas. Jacob’s holding back his son Benjamin from making that journey to Egypt resulted in a severe test’s being put upon the ten half brothers of Joseph, which test determined whether or not they had envy and hatred towards Benjamin as they had previously shown towards Joseph. Jacob’s language as in this connection, “lest peradventure mischief befall him,” does not mean that Jacob had learned of the deception practiced by his ten sons upon him concerning Joseph. Jacob was still under the impression that Joseph had been slain by wild beasts. Benjamin was his only surviving son by Rachel, his beloved wife, as it then appeared to Jacob, and he was taking the necessary precaution to protect his son, and that furnished a test as to the heart condition of the ten half brothers. Before Joseph revealed himself to the ten half brothers they had to show and did show their desire to do good unto Benjamin. This part of the drama foretold that Jehovah would first prove the people of good will and cause them to show that they had gotten rid of the religious spirit of the world, that of persecution of the followers of Christ Jesus, and this they must do before he reveals to them the way to life.
7	Those people of good will must first show that they have no longer the “goat” spirit, but that they have the disposition of the “sheep”, and then the Lord reveals himself to them and discloses Jehovah’s gracious provision for all such. The facts now well known show that the Jonadab class have first shown kind consideration for Jehovah’s witnesses and then later the Lord revealed himself to them and made known God’s gracious provisions for them and pointed them to the way to life everlasting.
8	It seems well here to mention another thing. “The famine was in the land of Canaan,” where Jacob resided with his family and where they were sojourners and strangers. Jacob and his family there were the people looking for a city or organization with foundations as described by the apostle Paul in the epistle to the Hebrews. Today the earth is still dominated by Satan and his organization, and it is in that land that Jehovah’s witnesses and others who love God reside as aliens, sojourners and strangers. In the world there is a great famine for spiritual food except for those who love and serve Jehovah God. Now all those of the temple class praise Jehovah for his loving-kindness and point the people to the Greater Joseph as God’s provision for them. All the holy prophets of God, who in the long centuries past prophesied, foretold the com
March 1, 1937
SFfie WATCHTOWER
69
ing of the great Messiah and pointed out to the people that he is the One whom Jehovah uses to dispense life. Jacob is included among those holy prophets who faithfully served God. It does not seem out of place, therefore, to here suggest that those holy prophets may soon be raised from the dead and before Armageddon, and before God’s remnant have passed from the earth, and that these will join together with the other witnesses now on earth in the proclamation of God’s provisions for mankind. That would mean, therefore, not only that Jacob in the drama was picturing Jehovah God sending the people of good will to Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, but that he also in a lesser way pictured those holy men of old who by the prophecies they uttered foretold Jehovah’s provision for humankind.
9	Pharaoh and Joseph together constituted the “higher powers” locally, that is, in Egypt, and thus they pictured Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, the real higher powers. “And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the land: and Joseph’s brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.” —Gen. 42:6.
10	Here is another proof that all creatures should obey the “Higher Powers”, Jehovah and Christ Jesus, rather than men. Doubtless Joseph had heard that the famine was also upon the land of Canaan, and he therefore anticipated that his father’s family would have to draw upon Egypt for supplies and that those who came would have to appear before him, and that therefore the opportunity would also arise for him to show favor to those who humbly sought his favor, and then he would reveal himself unto them, and the provisions that had been made for them. Joseph’s prophetic dream, which he had had when a lad, was now about to be fulfilled, and ‘his brethren came and bowed before him’. Probably they recalled the dream at that time and this had something to do with softening their hearts toward their brother Benjamin. Those ten men had come to Egypt chiefly ‘ for the loaves and fishes’ (John 6:26); but as the drama progressed they pictured that class of persons who seek the Lord first for self-preservation and who thereafter learn of his loving-kindness and put themselves gladly under the Lord’s control. It was after the second visit to Egypt that the ten half brothers learned with gladness the provision Joseph had made for them. They gradually came to know of that life-saving provision. It was on the 24th day of February, 1918, that the Lord first caused to be publicly proclaimed the message “Millions now living will never die”, but it was years after that when the Lord revealed that the “sheep” class, in company with the “goat” class, would appear before him for judgment, and that this judgment must take place before Armageddon, and not after Armageddon and during the thousand-year reign. (Matt. 25:31-46) As early as 1918 some began
to seek the Lord that they might live on the earth, having heard the message “Millions now living will never die”; but it was not until 1935 that the Lord revealed that it is his “other sheep” class that constitute the great multitude, which will live for ever on the earth; and from that time onward, especially, the “sheep” class have manifested greater love and devotion to the Lord, serving him and Jehovah joyfully because they love and have a part in the vindication of His name.
11	Gradually these truths have been brought to the attention of the people of good will, and gradually they have made a deep impression upon their minds. Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, anticipated the coming of such people of good will to him, and he caused his faithful followers by faith to see their coming to the Lord. But the disclosure of the proper relationship of such to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to his remnant, was made known only in God’s due time, when he began to unfold his prophecies in this behalf. The remnant saw that there was another class coming, but they could not identify them until God's due time for them to know. Those who compose the great multitude must first demonstrate that they have rid themselves of selfish motives in seeking the Lord; that they are really of good will toward God, toward the Greater Joseph, and toward his younger spiritual brethren on earth; and that they seek the Lord and serve him because they love him and love his people. Then the Lord reveals to them his gracious provisions. The facts now well known exactly fit the prophecy.
12	A test was now about to be put upon the ten half brothers. When they appeared before Joseph he accused them as spies seeking to do injury to Egypt. In this he was justified in the light of the treatment he had received at their hands when he was a lad. The real purpose, however, in thus charging them with being spies was to put them under a test, which prophetically foretold of a test that must be put upon the Jonadab or good-will class before God’s way of life is revealed to them. (Gen. 42: 6-14) Joseph knew his brethren, but they did not recognize him. They had told him of having a younger brother back in Canaan who was yet alive. And they had mentioned another one who “is not”. They had reference to Joseph himself, whom they had sold into Egypt. Joseph then said to them: “Ye are spies. Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.”—Gen. 42:14,15.
13	That was a strong oath which Joseph swore, “by the life of Pharaoh,” the supreme ruler of Egypt; which prophetically pointed to the Supreme Being in power, Jehovah God. Here was an unbreakable statement from which Joseph would not retreat, that his younger brother must be brought. Joseph then restrained these ten half brothers for three days, that they might have time to carefully give consideration
70
tffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to what he had said to them. This was a great test upon them, because they knew that their father would never consent to Benjamin’s being brought into Egypt.
14	Note now the facts which have come to pass, and which fit the prophecy. Since 1918 all nations have been gathered before the Greater-than-Joseph to be judged. (Matt. 25:31-35) Those gathered include the people of good will, who at that trial and judgment must demonstrate themselves to be real ‘‘ sheep ’ ’, having the love that would warrant their being gathered onto the Lord’s side and in his favor. The test that must come and has come upon those of good will proves whether or not they are any longer of Satan’s organization and are spying against the interests of God’s kingdom under Christ, as some of the enemy continue to do. It is true that such persons of good will have not known that they were on trial, but that did not alter the matter, except that it furnished a better opportunity to prove their real purpose and heart condition. If they still showed the spirit of selfishness, hatred and envy toward God’s people, such as had been demonstrated against Joseph when he was sold into Egypt, then they would be put on the “goats” side. If they showed the spirit of kindness toward the least of the brethren of Christ, pictured by Benjamin, and would seek to do them good because they served God and Christ Jesus, this would show a right heart condition and they would be adjudged worthy to be of the “sheep” class. Mark now that in 1918 the Lord began to have the message proclaimed “Millions now living will never die”, but even those who heard that message the Lord held off for several years before revealing to them their real situation. Why did he do so? In order that another class, represented in the drama by Benjamin, might first be brought before him and united to him and become a part of the sealed ones of the twelve tribes of spiritual Israel. The Benjamin class must be included in this number of 144,000, and this must be done before a clear identification of the great multitude as the “other sheep” of the Lord. Also at the same time a test would be upon those seeking the Lord and calling upon his name, which test would determine whether such are of the “goats” or of the “sheep” class. Revelation 7:1-10 shows that this work must first be done which includes the class pictured by Benjamin, before the great multitude is identified. The facts show that exactly that work was done and has been done from and after 1918 and before the identity of the great multitude was revealed by the Lord even to those who are of the spiritual remnant of God on earth.
18	In 1931 the twelve “hours” (years) of labor in Jehovah’s vineyard, as described in the parable uttered by the Lord Jesus, ended and the “penny”, that is, the “new name”, was paid to the laborers. (Matt. 20:1-16) It was on Sunday, July 26, 1931, that this great truth was revealed to God’s anointed and they
joyfully received the “new name” at the hand of the Lord. Only two months prior thereto the Lord had made known to his people the meaning of the prophetic drama in which Mordecai and Esther played prominent parts, and which drama discloses the two parts of the “faithful and wise servant” class, that is to say, the remnant. In June, 1931, at London, England, the prophecy of Ezekiel the ninth chapter was made plain to God’s anointed people, and it was then that they learned that those who God commanded must be marked in their foreheads constitute the earthly class, “other sheep” of the Lord Jesus, who get life on earth as human creatures. The same explanation was given at the international convention in July, 1931, at Columbus, Ohio. Then God’s anointed remnant saw that the ‘people of good will’ are earthly; but not even then were these recognized as of the great multitude, because the great multitude was not even revealed to them. To determine who are of the “goats” and who are of the “sheep”, the people who seek the Lord must be put to a test, and this test would determine what is their attitude toward ‘the least of Christ’s brethren’, pictured by Benjamin, and who are also pictured by Ruth and Esther. Would they prove themselves sincerely of good will and be kind toward the brethren of Christ? or would they treat the Lord’s little ones as the fleshly Jewish brethren of Jesus treated him when on earth, and as Joseph’s ten half brothers treated him when he was a young lad ? In the prophetic drama what the ten half brothers would do to Benjamin, Joseph would consider as done unto himself. Likewise what the people do unto the least of the brethren of the Greater-than-Joseph (meaning Christ Jesus) Christ Jesus takes as done unto himself, and by this test the “goats” and the “sheep” manifest themselves. The experiences through which the Lord’s anointed people have passed in the last few years clearly fit this part of the prophecy.
10	Joseph then brought these ten half brothers before him: “And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for I fear God. If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses: but bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.”—Gen. 42:18-20.
17	Joseph would hold one of their number as a hostage or as a preventive measure to insure the bringing of Benjamin before him unharmed. He caused Simeon, one of their number, to be bound and so held. Joseph had spoken to his brethren by an interpreter, manifestly to conceal his own identity, and they did not know that he could speak Hebrew. When this test came upon them, that one would have to be held as a hostage, they began to discuss their troubles in the presence of Joseph, and they did so in the Hebrew tongue. They recognized their wrongful act and confessed to one another their sin against Joseph their brother, whom
March 1, 1937
UHe WATCHTOWER.
71
they had sold into Egypt, and this confession, of course, Joseph heard, and that would be a double assurance to him that they had sincerely repented and that they would bring Benjamin safely to him. (Gen. 42:21-23) Likewise Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, makes due provision for the safety and preservation of the younger of the remnant, pictured by Benjamin, that these might be united to him at the temple, and in this provision the people of good will have opportunity to assist in whatever manner they can. If any of these of good will had a part in mistreating God’s children in 1918 and prior thereto, and later with grief and sincerity they confessed their wrongdoing in this respect, that would show themselves out of harmony with Satan and his organization and his agents and would prove their heart condition toward the Lord himself. Some of the persons of good will at this time were prior hereto, like Reuben, against . ;y wrong treatment of God’s people during the World War and since, and they have helped others to see and to confess the wrongful action taken in the persecution of God’s people during that time. Those of the “sheep” class are thus manifesting themselves. In the few years past the people of good will toward Jehovah have demonstrated this by ministering unto the needs of Jehovah’s witnesses and by helping them in whatsoever way they could. Another prophet of Jehovah refers to the same class manifesting their love for God and showing their unselfish disposition in helping others sec the right way. “And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord, out of all nations, upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord. And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the Lord. For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain. ’ ’—Isa. 66: 20-22.
18	Those of the “sheep” class have been and arc assisting others to see the way and to come to God’s organization under Christ that they may learn the way to life. Having arranged to hold Simeon as a hostage, Joseph then commanded that the sacks of the remaining nine should be filled with com. He received the money for such com at their hands, and then he caused that jnoney to be secretly put in their sacks with the corn. (Gen. 42:25,26) Likewise the life-giving and life-sustaining truths, pictured by the food that Joseph put in their sacks, the Grcatcr-than-Joseph, Christ Jesus, now sends to the people by the hand of his faithful witnesses. These life-giving truths arc in fact a free gift “without money and without price” (Isa. 55:1,2), and this is pictured by the money’s being put back in their sacks. The truth today carried to the people is a free gift from the Lord, even though the people who receive that truth do contribute a sum of
money at the time of receiving the message. Their contribution merely goes to help others learn of the truth and is an evidence of their sincerity.
18	Joseph’s half brothers must show a disposition to give something for the food they were receiving, and likewise the people of good will must now show that they have the spirit of sacrifice and unselfishness and that they desire to aid others to get the needed spiritual food, and hence they make a small sacrifice to that end. That is a further test of their unselfishness. The Lord eould supply the message in printed form and freely place it in the hands of all people, but that is not his way. Those who desire the truth themselves, and who are of the proper disposition toward the Lord, must show and will show it by a proper course of action, and hence this in a measure is shown by their willingness to contribute a small sum for the printed message. All the money is the Lord’s, and what the people contribute they get back. This the Lord does not do because he is economical, but because it affords the opportunity to the people to prove their real heart condition. The test is for their benefit. Many persons contribute money for the literature because they sincerely believe that the persons bringing the message to them are children and servants of God, and for this reason their hearts arc moved to do some good, and this acts to their own benefit.
20	Leaving Simeon bound in Egypt, the other nine returned to Canaan and reported to their father. Jacob was grieved because of the loss of Joseph, and now his son Simeon was also held from him; and when he was told that he must send Benjamin he was greatly grieved, and in this Jacob showed his great love for his son. Here Jacob pictured Jehovah, the Life-giver of all, who loves those who are his. “The Father himself lovcth you.” (John 16: 27) “He careth for you.” (1 Pct. 5:7) This manifestation of Jacob’s love for his absent sons put a further test upon the remaining nine half brothers, and this would determine whether or not they would consider their father's feelings in this complicated state of affairs and would be fully sympathetic with him. Likewise the people of good will, who seek the Lord, must show consideration for Jehovah’s feelings and his love toward those who are his own. Their real heart condition is therefore shown by their action toward Jehovah’s witnesses, the spiritual brethren of the Greater-than-Joseph, and by their action toward and treatment of all who serve God in truth and in spirit. They must show their love for those whom Jehovah loves and show that they do not bear ill will toward them.
21	In his grief Jacob declared that Benjamin should not go down to Egypt with the others. Reuben, one of the nine, now showed his love for his father, and doubtless he uttered the sentiments of all the nine. To his father he declared that at the cost of the life of his own sons he would bring back Benjamin safely to his father in Canaan. The test was upon all of these
72
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
men; and Judah, who was the one who had proposed selling Joseph for twenty pieces of silver, now stepped forward and offered to become surety for Benjamin. To his father he said: “I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bea^ the blame for ever.”—Gen. 43: 9.
22	These nine half brothers of Joseph here demon strated that they had the proper heart condition toward Jacob and toward their brother Benjamin, and this would also show their heart condition toward Joseph. At this point of the drama they pictured a class of people who had part in the persecution of God’s children but who, having had their eyes opened, have undergone a change of heart and now gladly do what they can in behalf of the true servants of the Lord and thus manifest a love for the Lord himself. In this day of fulfillment of the prophetic drama persons do come forward who have heretofore ill-treated the Lord’s children but who, having later seen that they were wrong, confess their error and put forth their endeavors to do good unto the servants of Jehovah, and thus they show their love for Jehovah and for Christ Jesus and his brethren by engaging with the latter in the proclamation of the message of life, which Jehovah has provided. Such persons show themselves to be of the “other sheep”, which the Lord Jesus says he will bring into the fold of God.
23	Jacob’s two sons having pledged themselves to their father’s interest and having declared their love for him, the other seven doubtless fully concurred, and thus the two stand as representatives for the entire number. The famine continued sore upon the land, and the food supply for Jaeob’s household ran low. Food must be had or death would follow. Jacob listened attentively to the plea of his sons that they might again go to Egypt and take Benjamin with them and thus be assured of getting another supply of food that their lives might be sustained. To their earnest and sincere pleas Jacob yielded: “And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds: and take double money in your hand: and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight. Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: and God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved. And the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.”—Gen. 43:11-15.
24	Jacob not only caused the return of the money which Joseph had placed in the sacks of his half brothers, but also sent a like amount to buy more corn,
and, furthermore, sent “the man” presents. “The man,” of course, meant Joseph, but Jacob did not know it was his son Joseph. In this generous action Jacob showed a wise provision in behalf of his sons, the half brothers of Joseph, as well as for Benjamin: “A erift in s'eret pacifieth anger, and a reward in the bosom strong wrath.” (i/rov. 21:141 “A man's gift maketb roo’.i for him, and hrin«™+h him before great men.”—Prov. 18:16.
25	In this Jacob pictured Jehovah’s care and provision for all those who declare themselves on the side of God and his King, both the remnant and the great multitude, that it may go well with them at the hand of the great Governor, Judge and Executioner, Christ Jesus, now at the temple. Gifts or contributions are made at a sacrifice or cost, and such show an unselfish disposition and willingness to obey and to serve the Most High. Joseph, being of the local higher powers, pictured Christ Jesus of “the higher powers” in heaven; and the gifts carried to him manifested the spirit of unselfish service and devotion. Unselfishness, which is love, is demonstrated by a willing desire and effort to further the cause of righteousness. Those persons of good will, and who are therefore of the “other sheep” of the Lord, now show their unselfish desire to aid in supporting the kingdom message to the honor of Jehovah’s name and for the'good of those who love righteousness. They manifest this disposition by making a sacrifice, willingly contributing their means to further the publication of the kingdom message. Thus they grow in godlikeness. The rule of the Lord is stated in these words: ‘ ‘ The desire of the righteous is only good; but the expectation of the wicked is wrath. There is that scattercth, and increaseth yet more; and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth only to want. The liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that watereth shall be watered also himself.”—Prov. 11:23-25, R.V.
ANOTHER TEST
20	Tests are put upon creatures in order that the creatures may by their own voluntary action prove whether or not they will maintain their integrity toward God. The affairs of men are so arranged that they must meet these tests, although they do not at the time know of the purpose of such tests. The great prophetic drama proceeds. The nine half brothers, together with Benjamin, journeyed back to Egypt bringing Benjamin safely with them and presenting themselves and Benjamin before the governor. Benjamin, being brought to Joseph the governor, here pictured the younger sons of Zion, which is God’s organization, being brought into a unity with Christ Jesus and the others who are of the royal house. The nine half brothers here pictured those who are not of Zion but who do come into God’s organization and who delight in their efforts of participating in the service of the Lord and in pointing others to his gracious pro
March 1, 1937
THe WATCHTOWER.
73
vision for them. In this connection consider the words of Jehovah’s prophet, to wit: “Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons [Zion’s sons] in their-arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me [as Joseph did].”—Isa. 49:22,23.
27	The people of good will in the various walks of life are now receiving the precious message concerning God’s kingdom and are manifesting their love for the Lord by joining in the work of bringing this message to the attention of others, and thus bringing them to the Lord’s organization. “Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.”—Isa. 60: 9; see also Isaiah 66: 20-22.
28	When the nine appeared before Joseph with Benjamin, Joseph released Simeon, who had been held as a hostage. (Gen. 43:23) This appears to prophetically foretell that when the people of good will do, under the test, prove their kind consideration for Jehovah’s witnesses and thus demonstrate their unselfishness and good will toward God and Christ Jesus, then the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater-than-Joseph, releases such people of good will from prison restraints, which have been put upon them by Satan’s organization. Those released ones join themselves to the anointed servants of God and openly, by their course of action, declare themselves on the side of Jehovah God and gladly serve him.
20 The bringing of the Benjamin class before the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater-than-Joseph, has progressed from 1922 onward and at least to the closing of the special vineyard service at the time the “penny” is paid to the Lord’s spiritual servants at the temple. (Matt. 20:1-16) When Joseph saw that Benjamin was before him, which proved that his brethren had met the test, he immediately ordered that preparation be made for all the ten, together with Benjamin, to dine with him (Joseph) at his house; which house pictures Jehovah’s organization. The dinner did not take place immediately, but preparation for it proceeded. the identification of all concerned, that is, Joseph and his brethren, and showing their proper relation to each other, was not immediately made. These half brothers, being brought to Joseph’s house, were mystified and much troubled. They then approached the steward of Joseph’s house and attempted to make clear to him about the money that had been found in their sacks, and that to assure him of their honesty they had brought this money back, and even more money to pay
for corn, and that they had also brought presents unto the governor. (Gen. 43:16-22) The steward of the house bid them not to fear. He gave them water to wash their feet and caused their animals to be fed. They made ready to deliver the presents to Joseph when he should come. They were prepared for the dinner, and all waited the coming of the lord of the household; and when Joseph appeared they brought him the presents, which they had taken down to Egypt, and bowed themselves to the earth before him.—Gen. 43:23-26.
30 Likewise, at the time of the coming of the Benjamin class the Lord Jesus Christ ordered a feast to be made ready, but there was a considerable period of time elapsed before the identification of all concerned and until all together began to partake of that feast. For some time the question was an open one, as to whether the Jonadabs or persons of good will should participate in the house-to-house witness work or not, but in due time the proper relation was seen and that it is the privilege of all these to have a part in the work. Then the time arrived when the Lord revealed to all who love and serve him that the ‘ ‘ feast of tabernacles” foretold the feasting together of the anointed remnant and the people of good will who form the great multitude, and this was first made known by the Lord to his people in the early part of 1936 although the preparation for the feast progressed before that time.
31 At the dining Joseph caused Benjamin to be served with a portion five times as large as that served to the half brothers; but that apparent partiality stirred no strife or envy amongst the half brothers, but all of them ate and drank together and were merry. This shows that the Benjamin class, who are pictured also by Ruth and Esther, are spiritual and that the half brothers of Joseph are earthly and that the food provided by the Lord ean be partaken of and appreciated by the spiritual class to a far greater degree than by those who are not of the spiritual class, and that this is done without any grudge or envy against the spiritual class being manifested by the earthly class. Those of good will rejoice in the food from the Lord’s table that they can be grateful, and they give the Lord thanks therefor. The feasting together upon the food provided by Joseph was a happy occasion, but a great test upon the ten half brothers was about due to appear.
THE CUP
82 At the command of Joseph the saeks of the brothers were filled with food, and although they had paid over the money for that food, all of their money was put back in their respective sacks. The paying over of money showed their willingness to deal justly. Likewise a contribution of money for the spiritual food which is made by the Jonadabs shows a willingness to give something in return for what those of good will
74
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
receive at the Lord’s hands. All the money is the Lord’s, and, as it is written, “God loveth a cheerful giver.” (2 Cor. 9:7) In the sack of Benjamin Joseph caused to be secreted his silver cup, and this, when found, would be circumstantial evidence tending to show that Benjamin was a thief deserving to be imprisoned and held as a slave in Egypt, even as had been done to Joseph twenty-two years before that. This cup brought upon the brothers of Joseph a real test and demonstrated whether or not they had an evil desire to be rid of Benjamin as they had had concerning Joseph. Their sacks had been filled with food, and the younger brother Benjamin was with them, and they were on their way home to Canaan, and that made them happy. Shortly after they had departed Joseph commanded his steward to follow them and to overtake them and charge them with stealing the governor’s silver cup. All of them vigorously denied the charge and volunteered that if the cup were found in the possession of any one of them, the one who had stolen the cup should die and that the others should become slaves in Egypt. They first made this proposition to the steward. (Gen. 44:1-10) Immediately their sacks were opened and searched and the cup was found in Benjamin’s sack,-and all of them returned to the city and were brought to Joseph’s house. (Gen. 44:10-15) Judah had been the one who proposed the selling of Joseph to the merchantmen and making him a slave in Egypt. He had also volunteered to become surety to his father for the return of Benjamin. Judah acted as spokesman for the ten: “And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are my lord’s servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found.” (Gen. 44:16) The circumstantial evidence pointed conclusively to their “guilt”, yet in fact they were not guilty. Judah confessed the iniquity and offered that all the ten, and Benjamin also, should become slaves. Joseph did not exactly agree to this, but named another condition on which they might live: ‘ ‘ And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father. ’ ’—Gen. 44:17.
"The judicial determination of the great judge was that Benjamin should remain in Egypt as a slave. This was a tremendous test upon the half brothers. If they held enmity against Benjamin, they could easily consent to the decree and themselves depart in peace and return to Canaan. Their course of action shows they did not have enmity toward Benjamin and that they regarded the feelings of their father. Judah then asked for permission to speak, and here doubtless he acted as spokesman for all. He recounted the facts before Joseph. He told that a son had been taken away from their father and was supposed to be dead, and that the father had bestowed his love upon the young
er son Benjamin and that if Benjamin did not return his father would die of grief. He made an eloquent and touching plea that Benjamin should be returned and that he, Judah, might become a slave in Egypt in the place and stead of Benjamin. The fervor with which Judah presented the case before Joseph proved that those ten men were of good will towards Jacob and also towards Benjamin, and, not yet recognizing that they stood before Joseph, doubtless supposing he was dead, they had great sorrow for the wrong that they had done him. This great test upon them disclosed a complete change of heart, and while, no doubt, they inwardly suffered great remorse because of their treatment of Joseph years before, they were willing to make any possible amends. In this test they bravely met it and demonstrated their good will. (Gen. 44:14-34) And what did this test in the prophetic drama foretell? It plainly identified and foretold a class of persons who at one time were antagonistic to the consecrated spiritual children of God, the brethren of Christ Jesus; but who upon becoming acquainted with the conditions of their own situation showed a deep contrition of heart and a sincere desire to do good toward all who love the Lord. Looking now to the facts: The persecution came upon the brethren of Christ, particularly in 1918, and this persecution was at the instance and instigation of the religionists. That stirred the hearts of many to enmity against the Lord’s people, that is, those of the original faithful remnant. But later on, when these came to more clearly understand their own situation and the purpose of God toward them, they had a change of heart and showed themselves in a proper heart condition to be gathered by the Lord as his “other sheep” into the fold of Jehovah. Thus the Lord shows that all of the “other sheep” class must be of good will toward Jehovah, pictured by Jacob, toward Christ Jesus, pictured by Joseph, and toward the remnant, pictured by Joseph and Benjamin, before they can be gathered into the Lord’s organization.
34 Benjamin did not share Joseph’s imprisonment down in Egypt. Likewise the Benjamin class, pictured also by Ruth and Esther, were not included in the great trouble that came upon God’s people during the World War, because these were brought to the Lord after 1922. This latter class, pictured by Benjamin, Ruth and Esther, have done a great amount of witness work in recent years and have suffered much persecution; and this has been a searching test to the people of good will towards Jehovah’s witnesses, that is, those who arc of the original remnant and those who were brought in after 1922. Some who are now of good will participated in that persecution. Those of good will have observed these witnesses in recent years standing before the courts, charged with crime, when their only offense has been and is that of preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God. They have seen Jehovah’s witnesses cruelly beaten and held in filthy
March 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
75
prisons, and this was and is a test to the Jonadabs as to whether or not they would be associated with the ones charged with crime. But those of good will, who really love God, have shown their good will toward him and toward Christ, and toward his faithful members by ministering unto those ill-treated ones and have thereby brought themselves into contempt and disgrace in the eyes of worldly men, and thus showed their willingness to be associated with Jehovah’s witnesses. The regular house-to-house witness work began in 1927 in a more intensified form, and has been carried forward persistently and continuously since that time. Shortly thereafter Jehovah’s witnesses began to be arrested and haled before the courts as lawbreakers. Such arrests and imprisonment of Jehovah’s witnesses has been vigorously carried on in Germany, in Quebec and in many of the states, and particularly in the state of New Jersey. Thousands of faithful men and women have languished in filthy prisons, and many are still in prison because of their faithfulness to God and to his kingdom interests. For ten years this cruel persecution has gone on, and during all that time persons of good will toward God and his people have come to the front and have taken their stand on the side of the Lord and declared themselves for him and his kingdom.
83	Why have Jehovah’s witnesses been charged with being lawbreakers, yet wholly innocent? Like the silver cup found in Benjamin’s sack, and put there at the direction of Joseph in order that a test might be placed upon, his brethren, so the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses as lawbreakers has been permitted to come upon them as a test upon the witnesses and upon all those of good will, otherwise known as “Jonadabs”, and also to demonstrate who are the “goats” and who are the “sheep” class. It is the cup which Jehovah has poured for his witnesses, that they might be charged with crime and appear as lawbreakers and dangerous to the ruling powers of the world, that this test might be put upon men; and this furnishes the opportunity to prove their integrity toward him. These experiences have served as a real test to the Jonadabs, and they have shown their willingness to be the companions of Jehovah’s witnesses, who have been branded as criminals. (Heb. 10: 33) Judah, the half brother picturing the Jonadabs or “other sheep”, boldly and willingly came to the front and offered to suffer in the place and stead of Benjamin. So likewise many of those persons of good will have offered themselves willingly to take the place of Jehovah’s witnesses and go to prison in their place and stead and thus suffer punishment. This is further proof that the ten half brothers pictured the “other sheep” of the Lord.
M When he sent his sons the second time to Egypt, Jacob held Judah answerable for the safekeeping and safe return of Benjamin. So in like manner Jehovah holds those who are of the “other sheep”, the earthly class, answerable to him for their treatment of the
spiritual brethren of Christ Jesus, whom Benjamin pictured in the drama. The parable of the “sheep” and the “gcats” fully supports this conclusion. This proves that those who are of good will and known as the “other sheep’” are in fact of the “sheep” class and not moved by selfishness, whereas those of the “goat” class are moved entirely by malice, hatred, selfishness and ill will. The parable discloses that the “sheep” class minister unto the suffering ones willingly, not knowing at the time that they do so as unto Christ Jesus himself. Those persons of good will have given Jehovah’s witnesses food and drink, have visited them in prison, and ministered unto them, been kind to them at their homes, and given them food and shelter, all because they looked upon such witnesses as honest and faithful' servants of God. Their action shows a kind heart, and all this they have done and continue to do unselfishly. It is only recently that even the faithful anointed ones have learned from the Lord that these persons of good will are the ones disclosed by the Lord as his “other sheep”, whose good deeds toward the faithful anointed ones in Christ Jesus he receives as done unto himself. There is therefore a grave responsibility laid upon the Jonadabs to show their willingness to be obedient to the rules of the Lord.
37	And what is the result thus far observed ? Several years have passed since the cruel persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses began, but which is still going forward, during which time “this gospel of the kingdom” has been preached by the faithful in many countries and made known to the people in many languages. That message of God has stirred the righteous of heart, who are honest and sincere and who desire to know God’s provisions for themselves, and has led these honest ones to the Lord. As the severity of the persecution has increased upon God’s anointed witnesses, those people of good will, the “other sheep”, have taken their stand and shown their willingness to be companions with the ones who are suffering for the sake of the Lord’s name. Those persons of good will have exhibited their faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus by thus doing, and they rejoice to be identified with others who love God and Christ Jesus and who serve him amidst great opposition. These people of good will have come forward out of every nation and of all tribes, and peoples and tongues, and are still coming; and they have declared themselves, and still declare themselves, as on the side of God and Christ Jesus. Note now the words of the prophet concerning such, and the facts well known, which show fulfillment of the prophecy, to wit: “Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim [distant oriental 'regions].”—Isa. 49:12.
38	The message has, according to the promise, spread to the oriental countries of the world, and a goodly number are manifesting their devotion to the Lord.
76
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Now it is recognized that these sincere persons of good will, otherwise called “Jonadabs”, are the ones who are the “other sheep” of the Lord and who will form the great multitude, and who, proving their faithfulness, shall dwell on the earth forever. The faithful remnant, who are Jehovah’s witnesses, are rejoicing in their suffering that they are counted worthy to be servants of Jehovah God and that they are counted as the heavenly class. Together with them the “other sheep”, the earthly class, also rejoice. Foreseeing this day, Jehovah caused his prophet to say in this connection : ‘ ‘ Sing, 0 heavens; and be joyful, 0 earth; and break forth into singing, 0 mountains; for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.” (Isa. 49:13) The heavenly class and the earthly class are rejoicing together.
8*It is'that class who today declare themselves for God and his kingdom that suffer affliction at the hand of Satan and his agents. But Jehovah loves them and shows his mercy toward them. While the enemy Satan brings upon the nations of earth woe after woe, God comforts his people with the knowledge of the fact that he has them in mind, and that those who joyfully endure affliction for righteousness’ sake and for his name’s sake shall receive his everlasting favor. Therefore the earthly class is today disclosed as standing before the throne of God and before the Greater-than-Joseph and joyfully serving the Most High. Disregarding the taunts and jeers of men, refusing to bow down before men or man-made institutions, and hailing Christ Jesus as the world’s true Governor, who will minister and does minister salvation to all who truly love and serve Jehovah God, these continue to render joyful service.
40 For centuries the Devil and his earthly religious agents have kept the people in gross darkness. Now the day has come when Jehovah, through his beloved Son, is removing the darkness and permitting the light to shine into the faces of those who seek righteousness and meekness. As Judah stood before the governor of Egypt and pleaded :n behalf of his younger brother, so now those of good will toward God lift up their voices and their hearts to the Lord in behalf of those who appear to be in jeopardy and are held in custody •because they unselfishly and faithfully serve the Lord. The eyes of the people of good will, by God’s grace, shall be further opened and they shall have an enlarged vision of the gracious provision Jehovah God has made for those that love and serve him, and this is indicated as the drama progresses.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
fl 1. How has the way to life been provided? Who may find it! Account for the prison condition and sadness of mind and heart of the sincere ones in the religious organizations called “churches”. What is the provision now made available for these?
1 2. Apply the prophetic fact that when the famine was upon
Egypt, and upon all the land round about, Joseph sold food to those who came to seek it.
fl 3. Who, in fulfillment of the prophecy, says, “Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do”? How is this done? How is this command obeyed by those to whom it prophetically applies? How important is such obedience?
4.	Compare Genesis 42: 2, and its application, with the prophetic command given by Pharaoh to the Egyptians as recorded in Genesis 41: 55.
fl 5. What was foreshown in Jacob’s sending the ten sons into Egypt but, for the reason given, keeping Benjamin with him?
fl 6,7. Whom did Benjamin represent, and how? Explain Jacob’s precaution concerning Benjamin. Apply this part of the drama, and the test which it furnished regarding the ten half brothers.
fl 8. (a) “The famine was in the land of Canaan,” (b) and Jacob, in Canaan, (c) saw that there was corn in Egypt, (d) and sent Ins sons there, where (e) the governor of Egypt had provided food for the people. Show that each of these points of divine record was prophetic.
fl 9-11. What was foreshown (a) in Joseph’s position, by Pharaoh’s appointment, as stated in Genesis 42: 6? (b) In what is there said concerning Joseph’s brethren? (c) In the fact that it was after the second visit to Egypt that these learned of the provision Joseph had made for them? Relate how the progressive revelation of truth led toward the identification of the “great multitude”.
fl 12-15. What test did Joseph then put upon the ten half brothers? For what purpose? Point out the fulfillment of this part of the prophetic picture.
fl 16,17. Joseph then subjected his brethren to what further test? For what purpose? Point out the fulfillment of this part of the picture.
fl 18,19. Apply the prophetic procedure recorded at verses 25, 26, together with their having given money for the food.
V 20-22. How was Jacob impressed with the report given to him by his sons on their return to Canaan? How did this affect the nine half brothers? What was pictured therein? What is seen to have been foreshown in the offer to Jacob of surety for Benjamin?
fl 23-25. Relate Jacob’s answer to his sons’ plea involving Benjamin. Point out the wisdom there manifest. How does this part of the picture apply?
fl 26,27. How do tests put upon creatures serve the purpose for which the tests are provided? Apply the prophetic picture recorded in which the nine half brotheis, together with Benjamin, journeyed back to Egypt and presented themselves and Benjamin before the governor.
fl 28. The nine appeared before Joseph with Benjamin, and Joseph released Simeon. What appears to have been foretold thereby?
fl 29, 30. Relate what was done when Joseph saw that Benjamin was before him. How has this found fulfillment?
fl 31. What is seen in 43: 34? and how does this have fulfillment ?
fl 32-34. That the brothers had paid over the money for the food which they would leceive is of what prophetic significance? Relate what next took place. What was the plea made by Judah? How was it received by Joseph? Why was tins a great test upon the half brothers? How did it serve Joseph’s purpose? What did this test in the prophetic drama foretell? Point out the fulfillment thereof.
fl 35. How does Joseph’s directing that the silver cup be put in Benjamin’s sack, and the result thereof, find fulfillment as a prophecy?
fl 36-38. Show that Jacob’s holding Judah answerable for tho safekeeping and safe return of Benjamin was prophetic, and in harmony with what Jesus foretold in the parable of the “sheep” and the “goats”. What is the result thus far observed, as evidence of fulfillment of Isaiah 49: 12, here under consideration?
fl 39,40. In what facts do God’s people see fulfillment of Isaiah 49: 13? Compare this with what was foretold at Revelation 7: 9,10, and in Judah’s plea before the governor of Egypt in behalf of Benjamin.
TO THE FAITHFUL IN ALL THE EARTH
Dear Brethren :
HE testimony period beginning March 27 is designated “Faithful Warrior”. All persons now on the earth and who are devoted to Jehovah God are on the side of Christ Jesus, his “Faithful
Warrior”. Such persons are known as the remnant and the Jonadabs. The command of Jehovah to them is: “Arise ye . . . against her in battle.” Christ Jesus, the Faithful Warrior, is now engaged in making war on organized religion known as “Babylon”, the Devil’s organization, that deceives the people and fights against God. That is God’s “strange work”, because it exposes the hypocrisy and duplicity of those who have used the name of God and Christ to deceive the people and turn them away from God.
Every person now on the earth and who is on the side of Jehovah and his kingdom is privileged to feed at the Lord’s table and to learn of the unfolding of prophecy, which is meat in due season for him, and which is provided by the Lord for his comfort and hope. Every one of such is duty-bound to obey God’s commandments, and those who have opportunity to obey and who fail or refuse will suffer the consequences. (Acts 3:23) To obey the Lord’s commandments everyone who is on the side of the Lord must now fearlessly bear testimony against the enemy and to the name and praise of Jehovah and his kingdom. This letter is merely a reminder, dear brethren, of your privilege and obligation. If you would maintain your integrity toward Jehovah you will joyfully obey his commandments.
Special periods for giving testimony are fixed in order that all of God’s people throughout the earth
may, at the same time, send up a shout to the honor of his holy name. The “Faithful Warrior” testimony period should see every one of the faithful in the field presenting the message of the Lord to the people. This you will do by the use of the transcription machine, and the phonograph, and by presenting to the people the printed message. A special combination of books is made available for this testimony period. Let everyone place as many combinations as possible in the hands of the people. Jehovah’s “warning” must be given to those who claim to be Christians. (Ezekiel 33:7-9) The message of the kingdom and the name of Jehovah must be proclaimed to all nations as a witness. Do not concern yourself about who will and who will not die at Armageddon, but concern yourself about your own duty to deliver the message as God commands. The Lord will take care of the result.
That part of the war which is the “strange work” is now on. Will you perform your part therein in obedience to God’s commandment? That work will be completed in due time, and then follows “his strange act”. Be alert and be diligent in this day of conflict between wickedness and righteousness. May the Father of mercies and God of all comfort continue to strengthen and bless you.
With much love and best wishes,
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society,
AND IF ANY ONE
thinketh that he worshippeth God, and doth not restrain his tongue, hut his heart deceiveth him; his worship is vain. For the worship that is pure and holy before God the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and that one keep himself unspotted from the world.
—James 1: 2S, 27, Synac Version.
ENDORSEMENT
SOMEONE writes an anonymous letter to The Watchtower as follows: “The Golden Age recently published an article entitled ‘That Delusion Called “Love” ’, in which a warning is given to God’s consecrated people to shun love-making with the opposite sex because it is one of the things the Devil has fostered and leads away from undivided devotion to Jehovah and therefore brings reproach upon His name. Many brethren would like to know whether The Watchtower is of the same opinion and would give the same advice to those desiring to be wholly devoted to Jehovah, seeing that this article puts the matter in rather a new light.”
Had the writer been studying The Watchtower since 1925 to date he would not have found it necessary to
77
ask this question. This is not putting the matter in “a new light”. The Watchtower fully endorses the article in The Golden Age, above mentioned. The article gives the same advice, identically, to those who desire to serve Jehovah. There are two forces operating toward all persons: (1) Passion, which is induced by the influence of others upon the person that is influenced; (2) principle, or law, that is, God’s law or rule of action, prescribing the way that is right and proper. Those who are devoted to Jehovah are governed by his law and follow his commandments. The publications of the Society for the last ten or twelve years have emphasized the very thing that is set forth in the article in The Golden Age.
LETTERS
SOUND EQUIPMENT WONDERFULLY EFFECTIVE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We as a company of three pioneers wish to express our appreciation of the wonderful arrangements which the Lord has prepared through you for our benefit and convenience in conveying the message of the kingdom to the people of good will, and we also want to thank the great King Jesus Christ for sending another company of pioneers with their sound equipment to our city to assist us in awakening the people here to a realization of the wonderful provision which Jehovah has in store for them,
I will give an account of how much difference there is in the work with and without the sound equipment. A report of three pioneers for thirty days without sound car is 23 bound books, 571 booklets, 327J hours, 260 obtainers. Now a report of 9 pioneers for nine days with a sound car: 100 bound books, 1,222 booklets, 354i hours, 380 obtainers.
May the Lord bless you in the future as the opportunity affords as he continues to use you as in the past, is our prayer.
Yours for the advancement of the kingdom work,
G. W. Bailey
Mrs. G. W. Bailey
Custer Brewer.—Arkansas.
NOTHING SAVE THE WILL OF OUR GOD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Am happy to report the attendance at the Bethel study held by the family each Monday evening. During the month of December it was 13, 15, 15 and 15, respectively.
It is hard to put in words the keen interest and great joy we have found in the revelation given to us concerning Malachi’s prophecy, and, in particular, of the part of it found in the third and fourth chapters which we have been studyiiig during the past month.
How grateful we are to Jehovah that through his Sun of Righteousness (Vindication) the wounds of his people were bound up and they were brought forth from the Devil’s organization and gathered unto the Lord in his temple. It would appear that each day sees an increase in the joy which the faithful have because of their loving obedience to the commandments of their father and mother. Such is the “healing in his wings ’ ’.
The Lord continues to bless us with opportunities of serving him and of taking the battle clear up to the gate of the Devil’s organization, and we are so very happy to be thus on the Lord's side at all times. We are determined to know nothing save the will of our God and to do it come what may.
May the Lord bless and keep you, as you continue to minister and serve his people under the direction of Jehovah and Christ Jesus.
Your fellow servant in Zion,
F. C. Wainwright, Toronto.
CLEARER AND CLEARER
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Kindly I ask. you to take notice of our Bethel study report for December, 1936, at Helsinki office, as follows:
The two last parts of “Gathering the Multitude” have now been studied. The question of the great multitude has been seen as through a telescope, first dimly, and then clearer and clearer according to the adjustment of the lenses. The Gibeonites have now been one such lens which, m the right place, helps us to seo distinctly God’s purpose re the Jonadabs. Especially, we have enjoyed also the steadfast reverence toward Jehovah, which comes just as streams against us throughout the whole article, making all different points harmonious with God’s justice and love.
December 8 we had no study, for the world-wide testimony period. December 15 there were 15 persons at our meeting; 22d, 14; and 29th, 15.
Continually asking God’s rich blessings upon you in your work, which is inspiring also to us here, we are sending our warmest greetings.
Your little brother by His grace,
Eero Nironen, Secretary.
JEHOVAH’S DOINGS IN THE EARTH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The inspiring series of articles on Malachi, which have reached a glorious climax in the January 15 Tower, are most certainly a feast from the Great Teacher, Jehovah. He has given us not merely a positive message of warning to the lawless, but also a crystal-clear, heart-searching mirror in which we can view within ourselves any roots of iniquity, pride, creature worship, or indifference that have embedded themselves in our hearts. Truly the Lord is indeed good to have given us this motive-weighing guide for our own eternal safety and protection lest we ourselves should fail to discern selfishness or slothfulness in our own service as true Levites in the temple.
And then, too, our heartfelt thanks arise to Jehovah for the new booklet Protection—what an incentive to carry such a pointed, clear-cut, uncompromising message to those still in bondage to the religionists I Having a new booklet makes the entire world a virgin field, as it were, in which to sow and water the field, and then as it pleases Jehovah, to have the joyous privilege of observing his giving of the increase.
How grand it is to have a yearly calendar which is not only a masterpiece of art conveying the very spirit of kingdom warfare, but also one whose red letter days are as they should be: devoted to coming service events, and not to pagan holidays!
The record of Jehovah’s doings in the earth as recorded in the Year Book is indeed a kingdom vision to our eyes proving that God’s recorded purposes are being accomplished and none of them are failing in the earth. As one considers the spectacle before men and angels presented world-wide by the consistent and faithful service of the kingdom publishers, even under the fire of the enemy, during the past year, it gives one renewed strength and determination to press on in the battle with continued zeal and fervor.
How tremendously important the “great multitude” issue is! and how grand this part of the witness! Looking back a few years our old selfish desires to see the climax in 1925 now seem to be thoroughly lacking in kingdom vision. Especially now, when one can look back over the years of joyful service and kingdom opportunities the Lord has blessed us with since then and as one looks ahead to see the still more thrilling work before us. Naturally one still desires the great battle to start as soon as possible, and one can almost feel its nearness; yet while this witness commission is still our anointed privilege, what greater favor could one ask? My great regret is that I have had to drop the auxiliary work for a few months on account of having to provide things material at home. Still the many opportunities of service still left open before me, and the help and aid of Jehovah, are indeed a rich blessing and favor. What a joy and privilege to share in exposing religion and exalting true Christianity!
I certainly hope that you will find time to have a convention somewhere in northern California this year and that the Lord will favor us by your personal presence at it. Such a thrilling assembly of publishers, etc., would surely be used of Jehovah to give an even greater witness to the people of this area. What a real treat it would be!	‘
May the Great Teacher and Guide of his people continue to bless you as a loyal and faithful, fearless and progressive agency and servant to be mightily used to the vindication of his mighty name and purposes.
Rejoicing as ever to be your fellow servant,
H. R. Hewitt.
1 UNDERSTAND NOW’
Dear Sir:
I would like to know how much is your Golden Age magazine for one year. I have some of your books and have liked them very much. I had a Bible that I bought ten years ago. I read only the New Testament; I didn’t bother to read the Old Testament. I thought of reading it later on.
So the years went by until one day a daughter of mine fell sick; she was ten years old. Well, to make it short, she died of ruptured appendix, May 28, 1936. When she died, I wanted to die, too. She died in the hospital. I have five children left, but it seemed to me that I had lost them all. I did not know what to do. The only thing I wanted was to die, I was so unhappy.
One day my son, who is twelve years old, found a book on
78
March 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER-
79
the road. The name was Intolerance. He picked it up and brought it home. He knew that I would like to read it. When my son gave me the book he found on the road, I looked at the cover. I could not quite understand it; so I decided to read it.
It was the first time I had seen a book like that one. I found it very interesting, and I was surprised. I am a Catholic. I was taught that when we die we would never again live on the earth. I obtained some more books from you, and I understand the Bible now. I am no longer puzzled. I read the Bible every day, starting from the first page of the Old Testament. It is just as interesting as the New Testament.
Every time I read the Bible I feel happy and glad. I am wishing for the appearing of Jesus Christ, and to see and have my daughter again. I believe the kingdom of God is at hand, and hope for it with all my heart.
Yours truly,
Mrs. John Souza Velko, Massachusetts.
THE COVENANT WE HAVE MADE WITH JEHOVAH Dear Brethren:
Some time ago I wrote and told you of the action taken by the board of Martin school, Fairlight, Sask., of expelling my son from school. We had followed your advice and a meeting was called which afforded us a great opportunity to set the truth before them and to state our case, why we, Jehovah’s witnesses, take this course. Also stated that we cannot and will not compromise with any of Satan’s organization. They decided to
expel my son for ten days. So, at the end of ten days they called a meeting, in which the inspector of the school was present. Without giving too many details, the inspector suggested for us to come half way, that is to say, stand while the anthem is being sung but not to sing. To this we cited the case of Daniel praying before the window, also of the three Hebrew children, the covenant we have made with Jehovah making it impossible. The inspector, then turning to the board, told them that he knew of no law making anyone stand while the anthem is being sung, or any law to expel anyone from school. My son is going back to school.
It being I had no crop this year, 1 applied for relief from the municipality, Maryfield, which was granted. Shortly after the school affair mentioned above I got word from the secretary of the Maryfield municipality that my direct relief had been suspended. The reason given for this was, I was operating an automobile for other purposes than for the marketing of produce or for the delivery of supplies to and from farm, which is contrary to regulations. In other words, I was using the automobile witnessing to the name of Jehovah’s kingdom. I am working on a hay press now as a means of providing for my household. Dear brethren, don’t think I am lamenting, but rejoicing.
There are three reasons why 1 wrote you: First, to thank you for your advice on school matter; second, that the G.A. might publish the above; and, third, for sending in a report card.
His servant,
Wilbert Marshall.
(Continued from page 80)
NEW JERSEY
Asbury P. WCAP Su 12:45pm
Su 2:45pm Su 9:00pm
Newark WHBI Su 9:55am
Su 6:25pm Su 9:00pm
NEW MEXICO
Carlsbad KLAH Su 10:55am
Su 1:00pm Su 5:00pm
NEW YORK
Brooklyn WBBR Su 9
Su 4:30pm Su 7
Brooklyn WBBR Su 10
Su 6:30pm Mo 10
Tu 10:30am Tu 6
We 10:30am We 6
Th 10:30am Th 6
Fr 10:30am Fr 6
Buffalo WGR Su 10
Su 10
Buffalo WKBW Su 5
Freeport WGBB Su 10
Su 12:30pm Su 5
New York WBNX Su 5
White Pl. WFASSu 6
Tu 10:55am Sa 10
10am 30pm 15am 30am 30pm 30pm 30pm 30pm 00am 45pm 55pm 25am 55pm 30pm 00pm 55am
NORTH CAROLINA
Greensboro WBIG Su 10:30am
High P’t WMFR Su 10:45am
Raleigh WPTF Su 3:30pm
We 3:15pm Fr 3:15pm
Wilm’gton WMFDSulO:30am
Su 12:25pm Su 4:30pm
NORTH DAKOTA
Valley C’y KOVC Su 12:30pm
Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
OHIO
Akron WJW Su 11:30am
Su 3:25pm Su 6:00pm
Su 10:15pm
Cleveland WIIK Su 11:00pm
Tu 1:45pm Th 1:45 pm Fr li4Jpm
Columbus WBNS Su 7:45am Su 12:30pm	Mo 3:15pm
We 3:15pm	Fr 3:15pm
Greek Su 8:30am
Columbus WCOL Su 10:00am Tu 3:45pm Th 2:30pm Sa 1:45pm
Columbus WHKC Su 5:25pm Mo 1:55pm	Tu 1:55pm
We 1:55pm	Th 1:55pm
Fr 1:55pm
Portsm’th WPAYMo ll;00am We 11:00am Fr 11:00am
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 10:50am
Su 12:25pm Su 5:00pm
Enid KCRC Su 10:15am
Su 1:25pm Su 3:00pm
Muskogee KBIX Su 10:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 5:55pm
Oki ’a City KFXR Su 12:25am
Su 6:00pm Su 7:25pm
Ponca City WBBZ Su 9:55am
Su 12:55pm Su 4:55pm
Shawnee KGFF Su 1:30pm
Su 3:55pm Su 5:55pm
Tulsa KVOO Su 9:25am
Su 10:05pm Mo 4:55pm
OREGON
Astoria KASTTu 7:00am
Th 2:55pm Sall:55am
Portland KWJJ Su 10:45am
Su 4:15pm Su 9:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Allentown WSAN Mo 4:00pm
We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Easton WEST Su 10:25am
Su 11:55am Su 9:25pm
Greensb ’g WIIJB Su 10:15am Su 4:00pm
Harrisb’g WKBOSu 12:45pm Su 3:55pm Su 5:55pm
Philad ’a WTEL Su 12:30pm
Su l:25pin Tu 5:30pm
Pittsburgh KQV Su 10:45am
Pittsb’gh WWSWSu 10:45am
Su 5:00pm Su 9:00pm
Wilkes-B. WBRE Su 10:40am
Su 2:45pm Su 6:30pm
Williamsp. WRAK Su 6:15pm
Su 7:45pm Th 7:30pm
York WORK Su 12:25pm
Su 3:00pm Su 6:25pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Greenville WFBC Su 8:00am
Su 3:30pm Su 9:30pm
Spart’b’g WSPA Su 10:30am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:40pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Huron KGDY Su 9:25am
Su 12:30pm We 5:55pm
Pierre KGFX Su 10:00am
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Sioux Falls KSOO Su 9:I0am
Su 9:45am Su 4:30pm
Watert ’n KWTN Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 1:55pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPI Su 10:40am
Su 1:10pm Su 4:25pm
Jackson WTJS Su 10:30am
Su 12:15pm Su 2:25pm
Knoxville WNOX Su 10:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 9:45pm
Memphis WNBR Su 12:40pm
Su 3:25pm Su 4:55pm
TEXAS
Brady	KNEL Su 9:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 4:30pm
Dallas WRRSu 9:30am
Su 4:00 pm Su 9:00pm
El Paso KTSM Su 9:10am
Su 1:15pm Su 6:30pm
Ft. Worth KTAT Su 10:15am
Su 2:55pm Su 7:00pm
Lubbock KFYO Su 10:55am
Su 1:55pm Su 4:25pm
Pecos	KIUN Su 11:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 5:00pm
Pt.Arthur KPAC Su 9:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 4:30pm
San Angelo KGKL Su 9:30am Su 10:40am Su 1:30pm
San Antonio KABC Su 9:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 5:00pm
S.	Antonio KMAC Su 7:55am
Su 2:55pm Su 7:55pm
Weslaco KRGV Su 9:45am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:45pm
UTAH
Price	KEUB Su 11:45am
Su 1:25pm Su 3:15pm
Salt L. City KSLSu 8:30am
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Mo 8:30pm We 8:30pm Fr 8:30 pm
VIRGINIA
Harrisonb. WSVA Su 12:15pm Su 2:30pm Su 4:45pm
Petersb’g WPHRSu 8:55 am Su 10:25am	Mo 8:55am
We 8:55am	Fr 10:15am
Sa 8:55am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15 pm
Roanoke WDBJ Mo 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Everett KRKO Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 3:00pm
Seattle KIRO Su 10:25am
Su 5:25pm Su 9:00 pm
Spokane	KGA Su 9:15am
Tacoma	KMO Su 10:00am
Su 3:00pm Su 5:55pm
WEST VIRGINIA
Fairmont WMMNSul0:30am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:00pm
Huntington WSAZ Su 1:00pm
Su 2:00pm Su 3:00pm
Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
Su 12:30pm Su 6:10pm
WISCONSIN
Madison WIBA Su 9:30am
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time Is shown In each Instance.]
ARGENTINA
Bahia Blanca LU2 Su 11:30am Buenos Aires LR2 Su 10:50am Los Andes, San Juan
LV5 Su 10:30am
Santa Cl’a CMHI Su 11:15am (1st and 3d Sundays) Spanish Su 11:00am Spanish Th 11:00am (1st and 3d Thursdays)
AUSTRALASIA
FRANCE
Radio Lyon Sa 6:50pm
French We 7:25pm
French Sa 7:25pm
Merced KYOS Su 8:45am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:00pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:00am
Su 4; 00pm	Su	7:00pm
Tu 9:00am	Tu	2:00pm
Tu 11:00pm	We	8:15pm
Fr 9:30pm	Sa	10:00pm
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury Goulburn Grafton Gunnedah New Castle
2-AYTu 9:45pm 2-GN Su 7:30pm 2-GFTu 7:30pm
2-MO Su
7:00pm
2-HD Su 10:30am
Su 6:30pm Su 11:40pm
We 6:30pm
Sydney
2-UE Su 9:00nm
Su 4:25pm
W’gaW’ga 2-WG Su 7:45pm
Brisbane Cairns Ipswich
QUEENSLAND
4-BC Su
4-CA Su
4-IP Su
Su 7:25pm Su
Marybor ’h 4-MB We Townsville 4-TO Su
7:30am 7:00pm 7:05pm 7:55pm 9:45pm 9:15pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Su
5:45pm
PARAGUAY
Asuncion ZP1 Su 10:30am
SPAIN
Madrid EAQ We 7:15pm (Eastern Standard Time) Sa 7:15pm
Spanish Su 6:45pm
URUGUAY
Montevideo CX10 Su 12:15pm (Radio Internacional)
Ballarat Bendigo Hamilton Horsham
VICTORIA
3-BA Su 12:45pm
3-BO Su
3-HA Su 3-HS Su
Su 8:00pm Su
Melbourne
3-AK Su
7:00pm 6:45pm 7:00pm 8:45pm 2:15pm
Swan Hill
Su 10:00pm 3-SHSu 7:15pm
WEST Kalgoorlie Northam Perth
AUSTRALIA
6-KG Su
6-AM Su
6-ML Su
7:00pm 7:00pm 7:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm ’ham WAPI Su 10:15pm
Su 4:30pm We 5:15pm
Decatur WMFO Su 12:00 nn
Su 2:00pm Su 4:00 pm Dothan WAGF Su 9:30an.
Su 1:45pin	Su 3:00pm
Gadsden WJBY Su 1:15pm
Su 3:00pm Su 5:55pm
M ’tgomery WSFA Su 4:00pm
We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Selma WHBB Su 10:10am
Su 12:25pm Su 4:10pm
Tuscaloosa WJRD Su 10:30am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:30pm
BELGIUM
Wallonia-Bonne Esperance (201.7 m) We 7:00am
ALASKA
Anchorage KFQD Mo 9:10pm We 9:10pm Sa 9:10pm
Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
COLORADO
Alamosa KGIW Tu 4:15pm
Th 4:15pm Sa 4:15pm
Durango KIUP Su 1:00pm
Sterling KGEKSu 2:30pm
New Albany WGRC Su 9:25am Sul2:25pin Su 4:15pm
T. Haute WBOW Su 12:00 nn
Su 2:00pm Su 4:00pm
IOWA
Davenport WOC Su 10:00am Su 12:15pm We 4:15pm
CANADA
BRITISH COLUMBIA Kelowna CKO V Su 1:45 pm
ONTARIO
Cobalt CKMC Su 3:15pm
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:00am
Su 1:30pm Su 8:30pm
Polish Su 6:20pm (1st and 3d Sundays)
CHINA
Shanghai XHHE Su 5:00pm
CUBA
Camaguey CMJFSull:45am
Havana CMQ Su 5:45pm
Eastern Standard Time
Also shortwave COCQ 9740kc
Spanish Su 5:30pm
ARIZONA
Jerome KCRJ Su 9:20am
Su 12:05pm Su 4:05pm
Phoenix KOYSul0:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 5:30pm
Tucson KGAR Su 12:55pm
Su 5:45pm
Spanish Su 9:30am
ARKANSAS
Hot Sp ’gs KTHS Su 10:15am
Jonesboro KBTM Su 8:30am
Su 3:55pm Su 5:10pm
CALIFORNIA
Bakersf’ld KPMC Su 10:30am
Su 1:15pm Su 8:25pm
El Centro	KXO Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 6:45pm
Spanish Su 2:30pm
LosAngeles KMTR Su 2:55pm Mo 2:55pm	Tu	2:55pm
We 2:55pm	Th	2:55pm
Fr 2:55pm	Sa	2:55pm
CONNECTICUT
N. Britain WNBC Su 8:00am
Su 8:10am Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilmington WDEL Su 1:15pm
Su 5:45pm Su 9:30pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Washington WOL Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 6:30pm
FLORIDA
Jacksonv. WMBR Su 9:55am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:30pm
Lakeland WLAK Su 9:30am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:00pm Orlando WDBO Su 11:00am Pensacola WCOA Su 1:45pm
Su 5:00pm Su 5:45pm
Tallahassee WTAL Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 4:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens WTFI Su 9:25am
Su 11:00am Sa 7:00pm
Atlanta WATL Su 10:50am
Su 2:00pm Su 9:25pm
Augusta WRDW Su 11:00am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:30pm
Griffin WKEU Su 9:40am
Su 2:45pm Su 4:30pm
Rome WRGA Su 10:50am
Su 5:00pm Su 8:50pm
Waycross WAYX Su 9:10am
Su 10:45am Su 12:45pm
HAWAII
Hilo	KHBC Su 10:00am
IDAHO
Boise	KIDO Su 10:55am
Su 6:00pm We 4:00pm
Idaho Falls KID Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 4:00pm Nampa KFXD Su 10:00am
Su 11:40am Su 7:15pm Pocatello KSEI Su 10:15am
Su 3:10pm Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Ilarrisb’g WEBQ Su 4:45pm
Su 6:45pm Su 9:00pm
Rockford WROK Su 9:15am
Su 12:55pm Su 3:45pm Rock Is. WHBFSu 9:15am
Su 12:45pm Su 4:00pm
Tuscola WDZ Su 9:35am
Su 11:55am Su 1:50pm
INDIANA
Evansville WGBFSu 9:25am
Su 2:25pm Su 4:30pm
Hammond WWAESulO:15am
Su 3; 25pm	Su 10:00pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:55pm
Su 2:55pm Su 3:55pm
KENTUCKY
Louisville WGRC Su 9:25am
Su 12:25pm Su 4:15pm
Paducah WPAD Su 10:00am
Su 2:45pm Su 8:30pm
MAINE
Augusta WRDO Su 10:00am
Su 1:15pm Su 4:00pm
Bangor WLBZ
Presque I. WAGM Su 9:45am
Su 12:30pm Su 1:55pm
MARYLAND
Baltimore WCAO Su 10:30am
Su 12:45pm Su 10:45pm
Baltimore WCBM Su 9:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 6:15pm
Frederick WFMD Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 5:00pm
Hagerst 'n WJEJ Su 10:25am
Su 1:40pm Su 9:15pm
MASSACHUSETTS
Boston WCOP Su 9:30am
Su 10:45am Su 1:10pm
Boston WHDH Su 9:45am
Su 1:30pm Su 3:00pm
Boston	WMEX Su 10:30am
Su 4:55pm Su 7:45pm
MICHIGAN
Detroit WJR Su 10:00am
Kalamazoo WKZO Su S :20am
Su 9:00am Su 9:55am
Muskegon WKBZ Su 10:30am
Su 3:15pm Su 5:55pm
MINNESOTA
F’gus Falls KGDE Su 10:00am
Su 1:45pm Su 7:15pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’g WFOR Su 1:00pm
Su 3:30pm Su 5:30pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
St. Joseph KFEQ Su 10:00am
Su 1:35pm Su 3:40pm
NEBRASKA
Lincoln KFAB Su 9:30am
Scottsbluff KGKY Mo 5:30pm
Tu 5:30pm Fr 5:30pm
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Laconia WLNH Su 10:30am
Su 3:15pm Su 7:10pm
(Continued on page 79)
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
“FAITHFUL WARRIOR”
The “Faithful Warrior’’ Testimony Period, specifically referred to in Brother Rutherford’s letter ‘ ‘ to the faithful in all the earth’’, embraces the nine-day period March 27 to April 4 inclusive. This campaign will be world-wide, and will be marked by the offer of a six-booklet combination: four colored-cover booklets and the two latest booklets, to wit, Uncovered and Protection, where these are available, all on a contribution of 25c. Full details on the campaign you will find in current issues of the Informant. Let there be the usual promptness on the part of all kingdom publishers in making report of their time in the field and the results.
NEW PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph of new design, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and covered with brown cloth and having rounded corners. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces, which is 5J pounds lighter than the previous model manufactured by the Society. With the three phonograph discs which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound is just as strong as that of the ' previous model, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonograph is timed properly, at 78 r.p.m., and should be checked from time to time. This new model, including three discs, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittance should accompany orders. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges
systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and south Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African.......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon writteu application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason-for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postoffice. Act of March 3, 1879.
MEMORIAL
The Lord’s people everywhere are advised to carefully study chapters two and three of the book Jehovah immediately pieceding Memorial on the 26th of March. This explanation will help you to appreciate the meaning and purpose of the Memorial.
Brother Rutherford will be at San Francisco for the Memorial season and will address the friends of the Bay City country at that time.
ADVERTISING WATCH TOWER PROGRAMS
Witnessing parties and all individuals engaging in the field service should mention the radio station in their vicinity which carries the Watch Tower programs. This magnifies to the people called upon the message which Jehovah’s witnesses introduce, and often results in interest in the printed message on the part of the radio listener. This is one of the chief purposes of sending out the message over the radio, to encourage the people to read the literature. In this behalf the Society supplies radio folders, and all workers should make constant use of them in house-to-house calling, leaving one of them, if nothing else.
ANNOUNCING COMPANY MEETINGS
Many hearers of radio transcription lectures have the desire to meet with Jehovah’s witnesses and to study his Word with them. Hence wherever the kingdom message is radiocast, the time and place of meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses should be announced after the transcription. Tho time on the air being paid for, tho station manager ought to readily grant your request to make such announcement.
Vol. LVIII	March 15, 1937	No. 6
JEHOVAH’S PROVISIONS
PART 4
“For God did send me before you to preserve life.”—Gen. 45: 5.
JEHOVAH does not force any creature to accept his gracious provisions. Everyone who comes to God and receives his blessing must come voluntarily and willingly. It is therefore necessary for such person to receive some knowledge of Jehovah and his gracious provision for the administering of life. To this end Jehovah by his chief officer, Christ Jesus, sends forth his witnesses to make known to the people that Jehovah is God and that all provision for humankind is in his hand, and that he freely gives to those who hear and accept his favor upon the terms as he has stated and who continue to render themselves in obedience to his will. To all such persons of good will Jehovah now discloses the identity of the Greater-than-Joseph and makes known that life and all attending blessings are administered to the obedient by and through Christ Jesus; and for this reason it is written in the Scriptures: “The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” As the famine was still sore upon Egypt and the nations round about, so now the famine for a knowledge of the way to life is sore upon all that are under Satan’s dominion. As Joseph was made known to his brethren, so now the Greater-than-Joseph, Christ Jesus, the Savior of mankind, must be made known to those who desire righteousness and life.
2 The time had come for Joseph to make himself known to his brethren, and then he caused everyone to withdraw from his presence, except his brethren: “And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.” (Gen. 45:1) Does not this strongly suggest that only those of good will toward God, and who give a hearing ear to the message of the kingdom and recognize and accept Christ Jesus as the Savior of the world and turn to him, will be saved, and that all others will go down in the cataclysm of Armageddon? No doubt Joseph’s brethren exhibited great fear when they recognized the brother whom they had sold into Egypt, and Joseph, seeing this, said to. them: “Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you, to preserve life.”—Gen. 45:5.
2 In so doing Joseph showed no resentment; no priding himself by reason of the humiliation of his breth
ren ; no shame for calling them his brethren; no hatred or ill will because of what they had done to him; but, on the contrary, he showed a loving consideration for their welfare, and he acknowledged God’s goodness and all-powerful hand for good in all that had come to pass. He acknowledged that he had suffered at the hands of his misguided brethren, but it was for their good. At the time Joseph disclosed his identity the young brother, Benjamin, stood with him, and Joseph revealed himself to all of them at the same time; and thus it is shown that all who are on the Lord’s side, whether of the heavenly or of the earthly class, stand together.
* Let the facts be briefly here recounted showing fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama. The issue of The Watchtower of May 15, 1931, by the Lord’s gracious provision, gave to his people a knowledge of the great prophetic drama of Mordecai and Esther. That was the first disclosure to the faithful remnant that there was among them such a distinct group as pictured by Esther, and which now, by the prophecy under consideration, is disclosed also as being pictured by Benjamin. The class pictured by Mordecai and the Esther class were made known to each other at the time above mentioned. This compared with Joseph’s making himself known to Benjamin. Just a month thereafter, at the London (England) convention, in June 1931, the mystery of the ‘man clothed with linen, and bearing the writer’s inkhorn, and sent forth to mark the people in their foreheads’, was made known to God’s remnant. Then it was that the Lord identified the people who sigh and cry for the abominations done in Babylon, and disclosed that these make up an earthly class, the people of good will or the “other sheep”, which correspond to Joseph’s half brothers at the time Joseph disclosed his identity to them, and which class must be informed by the faithful feet members of Christ Jesus, as pictured by Joseph himself. (Ezekiel 9) Did this information bring joy to the hearts of God’s anointed? Those at the London convention, when hearing these prophecies expounded, shouted for joy and were thrilled with the prospect set before them, and, as one put it immediately follow
84
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ing that meeting: “We could,have gone out and torn things to pieces because of our joy. ’ ’ One month later, to wit, July 1931, at the Columbus (Ohio) convention the same prophetic picture of Ezekiel was published to that convention. In a pioneer camp pitched upon the grounds at that convention there was so much joy because of the Esther picture that the pioneers strung up old Haman in effigy for sheer joy. At that same convention there was publicly declared and broadcast throughout the land the message “The Hope of the World”, which truth from God’s Word was like an abundance of food for a famine-stricken world, particularly for the people of good will. On the same day the intimate relationship of the remnant (pictured by Ruth and Esther and, as we now see, also pictured by Benjamin) to the Greater-than-Joseph was revealed by the adoption of the “New Name” Resolution, and this took place amidst a shout of joy, mingled with tears of rejoicing. It was at that same convention that the prophetic picture of the ‘man with the writer’s inkhom’ was first made known in America, followed immediately by the announcement of the publication and release for distribution of the book Vindication. That convention did not adjourn at Columbus, but the feast of joy unto the Lord was continued by being extended for three days in nine different assemblies in different cities throughout the country. Shortly there followed the Watchtower giving publication to the drama of Ruth, confirming the Esther drama. In The Watchtower of October 15, 1932, was published the truth, fully supported by the Scriptures, concerning the cleansing of the temple. With these truths placed upon the table by the Lord for his people they appreciated even more fully than ever the statement of Joseph, which applies to the Greater-than-Joseph, that “God did send me [Christ Jesus, to the temple] before you [to shorten or cut short the days of tribulation and], to preserve life”. The remnant then appreciated as never before that the shortening of the tribulation was to give them the opportunity of declaring “this gospel of the kingdom” and to give to the “other sheep” the opportunity to be saved by fleeing to Christ. These great truths are disclosed to the faithful remnant, and the remnant transmit the same to those who are of the “other sheep”, and they all rejoice, because all see that ‘except those days were shortened, no flesh would be saved’. The day of Armageddon approaches, and only those who seek righteousness and meekness have any promise of being spared and saved through that tribulation.
’Joseph then disclosed the fact that this entire prophetic drama was directed by Jehovah that'people might in due time be enlightened concerning his provision made for them to obtain life everlasting. “So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt. Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him,
Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not.”— Gen. 45: 8, 9.
B In the fulfillment of this prophetic picture Jehovah sent Christ Jesus to the world to save the world. He sent him to the temple “to preserve life”; he has made Christ Jesus “the Everlasting Father” in behalf of all subjects of the kingdom, and has made him Lord and Head over his royal house and rightful Ruler of the world. His kingdom is the hope of the world, and in Christ Jesus’ name and in his kingdom shall the nations hope. There is no other hope, because such is God’s provision, and that provision is entirely adequate and complete. Since the Lord has revealed the above-mentioned truths to the remnant and those of the “other sheep” class, they all the more clearly discern the application of the prophetic words of Joseph, which are fulfilled upon the Greater Joseph, to wit: “All my glory in Egypt, and ... all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste, and bring down my father hither.” To all such now appears the glory of Christ Jesus in all the world. The language of the prophecy at this point shows clearly that the obligation is laid upon the remnant, and upon the “other sheep” who hear, to ‘make haste’ and tell all as opportunity presents, that they may learn of God’s gracious provision for the salvation of obedient men.—Verse 13.
7	Joseph then told his brethren that there were yet five years of famine and that they should haste and tell their father, and that all of them, his father and his household, should come to Egypt and be near Joseph, the governor, “lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.” (Gen. 45: 8-11) This shows that at the time of the identification of the Greatcr-than-Joseph, who is pictured by Joseph, there is still much more work to be done by the Lord Jesus through his earthly remnant in behalf of those who shall live on the earth.
8	It was in 1931 that there was disclosed to the faithful remnant a class to which food must be ministered. But at that time the “great multitude”, as such, was not discerned. Joseph’s sending for the entire household of Jacob, including the families of his own half brothers, showed that after 1931 when the earthly class was disclosed, to whom the remnant must now minister, they must continue to minister to that class, the famine-stficken ones. This is exactly what has come to pass and is now in progress. From and after 1931 the remnant have appreciated that they must go throughout the land of “Christendom” and give information to those who desire righteousness, but it is interesting here to note that it was not until May 31, 1935, at the Washington (D.C.) convention, that the “great multitude” as such was identified and made known to the anointed class. From that time onward a specially organized effort has been made, and continues with increased zeal, in behalf of the great multitude, to bring to their attention the truths of God’s
March 15, 1937
9T^e WATCHTOWER.
85
"Word; and this they do while the Lord himself gathers the great multitude into the fold, where they shall receive fullness of bread.
INVITATION
9	The news soon spread throughout the land of Egypt that “Joseph’s brethren are come”, and this good news reached Pharaoh, and it pleased him. Pharaoh now appears upon the stage, and in this particular part he represents Jehovah God: “And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye: lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan; and take your father, and your households, and come rnto me: and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall cat the fat of the land. Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come. Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.”—Gen. 45:17-20.
10	Likewise Jehovah God was pleased with the work of Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, who had disclosed at the temple his identity and his true relationship to the remnant and to the “other sheep”, and the Lord confirms the gracious invitation to the people of good will by saying to them: ‘Come, and drink of the water of life freely.’ (Rev. 22:17) Again it is noted that the beginning of the fulfillment of this prophecy preceded the time when the same is made known to the remnant. In The Watchtower of March 15, 1929, there was published the article under the title “Gracious Invitation”, showing that the “river of water of life” was then flowing and that this truth must be called to the attention of those seeking life; but at the time of the publication of that article the ‘ ‘ great multitude ’ ’ was not identified as an earthly class, but was understood at that time to be a secondary spiritual class that must receive attention. Then followed the publication of the books Light, and yet the identification of the great multitude was not disclosed. It appears that the Lord frequently uses his devoted people in the fulfillment of prophecy and then later makes known to them that they have been so doing.
11	Some critical ones often find fault with the Watch Tower publications and say that The Watchtower changes its view and contradicts itself. In answer to that let it be noted that the revelation of prophecy and its fulfillment is gradually made known to God’s people, and therefore The Watchtower must publish only what is understood and revealed. If we were to follow the traditions of men, then we would insist on sticking closely to what is first published; but since God’s people follow not the traditions of men, but are guided only by the Word of God, and as it pleases the Lord to make known these truths, unfolding his prophecies in his own time and way, even so it is the privilege of God’s faithful remnant to publish the same as they become known. The truths made known and published
do not belong to any man nor any company of men. The truth is the Lord’s and is progressive and shines with increased brilliancy unto the perfect day. This should be the strongest kind of proof that God’s people are led by him and that the Lord is feeding them by placing upon his table from time to time such spiritual food as he sees is to their good, and as will redound to his own glory.
12	Joseph, picturing Christ Jesus, then instructed Benjamin and his ten half brothers to extend the gracious invitation to others of the family relationship, and these were all invited to journey to Egypt. It is Christ Jesus, the Greatcr-than-Joscph, who causes the truth to be held forth and who is gathering unto the Lord’s fold the great multitude, and therefore Jesus says: “And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.” —John 10:16.
13	The Benjamin class, the remnant, share in this work, in this, that they bear the message of the gracious invitation to the “other sheep”, and when these latter ones hear the message it is also the privilege and duty of those “other sheep” to say, as Joseph said: “Come . . . , tarry not.” This is further proof that the “other sheep”, who make up the great multitude, must participate in the work of bearing testimony concerning the kingdom before others of the world, that the latter may flee to the place of safety, where they may be fed by the Greatcr-than-Joscph.—Rev. 7:16.
SOLEMN ADMONITION
14	Laden with the material good things provided for them at the hand of Joseph, and bearing his invitation to their kin to move down into Egypt, the brethren of the governor wore now ready for their journey. “So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.” (Gen. 45: 24) Likewise now the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater-than-Joscph, has loaded down those who love him with great blessings and he sends them forth with his gracious invitation to others to seek the way to life. As Joseph admonished his brethren to “see that ye fall not out by the way”, so likewise the Greater-than-Joscph now solemnly admonishes those of the remnant and their ‘half brothers’, those who are of the “other sheep”, or great multitude, to take heed to themselves and to be at peace with one another in behalf of the kingdom interests and to continue to love one another. This admonition is again stated by the psalmist: “For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.” (Ps. 122:8,9) All who have given their hearts to the Lord must now keep constantly in mind that the organization of Jehovah under Christ Jesus is involved and that everyone who loves God and his organization must and will strive to do his or her part
86
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
in serving and progressing in peace and working together to the best interests of the kingdom. Let all persons who profess to love and serve God and Christ Jesus see to it that they take heed to the admonition of the Lord, and that they dwell together in peace and present a solid front against the common enemy. There is no excuse for any strife of any kind in a company or assembly of the Lord’s people. All who will receive the full approval of the Lord must and will show their love for God and likewise their love for all who love and serve Jehovah and his kingdom. Where strife arises in a company assembled to serve God, let it be known now that someone there is in the wrong and what should be done is for everyone to search his own heart and mind carefully, see to it that he puts aside selfishness, and all see to it that their energy and effort is devoted to the interests of the kingdom.
15	Joseph sent a message to his father that he should come down to Egypt, and also sent “good things” for his father’s use. In this is pictured that Christ Jesus above all things acknowledges and considers his Father and ascribes to Jehovah the greatest honor and praise, and does all things to vindicate the living God, whose name alone is Jehovah and who is the Life-giver to all who shall ever live. “For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named.”—Eph. 3:14,15.
16	All who love God will do as the apostle here states: give all glory to Jehovah God as the Giver of every good and perfect gift. At all times Christ Jesus gives honor and glory to his Father, and those who are of his household will likewise give honor and praise to the Most High. Doing this there is never any occasion to exalt self or to laud other human creatures. Having the right view, we can well understand how Jesus said that those highly esteemed amongst men are an abomination unto Jehovah. No creature possesses anything by reason of his own merit, but all he has or ever hopes to have is by the grace of God.
17	In The Watchtower of December 15, 1928, the Lord brought to the attention of his people that which awakened the expectation of the remnant that they might see and meet on the earth the faithful prophets of old, who had foretold the coming of the King. Since then God’s people have gladly made known to the world that the Scriptures plainly teach that Jehovah will bring back to earth those faithful prophets of old and use them to the praise of the kingdom. The public press of Satan’s organization has ridiculed this declaration of truth in no uncertain terms, but at the same time they have been informed of this great fact, and many people no doubt believe that the faithful prophets will be back on earth ere long and will assume the positions of visible agents of God and his King in the world. They well know that the rulers of the present time are not only imperfect, but wicked, and the righteous-minded look forward with expecta
tion to the coming of men who, under the direction of the Lord, shall rule in righteousness.
18	Joseph’s action in sending for his father would therefore seem in 'a secondary way to point to the present-day preparation for the bringing forth and making known ‘that cloud of martyrs’ of old, who went before the Lord, bearing testimony to the name of Jehovah, and these martyrs or “witnesses” include Israel, that is, Jacob himself. (Heb. 12:1) Jacob had not expected to see his son Joseph again, having for a long while believed that he had been torn by wild beasts. Those ancient witnesses, specially mentioned by the apostle in Hebrews the eleventh chapter, have not expected to see the feet members of Christ, the Greater-than-Joseph, while in the flesh, but the evidence strongly points to the fact that they will sec at least some of them on the earth. The Lord in his loving-kindness makes provision, and we may confidently expect that those faithful men of old will be back on the earth before Armageddon ends and while some of the remnant are still on the earth, and that they will unite together in the praise and service of Jehovah God. There is at least one house on earth the title to which is held in trust for the use and benefit of those faithful men. Whether they occupy it or not, this house has been a means of advertising the kingdom throughout the earth and calling to the attention of the people that those faithful men will be back on the earth, and that the Lord will use them as governors or local rulers. It will not be at all difficult to recognize such men, because they will be upstanding and righteous and do righteousness in every way, and will be a joy to those who come in contact and serve with them. The public press has ridiculed and scoffed at Beth-Sarim, but those who love the Lord rejoice that this has been used as a means to publicly call attention to the faithful men whom God will bring forth.
SOJOURNERS IN EGYPT
18	The drama proceeded in Egypt, being transferred now entirely to that country. Jacob and all of his household journeyed down to Egypt, and in doing this they had the approval of Jehovah. (Gen. 46:1-7) That does not mean at all that they had ceased to look for a “city . . . whose builder and maker is God”. (Heb. 11:10,16) Jacob and those of his household merely became sojourners in another part of the world, being transferred from one Hamitic land, which is Canaan (son of Ham), to another Hamitic land, Egypt, or Mizraim (son of Ham). (Gen. 10:6) They were in both places merely sojourners. Jehovah brought all the descendants of Israel out of the land of Egypt as he had promised; concerning which it is written: “Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.” (Ex. 12:40) “And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that
March 15, 1937
Tfie WATCHTOWER.
87
is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years.”—Gen. 15:13.
30	This 430 years’ sojourning included 215 years of sojourning in Canaan before going down to Egypt. This scripture does not say that the Israelites sojourned in Egypt 430 years, but that they who “dwelt in Egypt” were sojourners for that length of time. The entire drama shows that the people whom God approves and blesses are sojourners and aliens to the world under Satan’s rule. The great multitude, by coming out of Satan’s organization and seeking refuge and nourishment at the hand of the Greater-than-Joseph, thereby publicly profess that they too are merely sojourners and strangers in the world, even as Joseph and Benjamin were, and all are aliens and strangers to and in the midst of Satan’s organization, yet they are still doing their assigned work while on the earth.
21	Jacob, together with all of his household, arrived in Egypt, there to meet Joseph, and this company brought the total number “which came out of his [Jacob’s] loins” to seventy persons. (Gen. 46:8-27) Jacob’s four wives were not included in this number, because they were dead; nor were two of his grandsons by Judah, who also were dead; nor did the seventy include the wives of any of the other sons of Jacob, manifestly because they did not come “out of the loins of Jacob”. The number did include Joseph’s two sons; therefore it is written: “All the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten.” Seventy is a multiple of seven and ten and, being a doubly complete number, would picture all those creatures on the side of Jehovah at the passing away of the evil world; that is, the seven pictures the remnant or spiritual class, and the ten pictures those of the great multitude. All derive life from the great Father, Jehovah, which life is ministered unto them by and through Christ Jesus.
22	By appointment Joseph met Jacob and his household in the land of Goshen and there identified himself to Jacob and to all of his household aside from the brethren whom he had previously seen and known in Egypt. (Gen. 46:28-31) This part of the prophetic drama is another picture of the people of good will not merely as being foreshadowed by Jonadab, which was revealed in 1932, but also as being those that make up the great multitude, and which were identified for the first time in 1935. (Rev. 7:9,10) This more extensive identification the Lord provided for his people at the Washington convention on Alay 31, 1935, which identification was later set forth in The Watchtower of August 1935. Those who had the privilege of attending the Washington convention will recall the great joy expressed by the multitude there assembled when the subject was expounded and when they saw that some of the great multitude was even amongst them then. Those of the audience were then called upon to identify themselves, and a great number of persons
rose in the convention declaring themselves to be of the “great multitude” company. The Lord had gathered them there at that convention, and he made glad their hearts; and the remnant and the “other sheep” rejoiced together. Those of the “other sheep” there showed great zeal for the Lord, and they continue to show that intense zeal that impels them to go among the people and bear to them the kingdom message showing the people who will hear God’s provision for giving them life everlasting.
23	The land of Goshen, which is on the eastern borderland of Egypt and nearest to the promised land of Palestine, was where Joseph met the household of Jacob, and there Joseph arranged for them to sojourn or dwell while in Egypt. (Gen. 46:31-34) That disposition of his kinsfolk, separating them from the other people of Egypt, clearly shows that Joseph viewed himself and his kinsmen as no integral part of Egypt and that all of them were merely there as sojourners. Likewise Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, expressly says of the members of his household that they are not of the world, ‘ ‘ even as I am not of the world.”—John 17:14.
24	The remnant on the earth have so arranged their affairs and so deported themselves as to show that they are not of this world. The same is true of the great multitude, who have so arranged their affairs and earthly circumstances, and who by their course of conduct declare themselves to be separate and distinct from this world over which Satan now exercises power and control. But the remnant and the great multitude have their eyes and hearts set on the kingdom of God and are merely sojourners in the midst of a wicked and perverse generation. They are migratory, that is to say, having here in this world no permanent abiding place, but they are waiting for the full establishment of the kingdom. The Israelites were a nomadic or migratory people, having no fixed home, and tended their herds and flocks wherever they sojourned.
25	Joseph then instructed the Israelites as to what they should say when asked concerning their occupation: “Ye shall say, Thy servants’ trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.” (Gen. 46:34) The Egyptians kept their herds and flocks also, both sheep and cattle (Gen. 47: 5, 6; Ex. 9: 3, 6,19, 25); but they were settled or fixed in Egypt and formed a part of it and participated in its affairs, and therefore they had no respect for any roving band of herdsmen. Not that sheep-raising itself was an “abomination”, but the fact that the Israelites roved about with their herds, as gypsies rove about; so they were an abomination in the eyes of the Egyptians. This shows that those on the side of Jehovah God and his kingdom organization are an abomination to the modern-day commercial and religious Egypt, because they have no fixed and settled place or part in
88
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
this world and refuse to have part in the political affairs of the world. /Mthough they are in the world, they are no part of it, being aliens and strangers and sojourners, traveling toward the kingdom of God and eagerly looking for the full operation thereof on the earth, where the will of God shall be done as in heaven.
20 Joseph took five men of the Israelites with him and presented them to Pharaoh: “And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation ? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also our fathers. They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.”—Gen. 47: 3, 4.
2T Pharaoh assigned the Israelites to the land of Goshen and asked Joseph that he select from amongst the Israelites “men of activity” and ability and make them “rulers over my cattle”. (Gen. 47:6) This strongly says that those whom Jehovah selects for his service should see to it that they are men of discernment, activity and ability, and that they should be the most efficient in what work is assigned to them, and should do it carefully and earnestly, as unto the Lord himself. This has been a truth hard for many to learn properly.
28 Jacob, being introduced to Pharaoh, pronounced a blessing upon the king. At this point of the drama Pharaoh pictured Jehovah, the great King of Eternity, in possession and control of all the storehouses of lifegiving and life-sustaining food for the famished people of the world who are under Satan’s domination but are seeking the place of refuge and rest. Jacob blessing Pharaoh pictures all the people on the side of Jehovah God, who give honor, blessing and praise to his name. Everyone who takes his stand on the side of God and proves his faithfulness blesses the name of the Most High. “0 bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard; which holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be moved.” (Ps. 66: 8, 9) “Bless the Lord, 0 my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Bless ye the Lord, all ye his host s; ye ministers of his that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord, all his works, in all places of his dominion: bless the Lotd, 0 my soul. ’ ’—Ps. 103: 2, 21,22.
20 Agreeable to the order of Pharaoh Joseph placed the household of Israel in the land of Goshen, ‘ ‘ in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded. And. Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father’s household, with bread, according to their families.” (Gen. 47:11,12) Likewise now the Greater-than-Joseph has given those on the side of the Lord the best of his spiritual food, and he nourishes both the remnant and the great multitude with the bread of life, while they continue to sojourn in modern Egypt. None have and enjoy these ‘best of things’ aside from those who are on the side
of Jehovah God. Now the Greater-than-Joseph scuds forth the remnant, and their companions, to distribute to the people who have ears to hear the message of hie from the Lord, as set forth in the Bible and described in the book Riches, together with the booklet Choosing, which message is particularly helpful to those who are now seeking the way to life. By placing this printed message in the hands of the people and by use of the sound equipment reproducing speech these witnesses are pointing the yet unidentified members of the great multitude to the way of approach to Jehovah and Christ Jesus, where they introduce them to the great King of Eternity. Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, gathers the great multitude and introduces them to the Almighty King of Eternity, and thus it is seen that the great multitude ‘stand before the throne’ and give praise and honor to Jehovah, and to Christ Jesus, and refuse to attribute salvation to any man or man-made thing. They joyfully sing: “Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. ’ ’—Rev. 7:10.
80 These prove themselves “men of activity” and ability, faithful and dependable in the service of the King, and thus before the throne they “serve him day and night in his temple”, meaning that they serve God and Christ Jesus faithfully and continuously. (Rev. 7:15) The facts now well known fully corroborate this conclusion, showing the fulfillment of the prophecy. Those of the great multitude who are active and dependable are at all times zealous for the Lord and his kingdom and rejoice that they may have some part in the vindication of Jehovah’s holy name.
81 Again a secondary view of the prophetic picture here seems- quite apparent. Joseph introducing those of the household of Jacob, who represented the ones who are on the side of the King Eternal, appears also to mean that the Greater-than-Joseph, Christ Jesus, as the agent and representative of Jehovah, will bring forth from the grave the faithful “fathers” of old, that cloud of faithful witnesses that preceded Jesus on earth, and all of whom died in faith and faithful; and that these will meet and be introduced to the remnant remaining alive on the earth, and that these will be assigned to a specific service as “princes in all the earth”, and that they will bless Jehovah; all of which will be done before the passing of the last spiritual members of the remnant into the invisible part of God’s kingdom.—Ps. 45:16; Isa. 32:1.
RESPONSIBILITY
32 The prophetic drama emphasizes the identification of the great multitude. It is the Lord who brings them to his right side and makes them all his “other sheep”. Great favors are likewise accompanied by corresponding responsibilities. It is a great favor to know Jehovah God and his King and to be permitted to find refuge in God’s organization. There is no other privilege today comparable with that, so far as the “other
March 15, 1937
STU WATCHTOWER-
89
sheep” are concerned. The subsequent dealings of Joseph with the Egyptians disclose the great responsibilities and requirements that are now laid upon those who are of the “other sheep” of the present time, that is, who will form the great multitude. They must be fully and wholly consecrated to the Lord and must render themselves in full obedience to his commandments and joyfully engage in his service. Those who are now of the “other sheep” of the Lord must, together with the remnant, joyfully take up the message of life, which God has provided, and bear that message before the people of the famine-stricken world, to the end that those who are now in the world and who so desire may learn the way of life and flee to the place of refuge. There are others that the Lord will yet gather into the great multitude before Armageddon.
EGYPTIANS
88 As the famine continued sore upon Egypt and the countries round about, so now the spiritual famine continues sore upon the world: “And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt, and all the land of Canaan, fainted by reason of the famine.” (Gen. 47:13) The famine had been upon Egypt for two years when Jacob and his household reached Egypt. Assuming that some of the Egyptians had given heed to Joseph’s interpretation of the dream of Pharaoh, and to his advice to conserve food, and that they had conserved food, such provided stock of grain would at the end of the two years doubtless be used up and the Egyptians would then have to apply to the government for food. This they were compelled to do in order to live. Likewise now those of the “other sheep”, who are in the world, will have to come to Jehovah’s visible organization, represented by the remnant of God’s people on earth, and learn the way to life by obtaining and feeding upon the food which the Lord has prepared and stored up for such. This they must do before Armageddon.
84 Mark now the striking contrast in the action of Joseph and in the action of the “Democratic New Deal schemers” of the present-day. These modern worldly-wise men, instead of conserving the food supply when there was plenty, curtailed the food supply by restricting crops that should have been planted and harvested and by ruthlessly destroying animals, and this they did in order to increase the price of food. The fallacy of their conduct is now being experienced by the American people. Joseph was not interested in pegging up higher and higher the price for food, but was interested in taking care of the people. When the famine increased upon the land Joseph did not raise the price of food and permit anyone to profiteer at the expense of the people. The modern “new dealers”, headed by one whom the Press has designated as “Franklin Deficit”, make no provision for food storage and food supplies for the people of America, but they all together participate in specu
lation and continuously juggle with the food supply and continue to raise the price thereof at the cost and to the distress of the people. While this comment is being written (in July, 1936), the dealers in the grain of the land, which dealers never expended one ounce of labor to produce such corn, are holding it back in the hope that the dry weather may force the prices higher and higher, that they may reap greater gain by their selfish course. Even though arrangements have been made to import corn from foreign countries that the people here might supply their present needs, this is being held back that the price may be made higher and that selfish persons may profit materially thereby. The American farmer in the last three years past has been induced to curtail his production, and now, when the food supply grows less, the “new dealers” cry out: “We are not responsible for the drought.” They are responsible, however, for destroying in times past food which is now needed. This has increased the burdens upon the American farmer and has also increased the burdens upon all persons who are compelled to earn their bread in the sweat of their brow. It seems strange that the masses of the people are so very listless and foolish as to refuse to hear or give heed to what the Word of God says and, on the contrary, continue to listen to the world-schemes brought forth by selfish men, which schemes can never bring them any relief. In this distress upon the people the commercial religionists harangue those who will listen to them and tell them that their food scarcity and the dust storms that devastate their lands, and the burning heat that destroys their crops, and the pests that participate in such destruction, all of these things, have come upon the people as a judgment from God because the people have been negligent in the support of the religious organizations. The charging of Jehovah God with responsibility for these calamities that have befallen the people is a malicious lie and defamation of his holy name. The Scriptures plainly declare that it is the Devil who brings these present-day woes upon the people, and he is doing so for the very purpose of defaming God’s name and turning the people away from him. (Rev. 12:12) This is further and strong proof that the clergy who resort to such schemes of haranguing the people and charging God with bringing the calamities upon them represent the Devil and do not represent God. Great is the privilege and the responsibility therefore laid upon those who have received the truth, to make known that life-giving and life-sustaining spiritual food to other hungry souls who desire to know of the way to life. The truth is the only thing that will bring consolation and help to the people.
85 The Egyptians had many cattle, money and lands, and they enjoyed personal freedom. Joseph did not set up a starvation dole system that would bring all to poverty, but he sold the life-sustaining coni to the Egyptians, first for their money, which money Joseph
90
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
brought into Pharaoh’s treasury. He did not permit private and greedy money-changers to profit by the distress of the people. When their money was gone, then he sold corn to the Egyptians for their cattle and herds, and then Joseph bought all of their lands and paid for them in corn or food; and then the people said to him: “Buy us and our land fpr bread”; and this Joseph did. (Gen. 47:14-20) Pharaoh the king thereby became the rightful owner of everything in Egypt, and the people became the “servants unto Pharaoh”; and this was according to the wish of the people, “that we may live and not die.” Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, and this does not mean that man can buy his life from God. It does mean that in order for the great multitude to survive Armageddon and to get life from God through Christ Jesus these must fully comply with God’s terms, which terms are that men shall fully, unreservedly and completely consecrate themselves to God and his faithful service, and acknowledge and serve his King, Christ Jesus. There is nothing that they may withhold. Nothing that they can give can compensate for the free gift of life and all its attending blessings, because all that men have, to begin with, belongs to the Lord. “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.” (Ps. 24:1) They must show their full willingness to become the servants of God and Christ Jesus,'and must serve day and night, that is, all the time. (Rev. 7:15) Christ Jesus as the great official Agent of the King of Eternity has bought the entire human race, and life will be given to those only who comply with the terms Jehovah has provided, and to such life is a free gift through Christ Jesus.
40 For their welfare the people were brought together in the cities: “And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.” (Gen. 47:21) In a similar way Christ Jesus now brings his “other sheep” together or under the organization of Jehovah, pictured by a city, and in those “cities” they find refuge, and nowhere else. This corresponds exactly with the cities of refuge which Jehovah provided for the people in the day of Moses. (DeUt. 19:1-6) The land of the priests was not sold: “Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them; wherefore they sold not their lands.”—Gen. 47: 22.
8T That was not an act of discrimination against the people and in favor of the clergy, as some would try to make it appear. Even before the famine the priests of Egypt received government support, and this provision continued unaltered during the period of the famine. The priests were under no necessity to sill their land. It was a previous arrangement that they should receive their food from the king. Those priests or princes of Egypt, together with Joseph, were servants of the king, and in the drama here appear to
picture the great ‘elect servant’ of which Christ Jesus is head, together with the earthly remnant who are “the feet of him”. (Isa. 52:7) These today are joint heirs with Christ Jesus and belong to ‘the meek which inherit the earth’ with Christ Jesus. (Matt. 5:5; Rom. 8:16,17) They are therefore in a different position from those of his “other sheep”, the great multitude, although all must and do receive life from Jehovah by Christ Jesus.
38 Joseph did not arrange for a dole to be set up and that the people receive a dole from the government and continue idle. (Gen. 47:23) On the contrary, the people must be diligent and work and not become a public charge in idleness. They were commanded and must sow the seed given to them and sow it upon the land and trust to God for the increase. It has always been and always will be that men must work. (2 Thess. 3:10) If a man would not work, neither should he eat. The idler is an abomination in the sight of God and is classed as a waster. (Prov. 19:15; 31:27; Ezck. 16:49) In behalf of the great multitude and their future life, the Lord provides that they must not be idle, but must serve him continuously. (Rev. 7:15) “Ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God.”—1 Cor. 6:19, 20.
39 A liberal arrangement was made for the people: “And it shall come to pass, in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh; and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.” (Gen. 47:24) Since the land was not then their own, that was a very generous arrangement for them. A like requirement is laid upon the great multitude, as prophetically shown at Zechariah 14:16-18. The requirement of the great multitude is just and reasonable, and “not grievous”. (1 John 5:3) Christ Jesus according to the will of God puts them all on an equal footing before Jehovah and requires all of them to render faithful service unto God, and that not beyond measure. This arrangement the people of Egypt appreciated, even as the great multitude will recognize and be glad with the arrangement which the Lord has made for them: “And they said, Thou hast saved our lives; let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh’s servants.” —Gen. 47: 25.
<0 By his action toward the people Joseph vindicated his new name given to him by Pharaoh, that is, “Zaphnath-Paaneah,” which means “Saviour of the World”. Likewise the great multitude wave their palm branches at the temple and thereby ascribe salvation unto God and unto the Greater-than-Joseph, and they delight to be the servants of God and Christ for ever. Man can find favor in the eyes of Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, only by serving Jehovah. All this must be done before Armageddon, and it is those who do thus joyfully serve that may receive protection at Armageddon.
March 15, 19.37
UHe WATCHTOWER.
91
41	The household of Jacob, including the half brothers of Joseph, did not come under the Egyptian arrangement, for the reason, they were not landowners or permanent residents there, but were merely guests or sojourners, and they therefore pictured the great multitude from a different viewpoint. Jehovah’s people, whether of the remnant or of the great multitude, are not to be tied down to the famine-stricken world of Satan, but are merely sojourners there, enjoying the care and protection of God’s gracious provision for them under Christ Jesus. (Heb. 11:16) The part played by the Egyptians, particularly, shows what is required of all who become of the great multitude, and their condition prior to Armageddon. The great multitude do not now find rest in Satan’s organization, which rules the earth. They are not to be contented with the present wicked rule. They must advocate God’s kingdom and be diligent in doing so, and by doing so they ‘lay up for themselves treasures in heaven’, and are not to think that treasures of earthly things now acquired and held will be preserved in Armageddon. It is quite probable that the enemy may strip them of everything earthly just before Armageddon. It is certain that nothing will survive Armageddon except service privileges toward Jehovah, and these service privileges, together with the Word of God, are “treasures in heaven”. When Armageddon is past, then those of the great multitude are in line to receive the fullness of life, and not before. Should Jacob be brought back from the grave before Armageddon, he will be of the same attitude as when he asked Joseph not to bury him in Egypt, but to bury him in God’s promised land, that is, Jehovah’s organization. (Gen. 47:29-31) Joseph will be of like mind as when he requested that his bones be carried up out of Egypt in God’s appointed time. (Gen. 50:24-26) Although those men shall live on the earth for ever, they will have no part with Satan’s organization. All of the great multitude likewise look forward to the government of Jehovah under the righteous Ruler, Christ Jesus.
ENDLESS BLESSINGS
42	The famine had ended, and now God inspired Jacob to pronounce blessings upon all the heads of the twelve tribes. (Gen. 48:1-22; 49:1-28) The great prophetic drama was now being concluded and Jacob died. After his death Joseph’s offending half brothers appeared before Joseph and fell down before him and begged his forgiveness, and said: “Behold, we be thy servants. And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God ? But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive. Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.” (Gen. 50:18-21) This concluding part of the great prophetic drama appears to say that after the great famine upon the world has ended and
the great destruction of Armageddon has passed, then Jehovah, the great King of Eternity and Mighty Patriarch, will, by and through Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Joseph, further bless the great multitude and will continue to for ever nourish them and fill them with joy. Those millions now living who will survive Armageddon and never die will begin then to receive the material benefits of God’s kingdom under Christ, and then Jehovah by Christ Jesus will bring forth from the grave the other generations of human creatures who have died in ignorance of Jehovah God’s gracious provision for them. Returning from the dead these will be offered full opportunity to receive endless blessings through the Greater Joseph, Christ Jesus, upon whose shoulder the righteous government shall rest. Joseph lived for years after the famine, and this suggests that some of the remnant, who are the feet of the Greater Joseph, will survive Armageddon and further serve Jehovah in behalf of others on earth until God’s due time to fully receive them into the promised land of everlasting life and boundless joy.
43	This great prophetic drama, arranged and directed by Jehovah God, and played upon the stage long centuries ago, is a wonderful and beautiful picture of Jehovah’s gracious provision for the salvation of the obedient creatures of the human race who maintain their integrity toward him under the test, and all such shall result to the everlasting vindication of his holy name. “Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart. ’ ’—Ps. 119:1, 2.
44	Those who gladly comply with the rules of Jehovah and render themselves in full obedience to him and his great Governor will rejoice for ever. They will live, and not die. The wicked having perished for ever, then all creation will continue to praise Jehovah’s holy name. “Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.” (Ps. 150: 6) As Jehovah now discloses to the people his gracious provision, let every one who loves righteousness be quick and diligent to worship God in spirit and in truth, and to “ascribe unto Jehovah the glory due unto his name”, and to “worship Jehovah in holy array”.—Ps. 29: 2, A.R.F.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
If 1. IIow are Jehovah’s gtaeious provisions made available for humankind! Who will benefit thereby! What part of this prophetic drama is now in course of fulfillment, and how!
If 2-4. What strong and important suggestion is seen in Genesis 45: 1! What important facts are disclosed in the record at verse 5! Briefly recount the facts showing fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama.
T 5, G. Point out fulfillment of the prophetic picture recor led at verses 8,9, and the application of the prophetic words of Joseph fulfilled upon the Greater Joseph.
If 7, 8. That there were yet five years of famine, and an urgent invitation was sent to the entire household of Jacob to come to Egypt, for the reason stated, was of what prophetic significance!
WATCHTOWER.
Beooklyn, N.'X.
92
f 9,10; How, in the fulfillment of the part of the picture recorded at verses 16-20, did “Pharaoh” show his pleasure and extend to all of ‘the household of Jacob’ the invitation to avail themselves of the provision made for them in “Egypt”!
t 11. Account for a different understanding of certain prophetic scriptures now presented in The Watchtower, as proving that the Lord is leading and feeding his people.
t 12,13. What was foreshown in Joseph’s instructing Benjamin and his ten half brothers to extend the gracious invitation to others of the family relationship!
1 14. Point out how fitting, then and now, was the admonition given by Joseph to his brethren as recorded in verse 24.
t 15,16. Show that Joseph’s special consideration for his father was particularly appropriate as a part of the prophetic picture.
T 17,18. What further seems to have been foreshown in Joseph’s sending for his father and providing for him to come and have part in the blessings made available at the hands of Joseph! How will the fact of the presence of those faithful men of old be manifest!
IT 19, 20. Explain, in this connection, the statement recorded at Exodus 12: 40. That those who sojourned ineluded all the “children of Israel” is of what significance!
1 21. Explain and apply the prophetic statement that “all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten”.
1 22. Relate how, in the fulfillment of the prophetic occasion, ‘Joseph identified himself to Jacob and to all of his household aside from those he had seen and known in Egypt.’
T 23,24. How does Joseph’s meeting the household of Jacob in the land of Goshen, and the arrangement there made for them, find fulfillment!
T 25-27. What was the purpose in Joseph’s instructing his brethren as recorded at Genesis 46: 34! How did the answer to Pharaoh by the brethren of Joseph (47: 3,4) serve its purpose!
T 28-30. Show how appropriate as a prophecy was (a) Jacob’s blessing Pharaoh, (b) The provision made for “the household of Israel ’ ’ as stated in verses' 11,12.
T 31. What secondary view of the prophetic picture is here apparent!
H 32. What is the great privilege, and the attending responsibility, now before the “other sheep” class!
T 33,34. Describe the situation foreshown in the condition recorded at verse 13. Contrast the method employed by Joseph to provide for the needs of the people with that of the so-called “New Deal” schemers of the present day. Account for the listlessness and credulity of the masses of the people, and for their charging Jehovah with responsibility for present conditions. What does this mean for those who have received the truth!
If 35. Instead of setting up a starvation dole system, as at present, how did Joseph arrange for the people to have food! What was the outcome of that arrangement! How is that part of the picture fulfilled!
If 36, 37. What was foreshown in the arrangement as mentioned in verses 21, 22!
7 38-40. Show (a) that Joseph’s arrangement for the people was in accord with divine wisdom, in contrast with methods employed by governments at the present time, (b) That the reasonable requirements laid upon the people by Joseph, and their conclusion as recorded at verse 25, were fittingly prophetic.
If 41. What of prophetic significance is seen in the fact tnat the household of Jacob did not come under the Egyptian arrangement! How does the part played by the Egyptians serve as a prophecy!
If 42. After the famine had ended, what then took place, (a) as to Jacob and his sons! (b) Between Joseph and his half brothers! What seems to have been foreshown thereby!
If 43. What, then, did thia great prophetic drama picture!
If 44. How, and to what end, will the obedient now respond to Jehovah’s kindness in disclosing to his people the gracious provision made by him for them!
DOOM
JEHOVAH’S judgment written against “Christendom” includes all who have claimed to be his people but who have been and are hypocrites: “A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee; and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.” (Ezek. 5:12) God declares in this prophecy three methods or judgment acts to be executed against “Christendom”.
The “third part” in the foregoing text does not mean an actual one-third of the inhabitants, but has reference to the victims of one of the three judgment acts of God executed upon, or of one of his three methods of executing judgment upon, the nations of “Christendom”. These judgments of Jehovah, as written, will be executed because of the traducing of his name and for the vindication thereof. The great defamer of God’s name is Satan the Devil, and “Christendom” not only has fallen away to the Devil, but has become his chief instrument among the nations of the earth to practice fraud and hypocrisy and to bring reproach upon Jehovah’s name. The visible manifestation of Jehovah’s judgments and the vindication of his name will be a thorough instruction to all who re
main on the earth, and all shall know that Jehovah is the Almighty God. The name of Jehovah God, and its vindication, is of paramount importance. “So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction .and an astonishment unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgments in thee, in anger and in fury, and in furious rebukes. I the Lord have spoken it.”—Ezek. 5:15.
During the execution of these judgments God’s “faithful servant” class will abide in “the secret place of the Most High” and be delivered from “the arrow that flieth by day”, and from “the pestilence that walketh in darkness”. (Ps. 91:5-13) The “faithful servant” will be singing praises to the name of Jehovah, and he will hold them in the hollow of his hand. While these faithful ones are kept under the protection of Jehovah and are proclaiming his praises, he will execute his judgment upon “Christendom”. “When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine, which shall be for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy you; and I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of bread; so will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall bereave thee; and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the Lord have spoken it.” (Ezek.
Mabch 15, 1937
fffie WATCHTOWER.
93
5:16,17) The complete execution of his judgment will be in the battle at Armageddon, in which Satan and his entire organization shall completely fall.
Rulers of “Christendom” have lived wantonly and for their own pleasure. The clergy element have boldly proclaimed that the rulers of “Christendom” rule by divine right and therefore are God’s favored ones on the earth. These call themselves by the name of the Lord and have used his name to cover up their selfish and wanton schemes. This applies to every element of the government power of “Christendom”. There has been and is a large number of people who support the unholy alliance of the rulers, both mentally and actually with their hands, and deceive themselves into believing -that by this means they will have and do have special favor with the rulers.
Both the rulers and their supporters make believe that they are on the Lord’s side, when they should know that they are not. They call themselves Christians, when they have no love for God or for Christ. The rulers have builded up a system of religion which dishonors the name of Jehovah God, and continue to heap reproach upon him; and their schemes or organizations they use to ensnare many. “As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit; [and] they are become great, and waxen rich,” and claim to be God’s favored people on the earth. While this applies specifically to the clergy and the principal of their flock, it also has application to all of the peoples in “Christendom” who either mentally or actually lend support to the unholy alliance. The prophet Jeremiah prophesied against the same people, and God caused him to write concerning the clergy, the principal of their flocks, and those who support them, these words: “They are waxen fat, they shine; yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof?”—Jer. 5: 27-31.
The sixth chapter of Ezekiel’s prophecy contains a statement of God’s judgment against the rulers, symbolically represented by the “mountains” and the “hills”; and those people who support such rulers are symbolized or represented by the “rivers” and the “valleys”. This judgment God will execute in his own due time and after due notice is given:
“And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God; Thus saith the Lord God to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers,.and to the valleys, Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high
places. And your altars shall be desolate, and your images shall be broken; and I will cast down your slain men before your idols.”—Ezek. 6:1-4.
The prophet makes it appear that in the execution of God’s judgments the nations of hypocritical ‘ ‘ Christendom”, their chief men and leaders and their supporters, shall find no way of escape. There shall be no way of eccape, whether these of “Christendom” be in far-away lands doing missionary work or are manipulating the machines at the base of operations. Jehovah God through his duly appointed executive officer will search them out in every part of the earth: ‘ * He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine; thus will I accomplish my fury upon them. ’ ’—Ezek. 6:12.
This terrible work Jehovah declares he will do that his name may be vindicated. “And they shall know that I am [Jehovah], and that I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them. So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in all their habitations; and they shall know that I am [Jehovah].” (Ezek. 6:10,14) Four times in this chapter the statement is made: “They shall know that, I am Jehovah.” Had “Christendom” heeded the repeated warnings that Jehovah has given her, this might have been avoided.—Jer. 23: 22.
There is a class, however, that will give heed and is giving heed to God’s message of truth that he is causing to be proclaimed, and this prophecy of Ezekiel is another strong proof that “millions now living will never die” but will be brought through the terrible trouble: “Yet will I leave a remnant that ye may have some that shall escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries. And they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations whither they shall be carried.” (Ezek. 6: 8, 9) Jehovah will spare some creatures upon the earth, and this shall furnish the nucleus for the beginning of reconstruction before the resurrection of the dead. All the living shall know that Jehovah is God, and all those who are brought forth from the grave shall know it also.
Other prophecies of the Bible prove that 1914 marks the end of Satan’s rule without interference, and from that time forward war is made by the Lord against Satan and against his organization until the wicked thing is entirely cleaned out. (Psalm 110) The seventh chapter of Ezekiel’s prophecy is corroborative proof of this fact.
The World War came to an end and the League of Nations was brought forward, and the religious leaders of the world have put forth their program of forming the complete union with the other wings of Satan’s organization, and this they have done in order to insure their control of the world. Various peace
94
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
agreements arc promulgated by Satan’s organization, but none of these things shall stop the forward march of Jehovah and his Christ to crush out every vestige of Satan’s wicked organization. The end is inevitable, because ‘God’s wrath is come’> (Rev. 11:18) The period of Jehovah’s long-suffering with hypocritical religion and systems of the world has ended. Jehovah therefore said to his prophet Ezekiel: “And thou, son of man, thus saith the Lord Jehovah unto the land of Israel, An end: the end is come upon the four corners of the land. Now is the end upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways; and I will bring upon thee all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity; but I will bring thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: An evil, an only evil; behold, it cometh. An end is come, the end is come, it awaketh against thee; behold, it cometb. Thy doom is come unto thee, 0 inhabitant of the land: the time is come, the day is near; a day of tumult, and not of joyful shouting, upon the mountains.”—Ezek. 7:1-7, A.R.V.
The physical facts show that from and after 1914 this prophecy has been in course of fulfillment and is progressing forward to a final end. Now the world has reached the point when the prophecy uttered by Jesus is being fulfilled,'to wit: “Upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; . . . men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth.” (Luke 21: 25, 26) Doubtless Jesus had Ezekiel’s prophecy in mind when he thus spoke, and the words of Jesus confirm what Jehovah caused Ezekiel to prophesy.
“Christendom” is now doomed. God’s judgment has been written against her. That judgment has been announced and, as Ezekiel prophesied, soon God will pour out his anger upon “Christendom”. “Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee; and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations that are in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am [Jehovah] that smiteth.”—Ezek. 7: 8, 9.
NO LIFE
EFORE examining the scriptures relating to hell, the Scriptural proof is here submitted in support of what may be called “the layman’s
answer” to the question as to where and in what state are the dead, and which answer is that the dead are actually dead, unconscious, in the tomb, and know not anything until God’s due time to awaken them.
No creature could be enjoying bliss in heaven, or be undergoing suffering in purgatory or torture in hell, unless that creature were conscious at the time. Some clergymen try to qualify the statement of bodily torment in hell by saying that the wicked are merely undergoing ‘mental torment’ because of the memory of their wickedness. Neither could this be true, unless the creature were conscious at the time and able to remember what had taken place. If the Scriptural proof then establishes the fact that when one dies he has no knowledge nor wisdom, that he has no memory, that he cannot work and cannot think, and that he is in a condition of silence, such proof absolutely disproves the clergymen’s answer that the dead arc undergoing any kind of suffering or any kind of joy.
God is true, and his Word is true. Men are not true, nor is their word true, except when in harmony with God’s Word. (Rom. 3:4) Upon the question at issue the following quotations from the Word of God are submitted, with absolute confidence of establishing the truth of the layman’s answer, to wit:
Ecclesiastes 9:5,10: “For the living know that they shall die; but the dead know not any thing. . . . Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy
IN HELL
might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest. ”
Psalm 6:5: “ For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks?”
Psalm 49:14: “Like sheep they are laid in the grave [(Hebrew) sheol] ; death shall feed on them.”
Psalm 115:17: “The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence.”
Man was made of the elements of the earth, and when he dies he returns to the dust, even as it is stated in Genesis 3:19.
Ecclesiastes 3:19,20: “For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them; as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity. All go unto one place: all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.”
The breath of life animated man and made his organs function. No longer do they function when he ceases to breathe. Psalm 146:4 rightly says: “IIis breath gocth forth, he rcturueth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish.”
The clergy have attempted to apply these texts to the body only, and not to the soul. In this they are wrong; for it is the soul or animal or creature that ceases to exist. Ezekiel 18:4 reads: “The soul that sinneth, it shall die.”
There is no place for the eternal torture of men or souls. God is not a fiend, as the clergy would make him appear. God is love. What good eould result from
Mabch 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
95
torturing one of Jehovah’s creatures? How could love be expressed in such a manner? Furthermore, how could torment in any wise comply with the law which God gave to Adam, and which provided death as the penalty, God saying to Adam: “ In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” (Gen. 2:17) Again the answer of the clergymen is both unreasonable and inconsistent with God.
The doctrine of eternal torment was never heard of for more than four thousand years after Adam was sentenced to death. It is an invention of the Devil promulgated for the purpose of supporting his original lie, namely, that there is no death. He contradicted God, saying deceitfully to the woman Eve: “Ye shall not surely die.” (Gen. 3:4) The Devil saw that if man should believe the doctrine of the inherent immortality of the soul he likewise must believe that the wicked are somewhere in torment. If he could induce man to believe that God had provided a place for the eternal torture of that soul, then he would succeed in turning man away from God and causing him to hate Jehovah God. The doctrines of eternal torture and inherent immortality of man are intended to support each other; and both being false, both must fall.
The Bible was translated from other languages. The old part thereof, before Christ, was translated from the Hebrew, and the new part, after Christ, from the Greek. The English word “hell” is translated from the Hebrew word sheol; and the Greek words hades, gehenna and tartarod are also translated “hell” in the Scriptures. As to the significance of the word “hell”, consider this: As winter time approaches a farmer gathers his carrots and turnips, digs a hole in the ground, and then covers these vegetables over so that they will not freeze. According to the old English way of describing it he is putting his vegetables into hell, that is to say, a dark [unseen; hidden] place. In the Bible the Hebrew word sheol is translated “grave” and “pit” more times than it is translated “hell”. The grave is a dark place. If sheol means torment in one place, it must mean this in all. A few scriptures on the point will illuminate the mind on the question.
Jacob was one of the men whom God approved. Jacob’s son Joseph had been taken away and sold into Egypt, and representation had been made to Jacob that his son was killed. His sons and daughters came about him to comfort him; but he said: “I will go down into the grave [(Hebrew) sheol] unto my son mourning.” (Gen. 37:35) Years afterward there was a famine in the land where Jacob lived, and he sent his sons into Egypt for corn. They found Joseph there. They returned with the request that the father send Benjamin, the youngest son. Jacob responded to their request with these words: “Aly son shall not go down with you; for his brother [Joseph] is dead, and he [Benjamin] is left alone; if mischief befall him by
the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave [(Hebrew) sheol].”—Gen. 42:38.
Here the word sheol is translated “grave”. It is easy to be seen that Jacob expected to go to the tomb. The translators saw that they could not make this scripture read ‘ ‘ hell ”; if they did, it would be rather inconsistent to argue that Jacob’s gray hairs would last long in fire and brimstone. The American modern revision committee of the English Bible left this word sheol untranslated, evidently expecting thereby to deceive the uneducated.
Job was a good man and approved by Jehovah. The Devil boasted that he could make Job curse God. God let him try it. But he never succeeded in causing Job to curse Jehovah. Job was afflicted with boils from the top of his head to the soles of his feet; his flesh was putrid; and all his neighbors and friends turned against him and came to mock him; even his wife repudiated him and said: “Curse God, and die.” Poor Job was left with no one to eomfort him. According to the preachers’ description of hell Job was having about as mueh of it as any man could have on this earth. If he believed that hell means eternal torment, it would seem rather strange that he should have uttered this prayer, to wit:
“0 that thou wouldest hide me in [hell, sheol] the grave, that thou wouldest keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me!” (Job 14:13) Then he adds: “If I wait, [hell, sheol] the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the darkness.” (Job 17:13) Job wrote these words under inspiration from Jehovah. They are quoted here to prove that the word sheol, translated hell, means the grave, the tomb, the condition of silence.
In Psalm 16:10 it is written: ‘ ‘ Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell.” This is quoted by the apostle Peter in the book of The Acts, chapter two, verses thirty to thirty-two, and is specifically applied to the Lord Jesus, proving that Jesus went to the hell of the Bible, which means the tomb. If hell were a place of eternal torture Jesus would still be there. But he came out in three days. He was resurrected from the dead. The preachers may answer: ‘He went down to investigate and to inform others how hot it is there.’ If they are correct he must have been supplied with an asbestos body for the trip. Besides, Jesus spoke of hell and never indicated that it was a place of torment, as we shall see as we progress with this argument.
Ono of the best illustrations of what is meant by hell is that with reference to Jonah. A great whale swallowed him. Jonah says: “I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me: out of the belly of hell cried I.” (Jonah 2:2) Evidently it was quite dark in that whale’s belly. If hell had been eternal torment Jonah would not have gotten out.
96
*3Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Yv
The same Hebrew word sheol is often translated “pit” in the Bible. Describing the wicked that die, it is written concerning them: ‘ ‘ They go down quick [or alive] into the pit.” (Num. 16: 30) Here the word “pit” is translated from the word sheol. Again it is written concerning those who die: ‘ ‘ They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together is in the dust.” (Job 17:16) The word here translated “pit” is from the same .Hebrew word sheol, and plainly expresses that it means the condition of death.
In the scriptures since Christ the Greek word hades is translated into the English word “hell”, and has the same meaning, identically, as sheol in the Hebrew. It refers always to the condition of death, spoken of as the grave, the tomb, or the pit. A few proof texts concerning this: Acts, chapter two, verse twenty-seven, is a quotation from Psalm sixteen, verse ten, quoted above, the former text using the Greek word hades and the latter text using the Hebrew word sheol, thus showing the two words to be equivalent. Then in Matthew 16:18 Jesus uses the word hades, which is translated “hell”, saying: “The gates of hell shall not prevail” against the church of God. Without doubt the thought is that the condition of death shall be destroyed in due time, and that therefore it cannot prevail against those who serve God.
In harmony with this, in Revelation 1:18 it is declared that Jesus has the keys of hell, that is to say, the means of unlocking the condition of death. It is written: “Death and hell delivered up the dead.” (Rev. 20:13) Hades is the word here used; it has the same meaning as sheol, and evidently means the grave, or tomb, which shall give up the dead at the resurrection.- It manifestly does not mean eternal torment; because if people are there eternally, they could not be brought out. This scripture does not say that hell gives up the living, but says that it gives up the dead.
The Greek word gehenna is also rendered “hell” in English. It means the condition of death, or complete destruction, from which there is no awakening or resurrection. Gehenna is a Greek expression, referring to the valley of Hinnom. Just on the south side of Jerusalem is a valley called the valley of Hinnom, or the valley of Gehenna. Therein was a fire kept constantly burning. The offal from the city and the bodies of dead animals and the like were thrown into the fire and destroyed. Under the Jewish law no living creature was permitted to be cast into that fire. The practice was to bring the offal out of the gate of the wall of Jerusalem and cast it over the high embankment into the valley. The bodies of some of these animals lodged on the rocks, and the worms consumed them. The valley of Hinnom therefore was a place of destruction. It pictured the destruction of the wicked.
Speaking to the Jews, who would understand his meaning, Jesus said: “If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than, having two eyes, to be cast into hell fire [(Greek) gehenna] : where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.” (Mark 9:47,48) The ‘unquenchable fire’ and the “worm” represent destruction, and Jesus was telling the Jews that that was what would come upon their nation.
Jesus in plain phrase was telling the Jew that he, Jesus, was the One appointed as King by Jehovah God, and that in due time God would set up his kingdom; that a place in that kingdom was the greatest privilege one could have; but that no one could enter it unless he willingly put away everything that would be contrary to God’s will. If therefore anyone had something that was dear to him, even as dear as an eye or as a hand, if it was offensive and would keep him out of the kingdom he would better cut it off than be destroyed.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
X' C. BOOTH
Edgar, Nebr. ---------Apr.
Glenvil, Nebr..........“
Bloomington, Nebr.....“
Cambridge, Nebr.......“
North Platte, Nebr. .. “
Mullen, Nebr. _________“
Alliance, Nebr. _______“
Bayard, Nebr. ---------“
Scottsbluff, Nebr.....“
2
3,4
6
7
8
9
10
11
13
Torrington, Wyo. •...Apr.
Jireb, Wyo..............“
Lead, S. Dak............“
Vale, S. Dak.........— “
Gillette, Wyo...........“
Sberidan, Wyo...........“
Riverton, Wyo...........“
Casper, Wyo............."
Slater, Wyo. ___________“
14 IS
17,18 20
•>•>
23
25
27. 28 30
G. V. r.l’CORMICK
GreenvHle, S. C	Apr.	3,4	Dallas, Ga		....Apr. 18, 19
Anderson, S. C	“	6,7	Atlanta, Ga			“ 21, 22
Abbeville, S. C	“	8	Monticello, Ga		..... “	23
Greenwood, S. C. 	“	9,10	Waynesboro, Ga.	......	24
Athens, Ga	 “	11,12	Augusta. Ga			“ 25, 20
Jasper, Ga	 “	14	Denrihc. Ga				“	28
Daitou, Ga. 	“	15	Midville, Ga		..... “ 29, 30
Rome, Ga. 	  “	10,17	Brooklet, Ga		....May	1
Swiftown. Miss......Apr.
Belzoni, Miss. _______“
Longwood, Miss. ______“
Vicksburg, Miss.......“
Bolton, Miss.......—.. “
Yokena, Miss..........“
Church Hill, Miss.....“
Natchez, Miss.........“
Alexandria, La....._... “
Leesville. La. _______“
Shreveport, La. ______“
M. L. HERR
1	Ruston, La..........Apr.
2	Bernice, La..........“
3	Homer, La............“
4	Bradley, Ark. ........"
0	Texarkana, Tex.......“
7, 8	Hope, Ark.............“
9	Saratoga, Ark._______“
10.11	Prescott, Ark. _______“
13	Camden, Ark..........“
14	Strong, Ark......... “
16,17	Hamburg, Ark.........May
18 20 21
IO
23. 24 23
27 28
29 JO
1
	S. H. TOUTJIAN		
[’remerton, Wash.	...Apr.	6,7	Chelan, Wash			\pr. 21
Iherett, Wash		.... “	8, 'J	Okanogan, Wash.		“	22
Coupeville, Wash. .	....	10	Ellensburg, Wash.	.... “	24
Mt. Vernon, Wash.	.... “ 11,12	Yakima, Wash			“ 25, 20
Bellingham, Wash.	.... “ 14,15	Sunnyside, Wash.		“	28
Wenatchee, Wash.	.... “ 17,18	Richland, Wash. ..		“	29
Entiat, Wash		...."	20	Pendleton, Oreg. ..		“	30
Russell, Kans.....-Apr. 24, 25
Wakeeney. Kans..........“	27, 28
Lenora, Kans........... “	29
Achilles, Kaus.........“	UO
S. WRIGHT
Wlchitn, Rans. ......Apr.	3, 4
Douglass, Kans.........“	6
Winfield, Kans. _______"	7
Arkansas City, Kans. “	8,9
Anthony, Kans........Apr.
Kiowa, Kans...........“
Pratt,. Kans__________“
Plains, Kans. ._.... *'
10	Garden City, Kans.	..Apr.	15,16
11	Dodge Citv, Kans.......“	17,18
13	lairned, Kans..........“	20, 21
14	Great Bend, Kans.______“	22,23
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges
systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Fobeicn, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia South African.......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating tile reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postoffice. Act of March 3, 1879.
NEW PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph of new design, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and covered with brown cloth a.nd having rounded corneis. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces, which is 5} pounds lighter than the previous mode) manufactured by the Society. With the three phonograph dises which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound is just as strong as that of the previous model, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonogtaph is timed properly, at 78 r.p.m., and should be checked from time to time. This new model, including three discs, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittance should accompany orders. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
ADVERTISING WATCH TOWER PROGRAMS
Witnessing parties and all individuals engaging in the field service should mention the radio station in their vicinity which carries the Watch Tower programs. This magnifies to the people called upon the message which Jehovah’s witnesses introduce, and often results in interest in the printed message on the part of the radio listener. This is one of the chief purposes of sending out the message over the radio, to encourage the people to read the literature. In this behalf the Society supplies radio folders, and all workers should make constant use of them in house-to-house calling, leaving one of them, if nothing else.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES AND SOUND CARS
The Society constructs and assembles portable transcription machines at our own factory at 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y. These machines are spring-wound, and operated from a 6-volt wet-cell battery. Every machine is furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. This machine can be offered at $100, complete, to brethren in the United States.
The sound car equipment includes the above and, additionally, a power amplifier and a horn with mountings for the top of your car. The entire sound car equipment with microphone attachment can be had for $175. Write to the Society for details.
ELECTRIC SIGN
For your homes and other places, to call attention of all passers-by to the kingdom message which Jehovah has entrusted to you to dispense. This sign is attractive. The wording on the inserted signs can be changed at small cost, and the Society will supply such changes from time to time so that they will be uniform throughout all the earth. The Society will fill the orders at once, shipped to any address in the United States, at $1.50 each, remittance to accompany order. If possible, order in lots of two at least, as they are packed two in a carton. They come complete with cord, flasher, electric bulb and sign. Groups should order these through their company servant, sending in one order for all required by the group.
"SONG OF THE HARLOT”
“Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten: make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.”—Isa. 23:16.
PART 1
JEHOVAH, by his prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel, foretells the rising of a religious organization which claims to represent God on the earth but which, in fact, is at all times consorting with and acting for Satan to bring reproach upon the name of the Almighty God. Jehovah’s organization is revealed under the symbol of a good woman called Zion, which gives birth to those who are the devoted and faithful children of God. (Isa. 54:1-13) Satan, the wicked one, has an organization, which is symbolized by a wicked woman and named in the Scriptures ‘Babylon, the old whore’, and which organization gives birth to all creatures that are in opposition to Jehovah God. All things earthly of Satan’s organization properly take the name of his woman Babylon, which is their mother. The chief element of Satan’s organization is religion, which Satan employs to corrupt earthly creatures and to make them a part of his visible organization. In the Scriptures “organized religion” is designated as the “harlot” because of the use to which the organization is put.
2	“Harlot” is properly defined as a female committing adultery or fornication indiscriminately. In the Hebrew the word is used as applying to things spiritual, that is to say, going after idols, the committing of idolatry, thereby departing from the true worship of Jehovah God and engaging in religion or the worship of various wicked deities.
3	That part of the prophecy here specifically considered relates to Tyre. Before discussing in detail the prophecy of the twenty-third chapter of Isaiah it is well to observe some other parts of prophecy which throw light on the subject matter under consideration. Some persons have lodged objection to the manner of treating prophecy in The Watchtower, complaining that The Watchtower repeats. This may be answered fully by saying that Jehovah often repeats, or causes to be said, the same words many times, and without a doubt he has a purpose in so doing. In the prophecy of Ezekiel he uses 64 times one phrase: They shall “know that I am Jehovah”. It should be kept in mind that The Watchtower is not published to appeal
to the fancy of critics, nor to please men. It does not attempt to please creatures, because such is an abomination in the sight of God. The Watchtower aims to present a study to enable real students of God’s Word to get a better insight into the prophecy under consideration. At certain intervals in such study it is necessary to repeat something that has been said, in order to emphasize the point. Students of God’s Word who are really devoted to him and love him will appreciate this. The critics never appreciate anything.
4	Satan the Devil is designated in prophecy as ‘ ‘ the king of Tyrus” or Tyre. (Ezek. 28:12) The visible ruler of the city bearing that name was merely, as the Scriptures state, “the prince of Tyre.” (Ezek. 28:2, A.IZ.V.) Satan rebelled against Jehovah and therefore departed from the true faith toward God that he, Satan, might traffic in humankind. To do that Satan employed religion. Satan began by telling doctrinal lies respecting Jehovah God, hence religious lies, and these constitute the main stock in trade of all religions, and which doctrinal lies are uttered by the word and authority of the Devil and not on the authority of the Word of Jehovah God. Satan introduced his lying doctrines to Eve when he said: “Ye shall not surely die; for God [as you, Eve, call him] doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened; and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.”— Gen. 3:4,5.
3	Eve desired religion, and the Devil saw to it that her desire was fulfilled. She wanted Adam and hersel f to become mighty ones, ‘ ‘ as gods, ’ ’ and not be limited to knowing just Jehovah God’s word. She wanted her ‘eyes opened’ and to ‘know good and evil’. The mere worship of God by obedience to him was made to appear as extreme and too much in restraint of the liberty of Eve and Adam. As “gods” they would not be restrained, but would be independent and hence not subject to the “higher power”. Then they could do what seemed right in their own eyes, even to compromising between “good and evil”. That was the first introduction of religion to mankind. Thus Satan, “the king of Tyrus,” created and used religion as the
100
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
means of gaining control of and commercializing the human race. Therefore God said to the Devil, “the king of Tyrus”: “By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, 0 covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty; thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee.” (Ezek. 28:16,17) The practice of religion had its beginning with Adam and Eve. Thereby they expressed the selfish desire to have that which their Creator had not given to them. The Devil’s purpose in introducing religion was to alienate the devotion of man from God; and this is conclusive proof that the Devil is the author and father of all religion.
’Adam’s son Abel was never religious, because he was fully obedient to and received the approval of God the Creator. At the beginning the children of Adam were not commercial. Then Cain began to practice religion, in this, that he adopted a form of worship, but without faith in God. He had no love for God, nor for the true worship of God. He brought unto God an offering, for which offering God had no respect. Cain was not ‘doing well’, and said Jehovah to him: “Sin lieth at the door.” (Gen. 4:3-7) Then followed the great crime of murder committed by Cain, and which was induced by religion. Since then religion and murder have gone hand in hand. There never has been a war but that the religionists attempted to bless the warring factions.
’ Politics and commerce or trade were quickly developed through religion, and this for selfish gain. Cain built a city and named it for his son Enoch, meaning “dedicated [to selfishness]”. Then the grandson of Cain became “an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron”, which were and are commercialized and used for military purposes. (Gen. 4: 8-22) Due to religious practices in defiance of Jehovah God the human race became frightfully degenerate. The flood came and destroyed all practitioners of religion. Noah and his household remained true to Jehovah God, and they were the only survivors of the great deluge. Noah was “a preacher of righteousness”, but never a religionist.—2 Pet. 2: 5.
8 In obedience to God’s commandment Noah and his sons, following the flood, began to “multiply and replenish the earth”. (Gen. 9:1) Soon after the flood religion again came prominently to the fore. Nimrod, the great-grandson of Noah, became the visible religious leader, and ‘he began to be a mighty hunter before the Lord’. That was the practice of religion, because it put Nimrod, a creature, “before” or superior to God, the Creator, and it was a religion to all of Nimrod’s admirers and supporters. The purpose was to turn creatures away from Jehovah. With Nim
rod religion began to be practiced after the flood. After religion politics was quickly employed and the political rule by Nimrod the religionist began. “And the beginning of his kingdom [political rule] was Babel.” Then commerce quickly developed, which is evidenced by Nimrod and his sons’ building cities and bringing together many people, which again required traffic amongst them.—Gen. 10: 8-12.
B The building of the city and tower of Babel was induced by religion, and this is clearly shown by the language of the builders. “And they said, Go to, let us build us a city, and a tower whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.” (Gen. 11:4) Babel, Babil, and Babylon, all meaning the same thing (Gen. 10:10, margin), from the beginning stood for religion, politics and commerce, because the very express purpose was to turn men away from God in defiance of his commandment. The name Nimrod means rebel or rebellious one that rules. He named the beginning of his political kingdom Babel, which meant to him and his followers “the gate to god”; therefore a religion. In defiance of the religious aspect of this organization the Almighty God interfered and brought about the confusion of tongues or language, and therefore the Hebrew word for Babel means “confusion”. Religions have always brought confusion to the people. The word “Babylon” means the same as “Babel”. The deity or one worshiped by that people was “Bel” or “Baal”, which means the Devil, the covetous one. (See Prophecy, pages 127, 128, and the scriptures there cited.) This is further proof that religion is the product of the Devil. Politics and commerce, added to religion, form the elements of Satan’sorganization. Jehovah God, by his prophet Ezekiel, designates Babylon as “a city of merchants”, “a land of traffic” or commerce.—Ezek. 17: 4,12.
10	The faet that Jehovah named Satan the Devil “the king of Tyrus” and said to the Devil, “By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence,” is conclusive proof that the city of Tyre or Tyrus stands for or symbolizes the Devil’s organization, which is made up of religion (the chief element or binding tie), politics, and traffic or commerce. All these things, recorded in the Word of God, were written aforetime for the aid and comfort of those persons now on the earth who love and serve Jehovah God as he has commanded; and for this reason a careful study of the Scriptures, together with the physical facts well known to be true, will result in much benefit to those who diligently seek for knowledge and understanding. The publication of The Watchtower is for the purpose of aiding in such true and faithful study.
11	Referring now to the foregoing Scriptural definition of “harlot”: What religious system exactly fits the prophecies recorded in God’s Word? There is but one answer, and that is, The Roman Catholic Church
April 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
101
organization. It is a religious organization. It claims to be the mother of the “Christian religion”, so called. All other religious organizations that take the name “Christian religion” are the offspring of the Roman Catholic organization, and therefore all are a part of Babylon. No one will even attempt to dispute the fact of the relationship of all so-called “Christian religions ’ ’ to the Catholic church organization. The Roman Catholic organization is ruled by the Hierarchy, and that organization indulges and participates in the political affairs of all the nations of earth. The Roman Catholic church is also a great commercial organization. It contains all the elements of the religious organization which began with Nimrod and of which the Devil is the father. This must not be construed to mean that all the people who are dominated by the Roman Catholic organization, or who support the same, are the willing servants of the Devil. Great numbers of them have been misled and woefully deceived. The millions of people who hold to the Catholic church organization, aside from the clergy, are designated as “the Catholic population”. Great numbers of these people are sincere, and it appears to be the Lord’s will to now give them an opportunity to see the truth and take their stand on the side of God and righteousness. Those credulous people have been deceived, and it now seems to be due time to afford them the opportunity to learn the truth and give their devotion to Jehovah God and receive his blessings. Nothing herein must be construed as an expression of ill will toward individuals or persons. The purpose of this publication is to expose the Devil’s deceitful methods in order that honest and sincere persons may escape his clutches and find the way to life and happiness.
12	It will be seen that the prophecy concerning Tyre applies to the Roman Catholic religious system. Zidon, being a neighbor city, pictured other religions that consort with and operate with the Roman Catholic organization. The term ‘ ‘ Christendom ” is a word applying to those countries or nations wherein the so-called “Christian religion” is practiced. All religious systems called “Christian religion” properly take the name of the mother harlot; therefore the terms Babylon and Tyre apply to the lands known as “Christendom”. Zidon, having been built before Tyre, would well picture other religions practiced prior to the beginning of the Roman Catholic, and which co-operate with the Roman Catholic organization. With this introductory a detailed examination of the prophecy appearing at the 23d chapter of Isaiah proceeds, and those who really love Gpd will pursue this study with a keen interest and, it is to be hoped, with much profit. If repetitions appear at different places you will see that such repetitions arc necessary in order to drive home the point.
BURDEN
18	The prophecy of the 23d chapter of Isaiah is introduced with the words “The burden of Tyre”. That
means something heavy to be borne by ancient Tyre and foreshadows a greater burden to be borne by modern Tyre. It will be seen that the prophecy applies in a miniature way to ancient Tyre and that it applies on a far greater scale to the Roman Catholic religious system and in that system its fulfillment in completion appears. God has his own way to conceal the meaning of a prophecy until his due time to reveal it to those who love him. It often appears that the prophecy is recorded in the inverse order, that is to say, that which applies to the fulfillment of the prophecy in completion appears in the record first, while that which applies first appears in the divine record last. At this point it seems well to examine some historical facts as they appear in the Bible and which relate to ancient Tyre and the cities associated with her.
14	Zidon was a sister city of ancient Tyre. Men who built cities immediately following the flood named them for their sons, as it appears: “Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and unto them were sons born after the flood. . . . And the sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan. And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth. And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth, . . . And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comcst to Gerar, unto Gaza : as thou gocst unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.”—Gen. 10:1-6, 8,15-19.
15	From the Scriptures it appears that Nimrod was a granduncle to the Zidonians and also to the Tyrians. Both cities practiced the religion which the Devil promulgated. It is written: “Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians” (1 Ki. 11:5) ; also, “the gods of Zidon.” (Judg. 10:6) Zidonians’ religion dates practically from the same time of the building of Babel.
10	Tyre was built by the descendants of Canaan, the cursed one. (Gen. 9:25) The Hebrew word for “Tyre” is “Tsore”, and means “rock”. The city was built on a rock island, like a point in the sea, a short distance from the mainland of Phoenicia. It became a worldimportant center of commerce or traffic upon the seas. Doubtless the Devil chose this place, a rock, on which to build Tyre, in mockery or as a mimic of Jehovah God’s organization to rule, which is built upon the rock, Christ Jesus, taken out from Jehovah’s universal organization, Jehovah himself being the Great Rock.
17	The first mention of Tyre is at Joshua 19:29, wherein it is called “the strong city”. It was included in the territory assigned to the tribe of Asher of the people of Israel. (Josh. 19:24-31) Both Zidon and Tyre maintained religious temples wherein they practiced the Devil religion and where they invoked the demon gods to bless their commercial traffic. (Joel 3:4, 5) The Devil was the invisible “king of Tyrus”, and the spiritual father of the visible ruler of the ancient city, which city was ruled by the representative of the Devil. That representative is called “the
102
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
prince of Tyrus”. (Ezek. 28:2,12) Note that the ‘ ‘ prince of Tyre ’ ’ said: “ I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas [hence, as a sea god].” Also note that Jehovah said to him: “Thou art a man, and not God.”—Ezek. 28: 2.
18	The Devil had said of himself: ‘ ‘ I will be like the Most High” (Isa. 14:13,14) ; and thus he declared himself to be equal to the Almighty God Jehovah. Satan the Devil is designated in the Scriptures ‘ ‘ the god of this world”, that is, the invisible, spiritual ruler. ‘‘The prince of Tyre,” therefore, prophetically pictures the visible representative of the Devil, who claims to be a god. Such a claim is made by the head of the Boman Catholic religious organization. The pope of Bome, or the Roman Catholic organization, is designated by the Hierarchy a god, as it is stated in history. A Boman Catholic authority, Ferraris’ Ecclesiastical Dictionary, says: ‘‘The pope is of such dignity and highness that he is not simply a man, but, as it were, God, and the vicar of God. . . . Hence the pope is crowned with a triple crown, as king of heaven, of earth and of hell. . . . Whatsoever the pope does seems to proceed from the mouth of God. . . . The pope is, as it were, God on earth, the only prince of the faithful of Christ, . . . The pope can sometimes counteract the divine law.”—Studies in the Scriptures, Vol. 2, page 310.
18 While this high-sounding claim is made by the Boman Catholic organization for the pope, mark that it does not say for what god he is the representative on earth. The fact is, he is the representative of ‘‘the god of this world”, whom the Scriptures show is the Devil. (2 Cor. 4:4) It is quite certain that the sincere ones of the ‘ ‘ Catholic population ’ ’ would not willingly class any creature as equal to Jehovah, the Almighty God. They have been deceived and misled.
2O‘The Devil has caused the people to be very superstitious or religious. Paul came in contact with the people of Athens who were practicing the Devil religion in ignorance of the fact that they were paying homage to the Devil. To them Paul said: ‘‘Men of Athens, in all things I perceive that ye are very religious.” (Acts 17:22-29, R.V.) Another translator renders the text in this wise: ‘‘How . . . reverent of the demons ye are, I perceive.” (Roth.) “Men of Athens, I perceive that you are in every respect remarkably religious.” (Weymouth) This is further corroborative proof that religion is of the Devil and is in exact and complete opposition to the commandment of Almighty God. “The man of sin” practices religion, acting contrary to the commandments of God. “That man of sin ... , the son of perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God, sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that
perish ; because they received not the love of the truth [the very opposite of religion is the truth], that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie [religious teaching].” (2 Thess. 2:3,4,9-11) That company of persons forming or composing the “man of sin” rely on the teachings of men, or tradition, which make void the Word of God.
21	Ancient Tyre, as shown by the Scriptures, did in fact control the commerce of the sea. “The sea” symbolically stands for the people that bear up and give support to the Devil’s religious organization. Therefore Tyre pictures religion commercialized, that is to say, religious doctrines and ceremonies and superstitions used for commercial purposes for the enrichment of a few at the expense of the credulous people, who are kept in subjection and under control. Religion traffics in humankind, selling the gullible and credulous people to the professional politicians and militarists. The religious institution known as the Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims that the head of that organization is infallible and can spiritually do no wrong, and yet it uses and practices religion and religious ceremonies to commercially gain material wealth and to control the people. Its subjects, that is, the “Catholic population”, must worship the religious institution, and at the same time those people are forced to contribute or pay money for the up-keep of the institution. “Organized Christianity” or “organized religion”, so called, is generally understood to embrace the Roman Catholic Church, the Greek Orthodox Church, and the Protestant church; but the Roman Catholic organization claims to be the original church, the mother of the so-called “Christian religion”. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the ruling power of “Christian religion”, so called, is the modern ‘ ‘ prince of Tyrus ’ ’, the members of the Hierarchy even giving themselves the title “the princes of the church”. Modem Tyre, therefore, is organized religion, visibly ruling the people under its father the invisible ruler, “the king of Tyrus,” who is the Devil. Jesus gave this plain statement concerning the practitioners of religion founded upon tradition.—John 8:44.
22	Today Protestantism is dead so far as the protest against the practitioners of Catholicism is concerned, and the Protestant clergy, together with the rabbis of the Jewish religious organization, follow the lead of the Roman Catholic organization and act in harmony therewith. All such practice religion, of which the Devil is the author. Ancient Tyre was an opponent of Jerusalem, God’s typical organization. Modern Tyre is the enemy and opponent of the true spiritual Israelites, God’s people on the earth.—Ezek. 26: 2.
“SHIPS”
23	Says Jehovah by his prophet: “Howl, ye ships of Tarshish.” (Isa. 23:1) Ships are vessels, implements or instruments, such as used by ancient Tyre to carry
April 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
103
on their commerce and trade upon the seas, and to establish colonies in the lands round about, to be used for commercial purposes. Also its religion was thus carried and spread to other places in the earth. Tarshish appears to have been one of the colonies of ancient Tyre where traffic was carried on. Tarshish was built at the far end of the Mediterranean sea opposite from Tyre and in the land since known as Spain: ‘ ‘ Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kind of riches: with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs.” (Ezek. 27:12) Her ships or vessels would carry the merchandise in which she trafficked. As a greedy enemy of Jerusalem it appears that Tyre used the ships under its control to carry on a slave trade: “Yea, and what have ye to do with me, 0 Tyre, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompence? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily will I return your recompence upon your own head: because ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into your temples my goodly pleasant things: the children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border.”—Joel 3:4-6.
24	Applying the prophecy to modern Tyre, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, the ships of Tarshish well picture the underpriests and subordinate organizations working under the command of the ruling Hierarchy, which is designated “The Hierarchy of Jurisdiction”. The underpricsts or orders underneath the Hierarchy, such as missionaries, Jesuits and others, are sent to all parts of the earth by the ‘ ‘ Hierarchy of Jurisdiction” to perform the more direct work with the people, which is called “missionary work”, and to commercialize the people and carry on a commercial work or trade in gathering in money for the upkeep and support of the Hierarchy. The monks, Jesuits, missionaries, priests, and all like agents work under the command or direction of the ‘ ‘ Hierarchy of Jurisdiction”, and thus such are in symbol represented as “mariners” of the sea, and the “wise men” are the pilots directing the movement of these symbolic ships: ‘ ‘ The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise men, 0 Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy pilots. ’ ’—Ezek. 27: 8.
25	Such vessels or instruments of the Hierarchy are used to hoodwink the common people and to deal with them and to keep them in slavery to the ruling power of the organization. Such underlings do the work of manipulating the common people or so-called “Catholic population”, who pay the bills, and the “Hierarchy of Jurisdiction” reaps the commercial benefits. In his book entitled The Faith of Our Fathers, published at the beginning of the twentieth century, Cardinal Gibbons says: “The number of Catholics in the world is computed at three hundred millions.” (Page 10) The claim is now made that there are more than 20,000,000 of the “Catholic population” in the
United States. Such constitute that which is symbolically designated “the sea”, who bear up and support the organization and the work of gathering the ‘ ‘ Catholic population” under the organization, and collecting the revenue from them is done chiefly by the underlings or underpriests, which vessels or “ships” ride upon the sea.
20	A Catholic priest known as “Anthony, O.M.C.”, operating from Kentucky, sent out a letter to the credulous and superstitious believers in the false “purgatory” doctrine of the Catholic religion, which letter is dated Louisville, Kentucky, September 21, 1936. That letter calls upon the credulous ones in these words, to discharge ‘your duty towards your dear departed who, helpless in their purgatory prison, crave the relief only Masses and Prayers can bring them. . . . Your offering will help to complete the Purgatorial Purse’. Attached to that letter is a paper or blank to be filled out and signed by all receiving it, setting forth the amount of money contributed for the purgatorial purse, and on that paper appear these words: “It is suggested that you send or pledge an offering of 25c for each name listed.” The paper or slip contains space for more than twenty names. Many of the “Catholic population” will contribute a much larger sum than that suggested. But suppose each one contributes 25c; that, according to the number of Catholics in the United States, would mean five million dollars, and, according to Cardinal Gibbons’ estimate of the number in the world, would be more than fifty million American dollars annually. A very unique commercial scheme. It has been well said that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is the richest in material wealth of any institution on earth. Religion, commercialized, is truly the Devil’s scheme, and God declares it so.—Ezek. 28:16-18.
“HOWL”
27	The word “howl”, as appears in the prophecy, clearly shows that a great calamity will come upon modern Tyre, that is, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization. A howl means a wail of great distress or despair. When is that howl to begin ? From the Scriptures it seems certain that the complete fulfillment of this prophecy is at the beginning of Armageddon, that is, the beginning of the “strange act” of the Almighty God. (Isa. 28:21) The reason for this conclusion is stated, as follows: It appears that Jehovah caused his prophecy to be here recorded in a manner to conceal the meaning thereof until his due time for the understanding to be given to his people. In the prophecy here under consideration the command to howl is recorded in the prophecy before mention is made of the “seventy years” and the singing of “the song of the harlot” set forth in verses fifteen and sixteen. That does not mean, however, that in the complete fulfillment of the prophecy the howling must precede the
104
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
seventy years, nor that the howling must continue for a period of seventy years either before or after.
28	As an example of how Jehovah causes prophecy to be recorded and revealed, attention is called to the drama of Ahab and Jezebel, both of whom were slain before the seventy sons of Ahab and also before the worshipers of Baal were slain; but not so in the complete fulfillment of that prophetic picture. The fulfillment shows the acts last recorded picture that which was first fulfilled. (See Vindication, Book Three, pages 41-53.) The prophecy of the “seventy years” mentioned by Isaiah in 23:15 corresponds with a like prophecy of seventy years prophesied by Jeremiah. (Jeremiah 25) What is there described as coming to pass at the end of seventy years, is actually fulfilled in completion at the same time as that which is described as due to occur before the seventy years began. Attention is called to this here merely to show that the prophecy at verses 1-14 is not necessarily fulfilled before that part of the prophecy mentioned here in verses 15-17 in Isaiah 23.
28	Some time after the destruction of ancient Jerusalem in B.C. 606 Nebuchadnezzar laid siege to and seriously damaged ancient Tyre. There was then some howling. (Ezek. 29:18) “For thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much people.” (Ezek. 26:7) “Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolations. ... To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse; as it is this day. . . . And all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea.” (Jer. 25:9-35) This great distress mentioned by the prophets above quoted clearly applies to Armageddon.
30	In the year 1848 distress came upon the Roman Catholic organization, also in 1870, and continued more or less until 1918; but such as then occurred could in no way compare with what will come to pass at Armageddon. The snarling or howling that took place in those years could in no way compare with the howl that will go up when Jehovah lays waste modern Tyre. When Jehovah, by his prophet, says, “Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it [Tyre] is laid waste,” when that comes to pass, such will cause modern Tyre to really howl. That howl will come when the Greatcr-than-Nebuehadnezzar, Christ Jesus, the Executor of Jehovah’s purposes, the Mighty Warrior, goes into action at the beginning of Armageddon. It is true that there was an attempt by world powers in 1848
and 1870 to lay waste the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, but that did not succeed. The permanent laying to waste will be such as to produce a mighty howl, and that will be at the beginning of Jehovah's “strange act”.
31	It is the command of Jehovah given to the ships of Tarshish to “howl, . . . for it [Tyre] is laid waste, so that [in Tyre] there is no house, no entering in”. According to Rotherham the text is rendered thus: “For it is laid too waste to be a haven to enter.” In other words, there is no haven to enter Tyre, because Tyre is destroyed. The howl is because incoming ships or vessels of Tarshish, laden with merchandise, could find no berth nor wharf nor warehouse in which to put the merchandise intended for Tyre. Such is due to the fact that Tyre and her once favorable position in commerce and intercourse with other countries are ruined and the markets thereof wrecked. This is further proof that ‘the prince of Tyrus is a man, and not a god’. (Ezek. 28:9) It will then clearly appear that the text often misquoted, to wit, ‘The gates of hell cannot prevail against it,’ has no application whatsoever to the Roman Catholic church organization, but that such Scripture text has been wrongfully applied by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to deceive the people and has resulted in deception and great injury to the people. No more will the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization carry on its work of ‘compassing sea and land to make proselytes for hell’ (Matt. 23:15), because the modern Tyre will be done. That of necessity will come about by reason of the “strange act” of Jehovah in completely destroying modern Tyre, which is the Roman Catholic organization, so that none can seek her or enter her thereafter.
32	The land of Cyprus, or island sometimes called “Chittim”, was northeast of Tyre. It was originally colonized by the Phoenicians from Tyre and Zidon. Says the prophet of God: “No entering in: from the land of Chittim [Cyprus (Roth.)].” Paul sailed from Zidon “under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary”. (Acts 27:4) It was a near-by colony, dependent upon Tyre. Says the prophet Isaiah: “It is revealed to them.” This would mean that the ships of Tarshish were bound for Tyre and laden with commerce and, while putting in at the port of Chittim or Cyprus, learned of the desolation of Tyre and that their ships were out of a job because Tyre is done for. The report of the fact shakes greatly the dependent colony. In this connection the prophet of God says: “Thus saith the Lord God to Tyrus, Shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee ? Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in the sea shall be troubled at thy departure.” (Ezek. 26:15,18) “All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee, and their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their countenance. The merchants among the people shall
April 1, 1937
fffie WATCHTOWER.
105
hiss at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt be any more.”—Ezek. 27: 35, 36.
M Applying this part of the prophecy to modern Tyre, the Roman Catholic organization, as it properly applies, it will be seen that all who have depended upon the Roman Catholic organization, all who have had dealings with the Hierarchy for selfish gain, either political or commercial or otherwise, will be greatly grieved and shaken. For many years that religious organization has boastfully said: ‘The gates of hell shall never prevail against us, ’ and now not only will those seeing it go down be shocked, but to them it will appear very strange that such a calamity could come to an organization that claimed to represent God. This indicates that at the very beginning of Armageddon the religious organizations as such will perish and others seeing it will wail. “And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea?” (Ezek. 27: 32) “The merchants of these things, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing, and saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls! For in one hour so great riches is eome to nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off, and cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city! And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate.”—Rev. 18:15-19.
34	Religion has been a means employed by the Devil to build his mighty organization on earth, which has deceived millions, and religion and religionists, according to the prophecies of God, will be the first of Satan’s organization to be destroyed at the beginning of Armageddon.
DUMFOUNDED
35	Jehovah, by his prophet, then addresses the supporters of Tyre, both ancient and modern, in these words: “Be still [silent (margin'), dumb (Rot/i.)], ye inhabitants of the isle; thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished.” (Isa. 23:2) This silence or dumbness is because of Jehovah's “strange-act” then begun. Hany credulous and gullible persons, and particularly the politicians and commercial giants, now look to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the modern Tyre, to pull them through their difficulties; but when they see Jehovah strike down that organization, which has claimed to be invulnerable, they will be greatly astonished and dumfounded. Then in distress they will say, according to God’s prophet: “We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a
time of health, and behold trouble!” (Jer. 8:14, 15) The words of Isaiah’s prophecy here considered, to wit, “ye inhabitants of the isle” (vs. 2), manifestly means in the final fulfillment those near the Hierarchy and who have been looking to the Hierarchy for help, protection and safety, even as Chittim or Cyprus was near to Tyre and depended upon Tyre. Those close or near-by and dependent upon the main organization, being of the same stripe, picture the Jewish and Protestant clergy and other allies of the Hierarchy who tag along behind the Hierarchy at the present time to do the bidding of the old “whore”. (Ezek. 27:8) They have helped to replenish the coffers of the Hierarchy, and hence Jehovah’s “strange act” is against not only Tyre but the Zidonians and other allies, as he declares in his prophecy: “And all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea.”—Jer. 25:22.
30	Today the so-ealled “Protestants” and the Yiddish clergy openly co-operate with and play into the hands of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy like foolish simpletons and thereby aid in replenishing the numbers of the Hierarchy and to carry on her commercial, religious traffic. Commercial religion is the stock in trade of all such merchants. The Hierarchy takes the lead, and the simpletons follow. The Hierarchy is now taking the lead in compulsory flag-saluting, and in building images or monuments, such as is now widely advertised to be built at Washington, D.C., and the clergy of the so-called “Protestant” and Yiddish organizations fall in line and do what they are told, and when the sackbut sounds they fall down and worship. Poor simpletons!
37	The Devil’s purpose, and therefore the purpose of his instruments in thus making merchandise of the people, is to keep them in subjection and to build up and support the Roman Catholic organization on earth. This part of the prophecy appears to have fulfillment during the period of time marked in the record at Isaiah 23:15,16; that is to say, the coming to pass of the physical facts which fit the words of the prophecy reveal the time of the fulfillment. This adds further force to the conclusion that prophecy cannot be understood until fulfilled or in course of fulfillment. But let it be understood and kept in mind that this prophecy will not be appreciated by merely casually reading it, nor what is here said about it be appreciated by casually reading. Careful study is required. The fulfillment docs not come chronologically in the order of recording of the prophecy, but it appears better here to proceed with the study in the order in which the prophecy is recorded in the Bible, rightly dividing it in harmony with the facts and the Scriptures, and thereby locate the time of the fulfillment. In brief, the fulfillment of the prophecy from verses 15 and 16 precedes the fulfillment of the preceding verses of the same chapter.
106
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
88	The peoples of earth, likened to the sea that bears up the ships of commerce, have been used as merchandise and for gain by the religious systems brought into being by Satan, the god of this world. Says Jehovah by his prophet in connection herewith: ‘ ‘ And by great waters the seed of Sihor [the grain of Shihor (Rotherham)], the harvest of the river [harvest of the Nile (R.V. and Rotherham)], is her revenue; and she is [was (E.U.)] a mart of nations.” (Isa. 23:3) The Lord said to Joshua: ‘‘Sihor ... is before Egypt.” (Josh. 13: 3) Egypt was a commercial world power. Tyre had dealings with Egypt, which symbolizes the Devil’s world power and which was brought into action and employed to reproach the name of Jehovah God.
89	It is written concerning ancient Egypt that its annual revenue amounted to approximately $20,000,000 or that which is equivalent to that sum. Egypt was a great market for the commerce of the nations. Compare these facts with the commercial traffic of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has, and for a long while has had, dealings with Big Business or mighty commerce of the world, members of the Hierarchy being large investors in the commercial traffic of the world. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has been and is a market for all the world, dealing in and manipulating the people, and particularly the “Catholic population”, and doing this for its own selfish gain. Politicians of all nations find the Hierarchy both politically and financially advantageous to them. Dictators, in particular, find a strong ally in the Hierarchy, and it will be generally found that these dictators are backed up and supported and put in power by the Hierarchy. Other religious organizations at the present, the Yiddish and Protestants, deal with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy because it appears to them to be to their selfish advantage.
40	Will the Yiddish and the Protestant clergy ultimately find it advantageous to link themselves to the Hierarchy and be dictated to by the Hierarchy of the Catholic organization? In answer to that question Jehovah says by his prophet: “Be thou ashamed, O Zidon [turn thou pale, O Zidon (Roth.)] ; for the sea hath spoken, even the strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins.”— Isa. 23:4.
41	Instead of being benefited those dupes and allies of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy will become pale of face and grow sick when they see the power of the Hierarchy yielding to Jehovah’s “strange work” now being carried on, and they will be greatly shaken with shame and humiliation when they observe the begin-.ning of Jehovah’s “strange act”. Recently the president of the United States has advised the “good neighbor” policy between all religious organizations, and their unity in action. That will prove to be very bad advice, as many will later discover. The Roman Cath
olic Hierarchy now takes the lead in an aggressive campaign against all who do not fall in line with its schemes, and in this campaign the other religionists trail along. Everyone today who will not support the religionists is denounced as “red” or “communist”, even Jehovah 's witnesses being classed by the religionists as such, although those religionists making these false charges well know that Jehovah’s witnesses have no part whatsoever with the political affairs of the world. The Hierarchy follow the course of their father the Devil.
42	Under the Devil’s wily and deceptive influence the people in general which are used to bear up and support the religious systems that engage in traffic have been deceived and blinded into following such course. The time is certain to come, however, when the following part of the prophecy will be fulfilled, to wit: ‘ ‘ The sea hath spoken, even the strength of the sea”; that is to say, the sincere people who love righteousness will break away from the religious prison house and speak against that wicked organization. Those who compose the “great multitude” (Rev. 7:9) as waters are first turned away from the support of the religionists and give their devotion to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. Then will follow in due time the masses who will renounce and turn away from and against the religionists. This prophecy shows that in God’s due time the relationship of the sincere people with the religionists will be broken off. “The sea” (that is, the people used and exploited by the Devil to mother, nourish and support the religious systems, who rule, are the rulers) will turn against the old “whore” and disclaim any relationship whatsover with her.—Rev. 17 :16-18.
48 Nebuchadnezzar, after laying siege to ancient Tyre, invaded Egypt. (Ezek. 29:18-20) The fall of religionists, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, will precede the destruction of the political and commercial elements of Satan’s visible organization, and such will bring great pain and astonishment to the latter; as it is written: “ As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.” (Isa. 23:5) The report here mentioned is concerning the beginning of Jehovah’s “strange act”. This text, according to the Revised Version, reads: “When the report cometh to Egypt, they shall be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.” The fall of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the religious organization, will bring great pain to the remaining portions of Satan’s visible organization because they will observe the ability of Jehovah’s Executioner to perform Jehovah’s “strange act”, and it will be evident to the remaining ones thai they have no power to protect themselves and that their turn for destruction is next. This conclusion is abundantly supported by other scriptures.—Rev. 18: 9-19.
44 Today Jehovah’s witnesses in every part of the earth are being persecuted by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies, and the Hierarchy religious or
April 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
107
ganization is the chief visible instrument of the Devil which brings into action against Jehovah’s witnesses the political and commercial elements, and together they seek to make the burden great upon the back of those who love and serve Jehovah. And now in this hour of great stress the true people of Jehovah God greatly rejoice, because, true to the promise of the Almighty God, greater hope and strength is given to them by revealing to them an understanding of his prophecy. “The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.” (Ps. 29:11) Those who now devote themselves entirely to Jehovah and his King, and who continue to maintain their integrity toward God, rejoice to be counted worthy of suffering some of the reproaches that came upon Christ Jesus. They are fully advised that Christ Jesus the King is upon his throne, and has gathered unto himself those of his royal house whom he leads and comforts. Now Jehovah through Christ Jesus is revealing to his people a knowledge and appreciation of his prophecies hidden in times of old, and by this knowledge the faithful have increased hope. In the following issues of The Watchtower, by the Lord’s grace, the examination of this prophecy will continue; and we give thanks to our heavenly Father that we are permitted to have his favor in this day, and to thus receive his comfort.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
If 1, 2. Identify Zion. Babylon. How is religion seen to be the chief element of Satan’s organization? Why is organized religion designated as the “harlot”?
If 3. Show whether The Watchtower is justified in repeating at intervals some things that have already been said therein.
If 4,5. Point out the origin and purpose of religion.
1f 6. How, in the record concerning Abel and Cain, and in later record, is religion seen to have originated with Satan?
If 7,8. How does the record of affairs before the flood, and of those soon thereafter, show the relationship of religion to politics, commerce and military organization?
1f 9,10. How, in the record at Genesis 10: 8-12 and 11: 4, and Ezekiel 17: 4,12, is it seen that religion is the product of the Devil, and that politics and commerce, added to religion, form the elements of Satan’s organization? How is this further shown in the designation “the king of Tyrus”, and in the charge made against him as recorded at Ezekiel 28: 16?
If 11. Show what religious organization exactly fits the prophecies recorded in God’s Word. What is the purpose of publishing The Watchtower, and the importance now of presenting the particular truths contained therein at this time?
If 12. Apply the prophetic names Tyre, Zidon, and Babylon.
If 13. Explain the expression “the burden of Tyre”. Account for the order in which this prophecy is recorded, and for the clear understanding now of prophecies hitherto not understood.
If 14-16. Point out the origin and relationship of Tyre and Zidon.
If 17-19. With scriptures and facts, identify “the king of Tyrus” and “the prince of Tyrus”.
K 20. In the light of the different translations, what important information in this connection is seen in the apostle’s words recorded at Acts 17: 22?
Tf 21,22. What are the facts proving the identity of modern Tyre? Of the modern “prince of Tyrus”? Of “the king of Tyrus”? How are Protestantism and the Jewish religious organization included in the fulfillment of the prophetic picture?
If 23-26. With scriptures and facts, and illustration, show what was pictured by (a) the ships of Tarshish, (b) “the sea,” and (c) Tyrus’ “marineis”.
K 27,28. When will the “howl” begin? What is the ground for such conclusion? How does the order in which the prophecy here under consideration is recorded serve its purpose? Give other illustrations of similar order of prophetic record.
If 29,30. What were the judgments declared against Tyrus? Have those prophetic declarations been fulfilled?
T 31-33. Explain the statement (a) that ‘Tyre is laid waste, so that in Tyre there is no house’, as applied at the time it was expressed by the prophet; also as a prophecy, (b) Likewise, that there was “no entering in: from the land of Chittim”. Compare this with what is foretold at Ezekiel 27: 32 and at Revelation 18: 15-19.
If 34. What, then, is seen to have been the purpose of religion and of the work of religionists, and to be God’s purpose concerning them?
U 35. How have “the merchants of Zidon” ‘passed over the sea’, and “replenished” the “inhabitants of the isle”?
If 36. That Chittim was near Tyre and dependent upon Tyre was of what prophetic significance?
If 37. How has the Devil been using the people? and what has been his purpose therein? When can prophecy be understood, and why not prior thereto? How, only, can it be understood at that time? In what order does Isaiah 23 have fulfillment?
If 38, 39. How did the statement at Isaiah 23: 3 apply at the time those words were spoken? In what facts is fulfillment thereof now seen?
5 40-42. Describe the situation foretold in verse 4.
If 43. With corroborative scriptures, point out the prophetic significance of the fact that Nebuchadnezzar, after laying siege to ancient Tyre, invaded Egypt.
7 44. Show that the promise recorded at Psalm 29: 11 is being fulfilled?
FEAR OR FAITH?
BEFORE the destruction of Jerusalem there were two prophets who prophesied at practically the same time, namely, Urijah and Jeremiah. Urijah received warning that unless he stopped his prophesying he would suffer. He got frightened and fled to Egypt, and the king Jehoiakim sent men to Egypt and fetched Urijah out, and brought him to Jerusalem and slew him. Jeremiah was arrested, and the clergy and other accusers insisted that he be put to death, and his accusers cited the case of Urijah. Jeremiah stood firm and showed his faith in Jehovah and performed his duty faithfully, and Jehovah protected him. (Jer.
26:8-24) The following experiences reported from Germany are quite appropriate. Urijah well pictures a class of men who have undertaken to serve Jehovah, and who because of fear have ceased doing so. Jeremiah pictures the “faithful servant” class, who obey God and not man. The names of the parties in Germany are omitted, for an obvious reason.
----------------------------------------, February 3, 1937. Dear Brother Rutuerforu:
It is my privilege in the name of all the German brethren to send you a report of the activity of the last few weeks and at the same time to express our great joy, which is amongst all of us.
108
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
At the convention in Lucerne you had given us permission to distribute the there adopted Resolution in Germany. This was done on the 12th of December, very rapidly and throughout Germany.
We had taken care to keep all preparations strictly secret. The Resolutions were prepared. The German Secret Police had received reports from their spies in Holland as to the distribution, but they received no information as to the exact date of the distribution. Even the brethren were not informed until tli'e day before. Every one received his package with the Resolutions placed in envelopes as well as the territory he was to cover. On Saturday, the 12th of December, at 5 p.m., the work suddenly began, and by 7 p.m. everything was finished. In all districts of Germany, in all larger towns and cities, 3,540 courageous witnesses began simultaneously the large attack. It was a great victory and a sharp stab at the enemy, to the indescribable joy of the faithful workers.
One hour and a quarter after the start, that is, at 6: 15 p.m., the police radio stations broadcast the distribution of the tracts, and in another half hour the whole police force, SA and SS, was on its feet. But they were too late; the work was done.
The enemy was furiously mad, that they bad been taken by surprise, and their anger knew no limits. They were also greatly disturbed and are now in fear, for the following reason: They do not know how many such tracts were distributed, but find them in all parts of Germany. When questioned, most of the population denied having received anything. But the police do not believe them, because it is no longer a secret that most of the people are against the Hitler government and really are glad when something is done to help the people get the truth.
In different places the police arrested those who had not taken part in the work, whereas the courageous ones were left in peace.
They are all very joyful, more so than at any former time since the dissolution of our organization. They are all waiting and asking when the next attack is to take place, and quite a number of those who through fear did not take part last time wish to join the others next time.
It is quite evident that Jehovah fought this battle and blessed our work in every detail.
Naturally, outside of these leaflets, books and booklets are
being distributed, the Jonadabs visited, and in certain places the work with the gramophones is carried on. During the last quarter year (October I to December 31), 1936, the report of the activity is as follows:
About 3,600 workers; 21,591 hours; 300 Bibles; 9,624 books; 19,304 booklets.
There are about 4,000 brethren under arrest. At the present time, trials are taking place all over, which, since the newspapers now give more detailed reports than before, are causing quite a stir amongst the population. I enclose in this letter several newspaper clippings and also a report of the most recent abuse of faithful brethren. In spite of the cruel persecutions by the brown and black tormentors, the brethren are undismayed. The joy of Jehovah is our strength, and the confidence in him, the desire to do our duty in the face of death, is ever increasing as the heat of the fire oven, which in Germany is truly heated ‘ ‘ sevenfold ’ ’.
The Watchtower, which all brethren receive regularly, and especially the last articles about the prophecies of Malachi, is wonderful food at the right time, also for us, and we are very thankful to the Lord that he has thus strengthened and encouraged us. Many from the ranks of the enemy look on with astonishment and admit that there is something extraordinary about Jehovah’s witnesses, that they could not possibly be so courageous, ready to stake everything and to oppose such terrific enemies in their own strength.
Surely the Lord will soon give an ear to our ardent prayers and to the many cries for freedom from this prison house and soon giant us a more free hand also in Germany for his name and his work’s sake, also for the great multitude, that we may carry on his work on a larger scale, as in other countries, because, we are quite sure, there is much to do in connection with the great multitude.
With many hearty greetings and blessings and with the assurance that all the faithful in Germany are endeavoring with their might to carry on Jehovah’s work, I communicate to you, Brother Rutherford, the expression of our appreciation that we are able to serve the Lord together with you and all the Loi d's people, to serve and to die for Him.
Your brother and cowitness,
TIME OF INSPECTION
THE temple or sanctuary of God must be set up and cleansed before the complete vindication of Jehovah’s name, and such work is a part of the preparation for the battle of the great day of God Almighty. For some time prior to the opening of the temple for judgment Christ Jesus was giving attention to the consecrated ones on the earth to ‘ prepare the way before Jehovah’ and to bring these consecrated ones to the time and place of judgment; and concerning that period of time Jehovah says: “And he shall prepare the way before me.” (Mal. 3:1) That work being completed, then Christ Jesus suddenly or straightway comes to the temple: “He shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.” From that time forward to the time of the battle of Armageddon is designated in the Scriptures “the day of his preparation”.—Nah. 2: 3.
The Scriptures show that these two periods are separate and distinct, in this, to wit: the time of ‘preparing the way before Jehovah’ ends with the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple; whereas “the day of his preparation” begins at the time of the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple. The consecrated must be brought before the Lord for examination, and must be tried and judged, and the approved ones are
brought into the temple and anointed. This is part of the work of “the day of his preparation”. This work was foreshadowed by the rebuilding of the typical temple at Jerusalem. The prophetic book of Zechariah deals with this preparatory work, the battle of the great day of God Almighty, and the conditions that will exist at the conclusion of that battle. All of this was written aforetime for the purpose of giving strength to the faithful remnant of God’s anointed people now on the earth. Jehovah has furnished cumulative evidence upon this point, and it behooves us to give careful consideration to all of such evidence.
When the term “Lord of hosts” or “Jehovah of hosts” appears in a Scripture text it relates particularly to Jehovah as the Commander of his military forces which he uses to express his wrath against the enemy. Note that the words of the prophet concerning the coming of Christ Jesus are: “Behold, he cometh, saith Jehovah of hosts." (Mal. 3:1, A.R.V.) Concerning the rebuilding of the temple as prophesied by Zechariah the command is: “Thus saith Jehovah, of hosts: Return unto me, saith Jehovah of hosts, and I will return unto you, saith Jehovah of hosts." (Zech. 1:3, A.R.V.) The great God of battle is preparing for
April 1, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER.
109
the final war, and those in his organization eagerly seek for information concerning the same.
Cyrus, the king of Persia, under the direction of Jehovah issued a decree for the rebuilding of the temple at Jerusalem. A remnant of Jews returned from captivity in Babylon and began the work of rebuilding, and then because of opposition these Jews for sixteen years did no work whatsoever in connection with the rebuilding of the temple. In the meantime Cyrus was succeeded by Darius, the Persian. It was in the second year of the reign of Darius that God sent his two prophets, Haggai and Zechariah, to stir up the Jews and put them to work on the temple. Zechariah began to prophesy two months later than Haggai, or, to wit, in the eighth month in the second year of the reign of Darius.—Zech. 1:1. See Vindication, Book Three, page 109.
Zechariah was a son of Berechiah, who was the son of Iddo the prophet. Therefore Zechariah was the grandson of the prophet. The scripture shows also that Zechariah was a priest. (Neh, 12:1-4,12-16) The name Zechariah means “whom Jehovah remembers”, and Zechariah foreshadowed God’s servant class on the earth at the end of the world and whom God remembers and makes living stones in his temple, which temple is his building for the vindication of his great name. The name Berechiah means “whom Jehovah hath blessed”. Sometimes Zechariah was called the son of Iddo, because he was in fact a son of the second generation. (Ezra 5:1) “Iddo” means “timely; one born on a feast day; loving; opportune”. We know that Jehovah does everything at the opportune time.
Jehovah was displeased with the service of these Israelites, and therefore he caused Zeehariah to prophesy and say: “Return unto me, saith Jehovah of hosts. . . . Be ye not as your fathers.” (Zech. 1:2-5, A.R.V.) Their fathers had permitted the temple, which had been built by Solomon, to be cluttered up with trash and defiled by idol worship, and now the returned captives from Babylon were showing the same disregard for God’s interests by permitting the building of the temple at Jerusalem to stop and lie in waste. (Hag. 1:4) The words of the prophet Zechariah serve as a warning to all who are begotten of the Lord’s spirit and who become negligent of the duties and obligations laid upon them by the Lord. (Zech. 1:6) Isaiah prophesied of a similar displeasure on the part of Jehovah with his consecrated people on the earth. (Isa. 6:1-9; 12:1) This is one of the reasons why the Lord Jehovah sent his message to cleanse his people, that is, to refine and cleanse the temple class; and this work would necessarily mean the cleaning out and putting on the side all the stubborn and rebellious ones. All must know that Jehovah is God and that his name shall be vindicated; and this work must begin at the house of God. (Mal. 3:1-3; Ezek. 20:1,37,38; 33:33) Such preparatory and cleansing work must
be done before the final battle; hence it is a part of the work of the ‘day of preparation’.
On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month in the second year of Darius, which month corresponds to our modern month of February, the prophet Zechariah had a vision. It was about the time for the ‘ ‘ latter rain” to fall. Three months previous to that time Haggai had been prophesying. After the twentyfourth day of the ninth month of the same year, it seems, Haggai ceased prophesying, or at least there is no record of his further prophesying; but from that time forward Zechariah exclusively filled the prophetic office concerning the work to be done on the temple.
Concerning the vision the prophet said: “I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom [of the mountain]; and behind him were there red horses, speckled, and white.” (Zech. 1: 8) It being in the nighttime, the vision relates to a time when ‘there is darkness upon the earth, and gross darkness covers the people’. (Isa. 60:2) The “man riding upon a red horse” was the angel of the Lord which materialized and to whom other angels make report of the result of their investigation. (Zech. 1:11) He was riding on a red horse, which is a symbol of sanguinary warfare. (Isa. 63:2) The ‘man on the red horse’ manifestly represents Christ Jesus, the Leader and Field Marshal of Jehovah’s war organization.—Ps. 45:4.
It is the time of inspection! The man on the red horse “stood”, that is, he made his horse come to a standstill, and this corresponds to the period of time of “silence in heaven” (Rev. 8:1), it being the time when there was inactivity between the end of the Elijah work and the beginning of the Elisha work of the church. (Mal. 4: 5,6) (See Light, Book I, page 99.) The rider on the red horse ‘stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom’. Another translation {Rotherham, and the A.R.V., margin) renders.this text “in the shade” or “shady place”. Evidently the leader stood his horse at a point on the side of the Mount of Olives in the shadow of the trees, and from which point he makes an inspection of the city of Jerusalem. At that same time there were myrtle trees growing on the side of the Mount of Olives. (Noh. 8:15) It was the appropriate place for the rider to stand his horse, and the faet that mention is made that he stood his horse among the myrtle trees shows that it was at an appropriate time for Jehovah to return to his people, to restore to them his truth, and to gather them unto himself. “Myrtle” means or points to harvest, the time of restitution and joy. (See The Watchtower 1931, page 149; Preservation, page 19.) This would fix the time of the fulfillment of the prophecy, to wit, at the time the Lord was gathering his people unto himself preparatory to cleansing them at the temple judgment.—Ps. 50:5; Isa. 41:19; 55: 13.
The man on the red horse was inspecting the city of Jerusalem, which represented God’s covenant people.
110
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, n. y.
The city of Jerusalem must, at the time, have presented a sorry appearance, according to the description given of it by The prophet. (Neh. 2:11-15) The inspector general of Jehovah’s hosts must have been filled with indignation when he surveyed the desolation of Jerusalem. Likewise when Christ Jesus came in 1918 to inspect the professed people of God and set up the temple, he would look with indignation upon the desolation of the earthly part of God’s organization, the covenant people of the Most High. At this point the words of Isaiah seem quite appropriate and express the indignation of the Lord: “For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed [remnant people] is come.” (Isa. 63:4) This locates the time of the beginning of the fulfillment of Zechariah’s prophecy.
The inspector general of Jehovah’s hosts at the same time made an inspection of Satan’s earthly organization: “He stood, and measured the earth.” What he then saw would further increase his indignation and in due time would increase his zeal to act in the destruction of the wicked world. “He beheld, and drove asunder the nations.” (Hab. 3:6) It is the day of Jehovah’s preparation. (Nah. 2:3) Standing behind the man on the red horse were other riders on “red horses, speckled [bay (margin) ; pale (Lccscr)], and white” horses. This shows that the inspector general was accompanied by his army officers in the army of Jehovah, and these make inspection and render their report to their chief. (Zech. 1:11) The conclusion is irresistible that these horsemen accompanying the Lord Jesus represented his holy angels that accom
panied him at the time of judgment. (Matt. 25: 31) “Behold, the mountain was full of horses ... of fire.” (2 Ki. 6:17) These represent the war organization of Jehovah. “And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.”—Rev. 19:14.
Zechariah’s prophecy, chapter fourteen, shows the two opposing armies assembled for war. Jehovah’s army is under the immediate command of Christ Jesus, and the army of Satan is under the immediate command of Gog, Satan’s field marshal. Then Jehovah comes forth to direct the fight. He is pictured as standing upon the mountain, and at the touch of his feet the mountain separates, forming a great valley between the two mountains. From between these two mountains come forth the war chariots of the Almighty rushing into battle, and then follows a description of the most terrible war that will ever have been fought. That is the end of war. The battle of the great day of God Almighty results in the release of all who love righteousness and in the complete destruction of all who willfully work wickedness.
Jehovah now is commanding this testimony to be given in the earth. Christ Jesus is the great witness, and he has committed to the faithful remnant who are members of his organization the work of delivering this testimony on the earth. The purpose of the testimony is to afford the people an opportunity to take their stand on the side of Jehovah and live, and that the name of the Most High may be made known and entirely vindicated.
LETTERS
THANKS TO JEHOVAH FOR GREAT AID
Dear Brother Rutherford:
AU praise to Jehovah, who in his due time i eveals his puipose to man! In the midst of the battle he issues his commands. His faithful witnesses are quick to hear and obey. So it is with the phonograph recently introduced into general uso with the house-to-house witnessing. “Use phonographs!’’ was certainly issued by the Conimander-in-Chief of Jehovah’s army, Chi ist Jesus. Under this fresli stimulus the work has gone foiward by leaps and bounds, adding a new zest and impulse and resulting in a more thorough and more widespread publishing of the kitigdom good news.
Lately we have taken the phonograph witli us on all our witnessing. So enthused are we with this latest provision of Jehovah for his witnesses that we cannot help but wnte you concerning our joy and gratitude, and wonder how we eier got along without it before.
With machine in hand and the promise to give a message of greatest importance to those within, entrance to more homes than ever is possible. More than that, the short Bible talks by Brother Rutherford break down prejudice of many years’ stand ing. People now hear the Word who had turned deaf cars to the radio talks, who had declined to read the testimony card, or who had set themselves in opposition to house-to-house publishers. We have found, too, that almost inevitably the placement of books and booklets follows the presentation of the phonograph lecture.
Our thanks to Jehovah for this great aid in the work and to you, Brother Rutherford, for transmitting to the field forces
instructions legarding the great blessings that are bound to follow the use of the phonograph machines.
Your fellow soldiers in the fight to the vindication of Jehovah’s name, Benjamin F. Meyers, Hattie Meyers, Auxiliaries.
“THAT’S WHAT THE PEOPLE NEED”
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Hope this statement will make your heart glad, and the hearts of those associated with you, in knowing how Jehovah is giving his increase to the work in New Jersey after the convention.
On the morning of February 9, while operating the sound car a patrol car approached me and the officer asked me if I was connected with the Jehovah's witnesses of Secaucus. I answered him “Yes". Then he looked into the sound car where Sister Nelson was sitting and I asked him if he wanted to see the appaiatus. He looked at the apparatus and saw how it operated and then started to go back to the patrol car, in which  was seated another policeman.
The policeman again propounded a question and asked me whether Judge Rutherford was a real judge of the bench. I answered him “Yes” and told him that now Judge Rutherford was dedicated to the service of the Most High God and the lectures which we were playing were by Judge Rutherford.
Then he asked me who the one was that was doing the talking at the convention at Newark, and I answered him and told him it was Judge Rutherford in person. While this conversa
April 1, 1937
3Tie WATCHTOWER.
111
tion was taking place the lecture “ Jehovah” was being played by the sound car.
Then the other policeman in the car propounded a question and said to me, “How do you people get alongf” I told him I would be only too glad to answer him, and said that I got along bv voluntary contributions. I then told him that the car in front of him was owned by Sister Nelson who was in the car mid that the apparatus was a voluntary contribution by people that loved the Lord.
Then the other policeman told me, “Yes, at the convention 1 saw cars from all parts of the country.” Then I answered him and told him that these lectures were for the benefit of the people of good will and that eveiything was done to the honor and praise of Jehovah’s name, and for further information he could tune in to station WBBR. Then the other policeman in the car answered, “That’s what the people need; that’s what we want: the truth. ’ ’
Then the policemen acted very courteous and withdrew by saluting Sister Nelson and myself in a kind way. We continued with our work of broadcasting and by Jehovah’s grace were having a wonderful time.
Toward evening, just as we were about through with that section of the territory, a police car again circled around us and just as the police car drove around the corner another policeman on foot approached me and asked me if I wouldn’t mind moving out of that part of the territory. With that I asked him if he had received instructions from headquarters.
He answered, “Yes; there is someone sick on this street who has made a complaint. ’ ’ Immediately I told him that I would be glad to accommodate him. The policeman was very courteous and very kind.
At the present time the police of North Bergen, New Jersey, have been acting very kindly, giving us the right of way with lights and saluting us as we go through the streets, and it seems that Jehovah God through his King Jesus Christ is giving the increase according to his good pleasure to the police of North Bergen, in that they are appreciating the truth which is being brought to their attention by the beautiful instrument provided by Jehovah, the sound car.
Furtheimore you would be interested to know that while witnessing in the business district of Newark the businessmen of that city have shown a different attitude entirely towards the truth since the convention. I have been placing books with some of them, and some of them openly admitted that they enjoyed the convention very much.
There was a time that at the mention of Judge Rutherford’s name the people would not have anything to do with us, but since the convention their attitude has changed very much, and now the people are gladly accepting us.
May the rich blessings of Jehovah through his King Christ Jesus be upon you as you endeavor continually to magnify His name.
Your brother in Christ,
Thomas Raci.na, Pioneer.
(Continued from page 11£)
NEW JERSEY
Asbury P. WCAP Su 12:45pm Su 2:45pm Su 9:00pm
Newark WHBI Su 9:55am
Su 6:25pm Su 9:00pm
NEW MEXICO
Carlsbad KLAH Su 10:55am
Su 1:00pm Su 5:00pin
Roswell KGFL Su 5:00pm Mo 8:00am Mo 6:55pm
NEW YORK
Brooklyn WBBR Su 9:10am Su 4:30pm Su 7:30pm
Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:15am Su 6:30pm Mo 10:30am Tu 10:30am Tu 6:30pm We 10:30am We 6:30pm Th 10:30am Th 6:30pm Fr 10:30am Fr 6:30pm
Buffalo WGRSu 9:55am
Su 10:45pm
Buffalo WKBW Su 5:55pm Freeport WGBB Su 10:25am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:55pm
White Pl. WFASSu 6:00pm Tu 10:55am	Ba 10:55am
NORTH CAROLINA
Greensboro WBIG Su 10:30am High P't WMFR Su 10:35am Raleigh WPTFSu 3:30pm
We 3:15pm Fr 3:15pm
Wilm’gton WMFDSu 10:30am Su 12:25pm Su 4:30pm
NORTH DAKOTA
Valley C’y KOVC Su 12:30pm Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
OHIO
Akron WJW Su 11:30am Su 3:25pm Su 6:00pm
Su 10:15pm
Cleveland WHK Su 11:00pm Tu 1:45pm Th 1:45pm
Fr 1:45pm
Columbus WBNS Su 7:45am
Su 12:30pm	Mo 3:15pm
We 3:15pm	Fr 3:15pm
Greek Su 8:30am
Columbus WCOL Su 10:00am
Tu 3:45pm Th 2:30pm
Sa 1:45pm
Columbus WHKCSu 5:25pm
Mo 1:55pm	Tu 1:55pm
We 1:55pm	Th 1:55pm
Fr 1:55pm
Portsm'th WPAY Mo 11:00am
We 11:00am Fr 11:00am
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA £u 10:50am
Su 12:25pm Su 5:00pm
Enid KCRC Su 10:15am
Su 1:25pm Su 3:00pm
Muskogee KBIX Su 10:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 5:55pm
Oki ’a City KFXR Su 12:25am
Su 6:00pm Su 7:25pm
Ponca Citv WBBZ Su 9:55am
Su 12:55pm Su 4:55pm
Shawnee KGFF Su 1:30pm
Su 3:55pm Su 5:55pm
Tulsa KVOO Su 9:25am
Su 10:05am Mo 4:55pm
OREGON
Astoria HAST Tu 7:00am
Th 2:55ptn Sa 11:55am
Portland KWJJ Su 10:45am
Su 4:15pm Su. 9:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Allentown WSAN Mo 4:00pm
We 4:00pm Fr 4:0Opm
Easton WEST Su 10:25am
Sull:55ain Su 9:25pm
Greensb’g WIIJB Su 10:15ain
Su 4:00pm
Harrisb’g WKBOSu 12:45pm
Su 3:55pm Su 5:55pm
Philad’a WTEL Su 12:30pm
Su 1:25pm Tu 5:30pm
Pittsburgh KQV Su 10:45am
Pittab ’gh WWSWSu 10:45am
Su 5:00pm Su 9:00pm
Wilkes-B. WBRE Su 10:40nm
Su 2:45pm Su 6:30pm
Williamsp. WRAK Su 6:15pin
Su 7:45pm	Th 7:30pm
York WORK Su 12:25pm
Su 3:00ptn	Su 6:25pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Greenville WFBC Su 8:00am
Su 3:30pm Su 9:30pm
Spart ’b ’g WSPA Su 10:30am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:40pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Huron	KGDY Su 9:25am
Sul2:30pni We 5:55pm
Piene	KGFX Su 10:00am
Tu 4:00pin Th 4:00pm
Sioux Falls KSOO Su 9:10am
Su 9:45am Su 4:30pm
Watcrt’n KWTN Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 1:55pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPI Su 10:4U:im
Su 1:10pm Su 4:25pm
Jackson WTJS Su 10:30am
Su 12:15pm Su 2:25pm
Knoxville WNOX Su 10:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 9:45pm
Memphis WNBR Su 12:40pm
Su 2:15pm Su 4:55pm
TEXAS
Brady KNELSu 9:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 4:30pm
Ballas WRR Su 9:30am
Su 4:00pm Su 9:00pm
El Paso KTSM Su 9:10am
Su 1:15pm Su 6:30pm
Lubbock KFYO Su 10:55am
Su 1:55pm Su 4:25pm
Paris	KPLT Su 9:10am
Su 10:25am Su 5:00pm
Pecos	KIUN Su 10:55am
Su 1:00pm Su 5:00pm
Pt. Arthur KPAG Su 9:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 4:30pm
San Angelo KGKL Su 9:30am Su 10:40am Su 1:30pm SanAntonio KABC Su 9:00am
Su 5:00pm
Spanish Su 1:00pm
S.	Antonio KMAC Su 7:55am
Su 2:55pm Su 7:55pm
Weslaco KRGV Su 9:45am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:45pm
UTAH
Price KEUBSull:45am
Su 1:25pm Su 3:15pm
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Mo 8:30pm We 8:30pm Fr 8:30 pm
VIRGINIA
Ilamsonb. WSVA Su 12:15 pm Su 2:30pm Su 4:45pm Petersh’g WPHR Su 8:55am
Su 10:25am	Mo 8:55am
We 8:55am	Fr 10:15am
Sa 8:55am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15pm Roanoke WDBJ Mo 5:00pm
' WASHINGTON
Everett KRKO Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 3:00pm
Seattle KIRO Su 10:25am
Su 5:15pm Su 9:00pm Spokane KGA Su 9:15am Tacoma	KMO Su 10:00aiu
Su 3:00pm Su 5:55pm
WEST VIRGINIA
Fairmont WMMNSul0:30am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:00pm
Huntington WSAZ Su 1:00pm
Su 2:00pm Su 3:00pm
Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am Su 12:30pm Su 6:10pm
WISCONSIN
Madison WIBA Su 9:30am
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other starions at time shown.
[Current local time Is shown In each Instance.]
ARGENTINA
Bahia Blanca LU2 Su 11:30am
Buenos Aires LR2 Su 10:50am Los Andes, San Juan
LV5 Su 10:30am
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AYTu 9:45pm
Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm
Grafton 2-GF Tu 7:30pm
Gunnedah 2-MOSu 7:00pm
Newcastle 2-HD Su 10:30am
Su 6:30pm Su 11:40pm
We 6:30pm
W’gaW’ga 2-WGSu 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane	4-BC Su 7:30am
Cairns	4-CA Su 7:00pm
Marybor’h 4-MB We 9:45pm
Townsville 4-TO Su 9:15pm
TASMANIA
Ulverstone 7-UV Su 6:25pm Su 10:20pm We 6:25pm
VICTORIA
Bendigo	3-BO Su 7:00pm
Hamilton	3-HASu 6:45pm
Melbourne 3-AK Su 2:15pm
Su 10:00pm
Swan Hill 3-SH Su 7:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA Kalgoorlie 6-KG Su 7:00pm Northam 6-AM Su 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Wallonia-Bonne Esperance (201.7 m) We 7:00am
BRAZIL
Sao Paulo PRF-3
Spanish Su 5:55pm
German Tu 5:55pm
English Th 5:55pm
CANADA
BRITISH COLUMBIA Kelowna CKOV Su 1:45pm
ONTARIO
Cobalt CKMC Su 3:15pm
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:00am
Su 1:30pm Su 8:30pm
Polish Su 6:20pm (1st and 3d Sundays)
CHINA
Shanghai JtHHE Su 5:00pm
CUBA
Camaguey CMJF Su 11:45am Havana CMQ and
shortwave COCQ 9740kc USA Eastern Standaid Time Su 5:45pm Spanish Su 5:30 pm
Santa Cl ’a CMHI
(1st and 3d Sundays)
Spanish Su 11:00am
FRANCE
Radio Lyon Sa 6:50pm
French We 7:25pm
French Sa 7:25pm
PARAGUAY Asuncion ZP1 Su 10:30am
SPAIN
Madrid	EAQ 9860kc
USA Eastern Standard Time
We 7:15pm	Sa 7:15pm
Spanish Su 6:45pm
URUGUAY Montevideo CX10 Su 12:15pm (Radio International)
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm’ham WAPI Su 10:15pm
Su 4:30pm We 5:15pm
Decatur WMFO Su 12:30pm
Su 2:00pm Su 4:00pm
Dothan WAGF Su 9:30am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:00pm
Gadsden WJBY Su 1:15pm
Su 3:00pm Su 5:55pm
M ’tgomery WSFA Su 4:00pm
We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Selma WHBB Su 10:10am
Su 12:25pm Su 4:10pm
Tuscaloosa WJRD Su 10:30am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:30pm
ALASKA
Anchorage KFQD Mo 9:10pm
We 9:10pm Sa 9:10pm
Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Jerome	KCRJ Su 4:00pm
Phoenix	KOY Su 9:20am
Su 12:45pm Su 5:30pm
Tucson KGAR Su 12:55pm
Su 5:45pm
Spanish Su 9:30am
ARKANSAS
Hot Sp ’gs KTHS Su 10:15am
Jonesboro KBTM Su 8:30am
Su 3:55pm Su 5:10pm
CALIFORNIA
Bakersf’ld KPMC Su 10:30am
Su 1:15pm Su 8:25pm
El Centro KXO Su 4:30pm
Mo 10:30am Tu 4:30pm
We 10:30am Th 4:30pm
Fr 10:30am Sa 4:30pm
Spanish Su 4:35pm
LosAngeles KMTR Su 2:55pm
Mo 2:55pm Tu 2:55pm
We 2:55pm Th 2:55pm
Fr 2:55pm Sa 2:55pm
Merced KYOS Su 8:45am
Su 1:45pm	Su	3:00pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:00am
Su 4:00pm	Su	7:00pm
Tu 9:00am	Tu	2:00pm
Tu 11:00pm	We	8:15pm
Fr 9:30pm	Sa	10:00pm
COLORADO
Alamosa KGIW Tu 4:15pm
Th 4:15pm Sa 4:15pm
Durango KI UP Su 1:00pm
Sterling KGEK Su 2:30pm
CONNECTICUT
N. Britain WNBC Su 8:00am
Su 8:10am	Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilmington WDEL Su 1:15pm
Su 5:45pm Su 9:30pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Washington WOL Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 6:30pm
FLORIDA
Jacksonv. WMBR Su 9:55am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:30pm
Lakeland WLAK Su 9:30am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:00pm
Orlando WDBO Su 11:00am
Pensacola WCOA Su 1:45pm
Su 5:00pm Su 5:45pm
Tallahassee WT AL Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 4:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens WTFI Su 9:25am
Su 11:00am Sa 7:00pm
Atlanta WATL Su 10:50am
Su 2:00pm Su 9:00pm
Augusta WRDW Su 11:00am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:30pm
Griffin WKEUSu 9:40am
Su 2:45pm Su 4:30pm
Rome WRGA Su 10:50am
Su 5:00pm Su 8:50pm
Waycross WAYX Su 9:10am
Su 10:45am Su 12:45pm
HAWAII Hilo	KHBC Su 10:00am
IDAHO
Boise	KIDO Su 10:55am
Su 7:00pm We 4:00pm Idaho Falls KID Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 4:00pm
Nampa	KFXD Su 10:00am
Su 11:40am Su 7:15pm Pocatello KSEI Su 10:15am
Su 3:10pm Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 4:45pm Su 6:45pm Su 9:00pm Rockford WROK Su 9:15am
Sul2:55pni Su 3:45pm
Rock Is. WHBFSu 9:15am Su 12:45pm Su 4:00pm Tuscola WDZ Su 9:35am Su 11:55am Su 1:50pm
INDIANA Evansville WGBF Su 9:25am Su 2:25pm Su 4:30pm Hammond WWAESulO:15am
Su 3:25pm Sul0:00pm
New Albany WGRC Su 9:25am Su 12:25pm Su 4:15pm
T.	Haute WBOW Su 12:00 nn
Su 2:00pm Su 4:00pm
IOWA
Davenport WOC Su 10:00am Su 12:15pm We 4:15pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:55pm Su 2:55pm Su 3:55pm
KENTUCKY
Louisville WGRC Su 9:25am
Su 12:25pm Su 4:15pm
Paducah WPAD Su 10:00am
Su 2:45pm Su 8:30pm
MAINE
Augusta WRDO Su 10:00am
Su 1:15pm Su 4:00pm
Bangor WLBZ Su 4:45pm
Presque I. WAGM Su 9:45am
Su 12:30pm Su 1:55pm
MARYLAND
Baltimore WCAO Su 10:30am
Su 12:45pm	Su 10:45pm
Frederick WFMD Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 5:00pm
Hagerst’n WJE J Su 10:25am
Su 1:40pm Su 9:15pm
MASSACHUSETTS
Boston WCOP Su 9:30am
Su 10:45am	Su 1:10pm
Boston WHDH Su 9:45am
Su 1:30pm Su 3:00pm
Boston WMEX Su 10:30am
Su 4:55pm Su 7:45pm
MICHIGAN
Detroit	WJR Su 10:00am
Kalamazoo WKZO Su 8:20am
Su 9:00am Su 9:55am
Muskegon WKBZ Su 10:30am Su 3:15pm Su 5:55pm
MINNESOTA
F’gus Falls KGDE Su 10:00am Su 1:45pm Su 7:15pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’g WFOR Su 1:00pm Su 3:30pm Su 5:30pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 10130am
Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
St. Joseph KFEQ Su 10:00am
Su 1:35pm Su 3:40pm
NEBRASKA
Lincoln KFAB Su 9:30am
Scottsbluff KGKY Mo 5:30pm
Tu 5:30pm Fr 5:30pm
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Laconia WLNH Su 10:10am
Su 2:10pm Su 6:55pm
(Continued on page 111)
tffe WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N .Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine> and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s, kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God, and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies, It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other' worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian.........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African.......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AU sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank- (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y-, Postoffice. Act of March S, J8W.
“GLITTERING SWORD”
The coming testimony period, ‘ ‘ Glittering Sword, ’ ’ from June 5 to 13 inclusive, will afford a most generous opportunity for the people of good will to get the Lord’s latest provision, to learn how they may find protection and preservation from Jehovah’s Glittering Sword. During this period the kingdom publishers will offer the people a 50c combination; this to consist of the two books Piches and Preservation and four booklets, including Protection, Uncovered, and Armageddon. Till then the Informant will give fuller and further details concerning this period, and all publishers will inform themselves therefrom and proceed accordingly. Your promptitude in preparing all needful things for this period will be pleasing to the Lord and blessed. Please report to this office the result of your service.
“ARMAGEDDON”
This new 64-page booklet is a thriller and of absorbing interest. It contains the president’s public address on that subject, which held spellbound vast European and American audiences, and also includes a clear Scriptural discussion of who will survive that dread conflict. The release of this booklet for regular house-to-house witnessing is announced elsewhere. Meantime you may procure the booklet for your own information and preparation, at 5c a copy.
NEW PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph of new design, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches m size, and covered with brown cloth and having rounded corners. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces, which is 5i pounds lighter than the previous model manufactured by the Society. With the three phonograph discs which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound is just as strong as that of the previous model, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonograph is timed properly, at 78 r.p.m., and should be checked from time to time. This new model, including three discs, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittance should accompany orders. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
HELP RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION WITHOUT DELAY
For the convenience of the subscriber, a renewal blank is sent with The Watchtower one month before expiration (on foreign subscriptions, two months). Renew your subscription promptly and fill in the renewal blank which is mailed to you with your Watchtower. Sign your name uniformly; give street and number, city and state; date your renewal blank, and please use the blanks sent to you enclosed in The Watchtower. These subscription blanks teU us which numbers will be necessary with your renewal order. Always read carefully the reverse side of the renewal blank. When you change your address it is always necessary to give the old as well as the new address. This should be done two weeks before change of address becomes effective.
Vol. LVIII	April 15, 1937	No. 8
"SONG OF THE HARLOT”
“Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten: make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.”—Isa. 23:16.
PART 2
JEHOVAH uses natural things, such as the creatures of the nation of Israel and those people who had dealings with Israel, to picture or foreshadow spiritual and natural things to be enacted in the future, but on a far greater scale. (1 Cor. 10:11) Jehovah’s due time having arrived to make clear the meaning of such prophetic pictures, he grants to those who love and serve him the privilege of seeing the meaning thereof. This privilege is not given to the selfish and supercritical ones. This favor to those who love him is granted in the ‘perilous days’ that his own faithful remnant may have comfort and that their hope may be strong. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, leader of religious organizations, is very arrogant, boastful, scornful and vicious, and acting in utter defiance of God’s commandments. The vessels or instruments employed by the Hierarchy who do the Hierarchy’s bidding likewise act viciously and without regard to the rights of others and wholly contrary to the Word of God. The prophecy at the 23d chapter of Isaiah, at this point, continues to speak' of the conditions of the Hierarchy and allies immediately before and at the beginning of Armageddon.
3 Chittim was the island nearest to Tyre, while Tarshish was at the opposite end of the Great or Mediterranean sea. To get from Tyre to Tarshish one must travel the full length of the Mediterranean sea. It is understood that Tarshish was a colony situated on the coast of Spain and belonging to Tyre and Zidon. Jonah took ship from Tarshish in order to flee far away from his assigned duty. (Jonah 1:3) Says the prophet: “Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle.” (Isa. 23:6) “Pass ye over to Tarshish, howl, ye inhabitants of the coast.”—Rotherham.
8 In the fulfillment of this part of the prophecy the lesser and dependent parts of the Catholic organization, whether far from the mother organization or near thereto, would have reason to howl and lament over the destruction of the Catholic Hierarchy, the modern Tyre. Missionary establishments, operating in the most distant parts of the earth from Rome, will be searched out and reached by the hand of Jehovah, because Je
hovah declares he will search out all his enemies. The Hierarchy is the enemy of Jehovah and of his organization: “Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies: thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee. Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men. For they intended evil against thee; they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform.” (Ps. 21:8-11) At the beginning of Armageddon Jehovah will execute that hypocritical organization.
* The prophecy is then addressed to the subordinate parts of the enemy organization, the modern Tyre: “Is this your [ Tarshish’s] joyous city [mother organization], whose antiquity is of ancient days? her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.” (Isa. 23:7) The Catholic Hierarchy is not at all joyous in Jehovah, although hypocritically and falsely claiming to represent God. It is joyous in its own merchandise and profits in the gay markets dealing in humankind. The Hierarchy and allied clergy employ all kinds of worldly schemes to entice the people and cause them to give up their money. In the church buildings they have, at stated intervals, concerts, Christmas cantatas, bazaars, socials, dances, athletics, and like things in order to attract the people to join their church congregations and to relieve themselves of their money for the benefit of the religionists. The words of the prophet are in the nature of a question addressed to the smaller parts of the Roman Catholic organization calling direct attention to the vanity of the Hierarchy. To these smaller ones the prophet, in substance, says: ‘Have you anything to exult in now, seeing that modern Tyre, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies and dupes are in a wrecked and spoiled condition? You boasted that it was so solidly built and fortified that nothing could do it serious damage. You boasted in its strength and relied upon it for protection and salvation and therefore automatically did its bidding. Modern Tyre, the Roman Catholic organization, has
115
113
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
failed you.’ Therefore says the prophet concerning Tyre: “Whose antiquity is of ancient days.” Tyre was preceded by Zidon, that latter city being mentioned in Genesis the tenth chapter in connection with Babel, and it may well correspond to the religionists of Pagan Rome, which merged into Papal Rome. Tyre, even in the days of Joshua, was called a “strong city”, and must have been founded on its rocky ground before the time of Joshua. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claim that theirs is the oldest, the mother and the true church organization, because it is the oldest religious organization of “Christendom”, and they cite in support of this claim that its antiquity dates from the time of Christ. It claims an unbroken chain of apostolic successors back to the apostle Peter • it calls itself “the Eternal City”.
8 But what shall be the end of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, that is, modern Tyre? Jehovah, by his prophet, says: “Her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.” (Verse 7) Rome thinks she is too ancient to ever have to move; that she is so thoroughly and completely entrenched in her position that no storm can move her bulwarks; and for this reason she claims to be invulnerable. Further speaking by his prophet, Jehovah says: “Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which, as a tempest of hail, and a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand. The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet. . . . When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.”—Isa. 28:2,3,18.
• Her arrogance and boasting attitude will bring her no good. Modern Tyre has existed for a long while and has practiced her wickedness with little hindrance, and in the minds of her mighty men is entirely secure in her position; but, according to Rotherham, ‘ ‘ Though from ancient days is her antiquity, yet shall her own feet carry her away far off to dwell,” that is, to remain permanently, by being removed from her place of existence into destruction, and there shall she remain for ever.
T By his prophet Joel Jehovah speaks of the ill treatment to which his covenant people have been subjected by modern Tyre, the Hierarchy of Rome. In this prophecy Judah and Jerusalem stand for the people of God’s organization. During the World War the religionists, led by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, attempted to rid the earth of those who arc and were devoted to Jehovah. Concerning this Jehovah says by his prophet: “Yea, and what have ye to do with me [Jehovah], 0 Tyre, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompcnce? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily will I return your recompence upon your own Head: . . . The children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border.”—Joel 3:4-6.
8	The day to pay for the Hierarchy comes, and the Lord God says to that Roman, scornful, boastful and wicked religious organization, which has ill-treated his faithful children: “Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them, and will return your recompcnce upon your own head: and I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabcans, to a people far off: for the Lord hath spoken it.”— Joel 3: 7, 8.
8	Jehovah always makes good his word. The day of recompense is absolutely certain to come, and the pay-off will be at the beginning of Armageddon, and the Hierarchy will find no way to avoid it. “Thus saith the Lord, For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly covenant: but I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the palaces thereof. ’ ’—Amos 1: 9,10.
10	With the beginning of Armageddon modern Tyre will cease, and no more will her feet carry her and her missionaries to the many lands of the earth, there to seek new markets in which to exploit the people, but she will go to the place where she will remain permanently. Of that crowd Jesus said: “Serpents, progeny of vipers! how can you escape the judgment of the Gehenna ? ’ ’—Matt. 23: 33, Diaglott.
11	The proselyting work of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and her vessels or instruments will cease then for ever. To all her supporters the words of Jesus will then appear applicable and appropriate to the Hierarchy: “Woe unto you [promoters and rulers of modern Tyre], scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of [Gehenna] than yourselves.” (Matt. 23:15) A question is then propounded by the prophet of Jehovah to all who have the hearing ear: ‘ ‘ Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth?” (Isa. 23:8) Another rendering of this text is: “Who hath purposed this against Tyre, the bestower of crowns?” (Revised Version and Rotherham) These words further identify the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, because for centuries the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has claimed that the pope has the power and the authority to crown and to depose earthly kings. To those thus crowned and who have submitted to the domination of the religionists, the Hierarchy has been and is the “higher powers”. The Hierarchy demands the full obedience of each one of its underclergy, as well as obedience of the political rulers of many lands, and the Hierarchy bestows titles upon whomsoever that organization chooses to honor, and thereby makes men “princes of the church”, and these traffickers, acting at the behest of modern Tyre, are the ‘ ‘ honourable [men] of the earth”. When one of these Roman
April 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
117
“princes” visits America, for instance, the politicians, with bands of music and flags, meet him at the dock, bow down, kiss his ring, and perform a lot of other senseless religious ceremonies. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy demands that the political rulers of the earth, and the “Catholic population”, the common people, shall regard the Hierarchy and speak of its members as “spiritual princes”, who are in no wise subject to political rulers. Even a king or an earthly monarch is permitted to kiss the big toe of the so-called “holy father”, the head of the Hierarchy.
12	Manifestly the question propounded at verse eight above quoted is to rivet attention upon the Hierarchy: ‘ ‘ Who hath purposed this against Tyre ? ’ ’ The answer to that question appears below, and the language employed shows that it is at the time when Jehovah is exercising his power to punish the workers of iniquity, that is, modern Tyre, the Devil’s chief visible instrument: “The Lord of hosts hath purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth.” (Verse 9) God plainly states: “I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46:11) Let no one doubt that God will carry out his purpose. Modern Tyre is made up of an arrogant, boastful, proud and scornful company and demands and receives high esteem and the plaudits of men. Jehovah’s decree upon such is announced by the Lord Jesus, to wit: “That which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.” (Luke 16:15) “Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased.” (Matt. 23:12) These fixed rules of Jehovah are not subject to change, and are certain to be enforced against all who come within the scope thereof; and this certainly includes the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. It is Jehovah who has purposed the destruction of modern Tyre, the great religious harlot organization. And why? The Scriptural answer is, “to stain [(A.R.V., margin) profane] the pride of all glory.” Certainly this means all glory that has been taken away from God, to whom it belongs, and been bestowed upon creatures.
18	The men composing the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, or modern Tyre, ‘clothe themselves in garments of glory and beauty’ and then “strut their stuff” in public places to be seen of men, that they may receive honor and glory of men. They consider that they are granting a great privilege to men to kiss their finger or toe. They call themselves by high-sounding titles and claim that their glory and “holy” beauty is so sacred that it is a dreadful sin for anyone to profane or criticize their attitude or to teach the people anything of the Bible that calls attention to God’s denunciation of religious hypocrisy. The proclamation of God’s truth quoted from the Bible “shocks the religious susceptibilities” of those hypocritical clerical gentlemen and all their allies.
14	It is written concerning Jehovah and his heavenly organization: “Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty,
God hath shined.” (Ps. 50: 2) The Hierarchy fraudulently seizes upon this text and misapplies it, assumes to stand in the place of God, and claims for those of the Hierarchy the beauty and glory that belong only to the Lord. Therefore Jehovah declares his purpose to “humble the pride of all beauty”.—Rotherham.
18 That religious, mercantile, political, arrogant, extremely selfish and proud organization shall fall, as Jehovah God has decreed, to wit: “Say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord God, O Tyrus, thou hast said, I am of perfect beauty.” (Ezek. 27:2,3) The Hierarchy thus poses before all nations of earth. Her allies and her dupes sing of her glory and beauty, whether the singers believe it or not; the politicians do it because they want political support. All these vessels or instruments supporting the Hierarchy fall in line and shout of iier glory and beauty. To them Jehovah says: “The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market; and thou wast replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the seas.” (Ezek. 27:25) But the day is not far distant when those singers and glorifiers of the Hierarchy and all of her allied religionists will come to a sorrowful end, because Jehovah says: “Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin. The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots. And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land; and shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes. And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter wailing. And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea?”—Ezek. 27:27-32.
10 To all the peoples of this world, who stand on the side and see the fall of the mighty religious organizations, it will seem ‘very strange’ that God would expose and destroy such, or that which the clergy have called by the name of the Lord. For many centuries the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has assumed the name of God and Christ, and claimed to be the only true organization of the Lord. But the Lord God marks their hypocrisy and says concerning that hypocritical organization: “Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.”—Jer. 7:14.
” Who on the earth today claim the exclusive right
118
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to use the radio and to speak to the people thereby, and to tell the people what they shall or shall not believe and do? Who are the ones claiming to be “the honourable [men] of the earth’’, entitled to the praise, honor and acclaim of all others? What class of men scornfully push aside all those who dare speak of God’s Word without first obtaining their permission. To these questions the answer is, The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, their allies or close associates. Jehovah declares that it is his purpose to “bring into contempt all [these] honourable of the earth”, or “to make of little esteem” such exalted ones. {Roth.) The Hierarchy, the main organization, the Jesuits, the Nazis, the Fascists, the allied clergy, are the ones of whom the Lord speaks when he says: ‘ ‘ Whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth.” (Verse 8) And what means will Jehovah employ to bring such “honourable” men into contempt? Such so-called “honorable” men are the instruments of Satan and therefore enemies of God, and in the battle of the great day of God Almighty, in the day of his wrath, he will destroy them. “Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.” (Ps. 21:9,10) Jehovah’s “strange work” is now exposing the duplicity and hypocrisy of those self-styled “honourable” ones; and his “strange act”, at the beginning, will rid the earth of that hypocritical religious organization and will proceed to the complete wrecking of the entire organization of the Devil. As Armageddon begins, the destruction of religionists will appear to all who are not on the side of Jehovah and his King as “strange”, very strange.
18	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, that is, “the Hierarchy of Jurisdiction,” which rules, claims to be the mother organization. Her supporters, agents, tools, vessels and instruments used, are her offspring or “daughters”. Jehovah, by his prophet, now addresses the daughter class and says: “Pass through thy land as a river [as the Nile (R.P. and Roth.)], 0 daughter of Tarshish; there is no more strength.” (Isa. 23: 10) The river Nile passes through the entire length of Egypt and from time to time overflows its banks and floods the country round about; so Jehovah says to those addressed: “Pass through”; that is to say, make complete inspection of the work and act of Jehovah and its effect; go and see for 3rourselves and verify all that his “strange work” does concerning the Hierarchy and other clergy. Jehovah has called his people to “rise up against her in battle” and to proclaim God’s judgment against the religious organization, and such, in the prophecy of Isaiah, is called “thy land”, that is, meaning the organization to which the supporters or vessels give service and support. The parent organization has colonized, supervised and appropriated to its service and exploited those designated
in the prophecy as the “daughter”. The fact that Tarshish should be told to pass through her own land on a sight-seeing or inspection journey to observe the effect of God’s purpose as executed indicates that God’s “strange act”, at the beginning thereof, will destroy the Hierarchy organization, that is, the inanimate corporation, and that some of the clergy under or beneath the “Hierarchy of Jurisdiction” will remain alive for a time and see the effects before they themselves are destroyed in the battle as it progresses.
19	To those survivors, for a season at the beginning of the battle of the great day, the Lord says: “There is no more strength [{margin) girdle].” The word here rendered “strength” is different from the word translated “strength” at verse fourteen following. Says the English Revised Version: “There is no girdle about thee any more,” that is, from the mother organization, modern Tyre, the “Hierarchy of Jurisdiction ’ ’, because that system is laid low in the dust and can give no more support to its vessels. This is proof that not only the lower order of the clergy, which remain, which have been used as tools of the Hierarchy to do menial service to the ‘organization of jurisdiction’, will be made to drink of the cup of the bitter wrath at the Lord’s hand, but also that the highest ones in the Hierarchy, including the pontiff, shall drink deeply, “spue [out], and fall.”—Jer. 25:27.
20	Another translation of this text reads: “There is no restraint any more.” {A.R.V.) The Hierarchy now puts restraint upon those who tell the truth about her and who inform the people about God’s kingdom as the only hope of mankind. Jehovah’s witnesses have now been commanded by the Lord, ‘Rise ye up against her in battle,’ and in obedience to this command the faithful go forth amidst great opposition to declare the message of God of and concerning his purpose. Restraint does not stop them. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy brings to bear all its influence and power exercised by and through religionists, politicians and commercial men, and the courts, to restrain Jehovah's witnesses and to prevent them from telling the truth. When Armageddon begins that restraint will be removed and “no restraint any more” will be upon Jehovah’s witnesses, because the witness work in the earth will then be finished and the marking and gathering of the great multitude by the Lord to himself will be completed. Until that time, as it is written, the ‘four angels, to whom is given to hurt the earth and the sea’, continue to hold back the storm of the Lord. (Rev. 7:1-3) The time comes when the restraint ends, and then there will be ‘no more restraint’ upon the “ten horns” of the “beast”, which shall turn upon the Hierarchy religious organization and rend it at the will of God, and when Jehovah’s great Executioner shall completely wreck every part of Satan’s organization. Religion, that has for so long brought reproach upon Jehovah’s name, and religious organizations and their political and commercial laws shall completely
April 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
119
pass away in the battle of the great day of God Almighty as it progresses.
21	As ancient Tyre built her commerce upon the sea and the coastlands round about, even so modern Tyre, the mighty religious system, has built her commerce upon the peoples all round about her, situated in her supposed invulnerable place at Rome. The time comes for Jehovah’s “strange act” to begin, and, looking back upon the effects thereof, his prophet says: “He stretched out his hand over the sea ; he shook the kingdoms; the Lord hath given a commandment against the merchant city, to destroy the strong holds thereof. ’ ’ (Isa. 23:11) The religious organizations boastfully claim both the sea and the land, but the claim thereof is false: “The sea is his, and he made it; and his hands formed the dry land.”—Ps. 95:5.
22	At Armageddon Jehovah, by his Executioner, rids the sea and the land of all of Tyre’s trade ships, that is, her instruments, vessels and tools, supporters and dupes. He reaches out to the most distant established settlements of modern Tyre and wipes them out. Says the Lord by his prophet: “He shook the kingdoms,” that is, all the ruling powers of the earth, whose kings committed fornication with Tyre, the old whore, for mutual profit to enrich themselves. Those kingdoms will not be able to stand up under Jehovah’s shaking, but will be shaken to pieces and destroyed. (Hag. 2:21,22) The old “whore” goes first into the ashcan, and then the others follow. “And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters; with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled. And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.” (Rev. 17:1,2,17,18; Rev. 18:3) “The king of Tyrus,” the Devil himself, and all of his kingdom shall be completely shaken down and destroyed.—Ezek. 28:12-19.
23	Jehovah gives command to his high officer, Christ Jesus, to execute the wicked organization, and concerning this the American Revised Version reads: “Jehovah hath given commandment concerning Canaan” [(margin) merchant-men], that is, the coast of Canaan occupied by Tyre and Zidon. According to Rotherham the text reads: “Against the Phoenician coast.” The command to Christ is given to “destroy the strong holds thereof”. One of the most powerful strongholds of the coast of Canaan was Tyre, and Tyre was specially mentioned in the command to destroy. (Jer. 25: 22) Modern Tyre, the Roman Catholic organization, is one, and probably the strongest one, of the strongholds of Satan’s visible organization. No stronghold is so strong, however, as to be able to with
stand the assault by Jehovah’s Executioner. Christ Jesus possesses the keys to hell, and hell shall not prevail against him and his organization. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has wrongfully adopted and applied the words spoken by Jesus concerning His organization, to wit: ‘ ‘ The gates of hell shall not prevail against it”; but the day is not far distant when the Hierarchy will see her complete end and will fully know the day of deceiving others has come to a final end. To those who love and faithfully serve Jehovah he now gives this information in advance of the fall of that hypocritical and wicked organization, to the end that such faithful may be comforted and have increased hope.
24	Viewing the prophecy of the twenty-third chapter of Isaiah as a whole, it appears that the period of rejoicing by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy precedes Armageddon, and just a short time before the beginning of Armageddon. The time arrives when the rejoicing of that religious system must cease, because Jehovah has so decreed, and therefore he caused to be written : “And he [Jehovah] said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, 0 thou oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon; arise, pass over to Chittim; there also shalt thou have no rest.” (Isa. 23:12) Since the prophecy is “the burden of Tyre” (vs. 1), it appears that it is Tyre that is addressed as the “oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon ’ ’. The city of Zidon was built first, and Tyre would be viewed as a daughter. Zidon had a devil religion. Pagan religion preceded the papacy, and many of the devilish practices of paganism were adopted by the papacy, and both originated with and are the children of the Devil.
25	Tyre would be viewed as a “ virgin ’ ’ daughter because not legitimately married but unclean from fornication, her chastity having been “violated”. (Rotherham) To that violation of her chastity she consented, and she therefore would be the “oppressed”. The Roman Catholic religion’s organization has practiced whoredom with “all the kings” or ruling powers of the earth of Satan’s visible organization, but the time comes, just preceding the beginning of Armageddon, when the Lord convinces the “ten kings” or ruling forces of the nations, which turn on the harlot religious system, and that system becomes greatly oppressed. God puts it in the mind of the ruling powers to fulfill his will.—Rev. 17:16,17.
20	The time arriving for her great oppression to begin, the Hierarchy system will seek rest somewhere, and, because thus seeking, Jehovah says to her: “Arise, pass over [the sea] to Chittim,” and see if you can find rest there. Chittim, being near to Tyre, would represent any subsidiary or auxiliary organization where the old woman might seek rest and relief and find none. This would seem to indicate that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy system will be seeking a place of consolation, and therefore abasing herself by going to some lesser organization, seeking a way to escape
120
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the deepest abasement, which is certain to come upon her by reason of being cast into Gehenna. (Matt. 23:12) Will the Hierarchy system find rest there? Jehovah replies: “There also shalt thou have no rest.” From time to time the Hierarchy system has had some setbacks or losses of temporal power, but she has always claimed that such setbacks were only temporary. She claims that she is eternal, cannot suffer destruction, and therefore she can afford to wait any temporary setbacks while she schemes to advance her position. The abasement or opposition to her in the past the Hierarchy has claimed to be that “little season” during which Satan is loosed, at the end of which she shall triumph. (Rev. 20:3-7) Again she is wrong in her conclusion. The time for her complete humiliation is near at hand, and there is no way for her to stop it now, and therefore there is no way for her to escape. Not even the individual members of that religious clergy crowd will be able to disguise themselves by putting on overalls and thus hiding their identity. (Zech. 13:4-6) They will not escape the scrutiny of others, and certainly not God’s executive officer. There is no rest short of complete destruction, from which she shall never again arise.
27	Jehovah used the Chaldeans, of whom Nebuchadnezzar was the king, as His executioner, who thus foreshadowed Christ Jesus, the great executioner of Jehovah who shall execute the devil religion, and particularly the Roman Catholic system. (Ezek. 26:7-14; Jer. 25:9,17,22) Therefore Jehovah says to the observers: “Behold the land of the Chaldeans: this people was not till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness; they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; and he brought it to ruin.” (Isa. 23:13) The words “Behold the land of the Chaldeans” manifestly direct the attention to his executioner that executes the judgment of Jehovah upon the Hierarchy system. Then the prophet says: “This people [that is, the people of ancient Tyre and modem Tyre, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy] is no more.” (E.R.V.) The word “till”, as appears in the Authorized Version, is an interpolation, and the correct rendering appears in the Revised Version. Therefore, as stated in the text, “the ships of Tarshish” calling at the port of Chittim, the island near Tyre, would have no reason to proceed on to Tyre, because of the information received at Chittim that Tyre no longer existed. Likewise in the antitype or fulfillment, the underpriests, missionaries and other subsidiary organizations are told that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy system is no more, that is, “the Hierarchy of Jurisdiction” is done for and hence there would be no occasion to further seek her. It is plainly written by another prophet that the end of the Hierarchy will be complete destruction; that is, “they shall be as though they had not been.” (Obadiah 16) Since the word “till” is an interpolation, and therefore improperly in the text, that part of verse thirteen following
the word “till” is no part of the preceding sentence. Therefore the words after “till” read: “The Assyrian [Asshur (Leeser) • Assyria (Rotherham)] founded it.” The word Asshur appearing in this part of the text (Leeser) means “successful one”, as in Genesis 10:11.
28	In Isaiah’s day the Assyrian world power still held the upper hand over the Chaldeans; but in Jeremiah’s time, and eighteen years before the fall of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar had become king of Babylon and established the Babylonish empire. (See Isaiah 39:1-8.) Therefore the words in Isaiah 23:13, to wit, “The Assyrian founded it,” clearly mean the Chaldeans or Babylonians. ‘ ‘ The Assyrian ’ ’ pictures God’s Executioner, Christ Jesus. Note that “the Assyrian” as a nation did not establish or found “the land of the Chaldeans”. Babylon preceded Assyria. It is said in connection with Nimrod: “And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Cal-neh, in the land of Shinar. Out of that land went forth Asshur [he went out into Assyria (margin)], and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah.” (Gen. 10:10,11) Another author (Hislop) renders the text: “And he, being strengthened, went forth out of that land and built Nineveh, ’ ’ the capital of Assyria. With this explanation note that the English Revised Version of the text reads: “The Assyrian hath appointed it” [(Auth. Ver.) “founded it”], that is to say, appointed “this people” of Tyre. Appointed the people of Tyre for what or for whom *? The prophecy answers: “For the beasts of the wilderness.” (E.R.V.) Clearly this means that God’s Executioner, pictured by “the Assyrian”, hath “appointed” modern Tyre (that is to say, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization and its clergy and allies) to a place or condition uninhabited by persons but wholly for brute beasts, hence for desolation. In support of this conclusion note the words of Revelation 18:2, 3: “And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils [wild goats, satyrs], and the hold of every foul spirit [stinking vapors arising like apparitions out of a marshy, foul and corrupt land], and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird [a place frequented by birds decreed by the law of God unfit for human habitation]. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.” This text, without a doubt, applies to Satan’s religious organization, rhe Roman Catholic Hierarchy being the principal part thereof. Therefore the prophecy of Isaiah discloses that Jehovah’s Executioner has appointed that Devil religious organization for desolation in accord with the decree or judgment heretofore written at the dictation of Jehovah.
28	The prophet continues to speak of the successful
April 15, 1937
Tfie WATCHTOWER.
121
Chaldeans and symbolically refers to Jehovah’s Executioner, saying: “They set up the towers thereof [their towers (R.V.) ; siege-towers (Rotherham)], they raised up [they overthrew (R.V.); demolished (Rotherham)] the palaces thereof.” The siege towers were set up, and thus the walls of ancient Tyre were surmounted and the palaces of her merchant princes were demolished. Applying the prophecy to modern Tyre, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, God’s Executioner, Christ Jesus, sets up siege towers against the Devil religious system and the princes of the Roman Catholic organization that traffic in human creatures and destroy their rights, and the system falls, including the so-called “holy father”, and all the trafficking princes. And the result is what? Says the prophet in answer: “He brought it to ruin [he made it a ruin (E.R.7.)],” that is, Jehovah’s Executioner at the beginning of Armageddon brings the Devil religious system to ruin.
80	The bulwarks of the Roman Catholic system, which for long has reproached the name of Almighty God, will completely crumble to the dust, and then the individuals who continue to live for a time will have reason to lament. Therefore, says the prophet of Jehovah, “Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, for your strength [which is modern Tyre] is laid waste.” (Isa. 23:14) The statement is similar to the words used in Isaiah 23:1 and shows that the ‘ ‘ howl ’ ’ is raised at the beginning of Armageddon and when the Hierarchy falls. Says the Revised Version, verse fourteen: “Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for your stronghold is laid waste.” The “Hierarchy of Jurisdiction”, which operates in and out of Vatican City, Italy, is by the Lord Jehovah’s decree certain to be laid in waste, and that “Hierarchy of Jurisdiction”, the central government of the religious system that for centuries has deceived the people and blasphemed God’s name, will go down. When that stronghold does go down its supporters can do nothing but howl. Armageddon will mark the complete fulfillment of the foregoing prophecy of Isaiah twenty-three, verses one to fourteen.
APPARENT FULFILLMENT
81	It has been suggested that verses one to fourteen of Isaiah 23 describe certain adverse experiences to which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has been subjected during a period of seventy years, from 1848 to 1918, and during which time she is “forgotten” and her howl is heard; that at the end of that period the Roman Catholic Hierarchy again comes to the fore, and hence that the latter part of the prophecy recorded in the twenty-third chapter applies after the fulfillment of the first part of the prophecy. The facts do not fit that conclusion, for the reason that the “howl” of Tyre clearly refers to what comes to pass at the beginning of Armageddon. There is, however, an apparent fulfillment of the prophecy concerning the ‘howling of the ships of Tarshish’ or supporters of Tyre,
within the seventy-year period above mentioned; but instead of being a fulfillment it would better be termed an agreeable parallel on a minor scale to that stated in the prophecy. It seems well to here set forth certain pertinent historical facts that came to pass during the seventy-year period from 1848 to 1918, in order that the student may consider the same in studying the prophecy, and which consideration may remove some doubt that might otherwise exist. Such historical facts here inserted are quoted from well-known and recognized authorities. They relate to the Roman Catholic religious system from 1848 to 1918 and are as follows:
HISTORICAL
32 1848. February 22-24: Revolution in France; King Louis Philippe out; republic is proclaimed. March: Revolution in Austrian Empire. Revolutionary movements in Germany. Insurrection at Rome; the populace demands a democratic ministry and the proclamation of Italian nationality; the pope (Pius IX) hesitates; the Romans surround the palace, and a conflict ensues. The pope accepts a popular ministry (Cardinal Palma, the pope’s secretary, is shot in this conflict) . . . November 16. November 20, a free Constitution is published. November 24, the pope escapes in disguise to Gaeta. November 28, protest of the pope against the acts of the provisional government (of Rome).
83 1849. January: Revolutions in various states on Italian peninsula. February 8, the Roman National Assembly divests the pope of all temporal power, and adopts the republican form of government. February 18, the pope appeals to the Catholic powers (of the world). “He now enjoyed the sympathy of the reactionists all over the world who had looked so coldly upon his early efforts at reform, but gained, of course, the execrations of the liberals, whose cause he had abandoned. Rome, left without a ruler, bloomed into a republic. The pope protested against all its acts, and summoned the Catholic world to put it down.” (McClintock & Strong Cyclopedia, Vol. VIII, “Pius IX”) June 3, the French under Marshal Oudinot commence an attack on Rome. June 30, after a brave resistance, the Romans capitulate to the French army. July 4, the Roman Assembly dissolved, and an officer from Oudinot’s camp arrives at Gaeta, to present the pope with the keys of Rome.
34 1850. April, the pope arrives at Rome; Cardinal Antonelli becomes foreign minister. “The pope returned in April, 1850, surrounded by the bayonets of a French army. . . . His first act was the perfidy of destroying the Constitution of chartered rights which he had guaranteed to his subjects. . . . The Inquisition recommenced its sacred labors. . . . The Bible was prohibited.” (McClintock & Strong Cyclopedia, Vol. VIII, “Pius IX”) September 24, he issues the bull establishing a Roman Catholic hierarchy in England.
122
STe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
851861. March 27, Cavour claims Rome as capital of Italy. June, the emperor of France declines a union with Austria and Spain for the maintenance of the pope’s temporal power. ‘ ‘ In 1868, the Austrians broke the concordat and declared their spiritual emancipation. The year after, Queen Isabella was driven out of Spain, and the government of the people refused to be bound by any previous treaties with the papacy [Sept. 29, 30].” [February 16, 1873, the first Spanish republic is proclaimed at Madrid, Spain.]—McClintock & Strong Cyclopedia, Vol. VIII, “Pius IX.”
89 1870. September 11, the pope refuses terms offered him by the king of Italy (sovereignty of the Leonine city and retention of his income). September 20, after a brief resistance from the foreign papal troops, stopped by order of the pope, the Italian troops under [General] Cadorna make a breach and enter Rome. September 21, Cardinal Antonelli issues a diplomatic protest against the Italian occupation of Rome. September 26, protest of the pope (Pius IX, still). September 29, circular letter from the pope to the cardinals complaining of the invasion and of his loss of liberty, and interference with his post bag. October 2, plebiscite: out of 167,548 votes, 133,681 for (Rome's) union with the kingdom of Italy. October 8, result of the plebiscite sent to the king (of Italy). October 9, Rome and its provinces incorporated with the kingdom by royal decree.
87 1871. May 13, law guaranteeing to the pope full personal liberty and honors, a revenue of 3,225,000 livres, etc.; rejected by the pope in his allocution, May 15. October 27, allocution of the pope, appointing some Italian bishops; still rejecting guarantees. —Haydn’s Dictionary of Dates, under “Rome", “Popes,” “France,” “Spain,” etc.
38 “In 1870, finally, the war with Prussia destroyed the empire in France, and with the fall of Napoleon [Jerome] not only the French refused to be bound to Rome, but the gates of the Eternal City opened to all Italy. . . . Notwithstanding all efforts of [King] Victor Emmanuel for peace, the pope sternly persisted in his firm protest against the inevitable change of things. ... He lived retired in the Vatican, and called himself a prisoner.”—McClintock & Strong Cyclopedia, Vol. VIII, “Pius IX.”
88 1878. February 7, Pope Pius IX dies. “On February 7, 1878, he died, after a protracted dropsical illness. . . . The missions of the Church were also strengthened, being carried forward in partibus tn-fidelium, and great hierarchies, in lands formerly heathen or Protestant, were added to the vast clergy that owned ‘the Latin obedience.’ Thus he provided by brief of 1850 for the ecclesiastical government of England, . . . exulting in the supposed triumph of his Church in the land which had been the home of the Reformation for three centuries. Then he created in this country [U.S.A.] a vast Roman Catholic hierarchy by elevating to the cardinalate the archbishop
of New York in 1875, and prepared the way for the re-establishment of the hierarchy in Scotland, which was effected in 1878. . . . One of the foulest blots on the pages of history regarding his reign is the forcible conversion of the Jew boy Mortara, and of a piece with this is the abject condition of the Hebrews at Rome, where the walls of the Ghetto were only removed with the establishment of the Italian power.”—McClintock & Strong Cyclopedia, Vol. VIII, “Pius IX.”
40	“ He also established four new dioceses in the United States at Albany, Buffalo, Cleveland and Galveston, all in 1847. In later years he established nearly 50 others in medium-sized American cities. . . . Matters were now going too fast and too far for Pius, who refused to countenance the revolutionary movement, . . . The pope now entirely lost the favor of the Roman populace. Threatened by the mob in his own palace he fled to Gaeta, and a Roman republic was proclaimed in February 1849, with Mazzini at its head. Louis Napoleon, determined to restore the pope, sent an expedition to Rome under Oudinot, by whom the Italian patriots, led by Garibaldi, were overpowered. Rome surrendered on 3 July; but the pope did not return to his capital till April 1850. . . . The pope himself now bestowed his whole attention upon the church. He recalled the Jesuits, canonized saints and defined two dogmas ... in 1854 ... in 1870. Previous to this time the pope’s temporal dominion had become sadly shrunken in extent, owing to the gradual unification of Italy under Victor Emmanuel. The temporal power of the pope, however, was still secured by the presence of a body of French troops at Rome. ... Ou 20 September 1870 the Italian troops entered Rome, and the temporal power was at an end. The Vatican was left to the pope; and free diplomatic intercourse, the honors due to a sovereign, and a civil list of £129,000 yearly, secured to him. But these he deelined, and confined himself to the Vatican and its garden, declaring that he was under restraint and a prisoner in his own palace.”—The Americana, Volume 22, “Pius IX,” page 137.
41	1878. March 4, Romanist hierarchy revived by pope; archbishopric of Glasgow, bishop of Dunkeld, etc. This was about a month after the death of Pius IX, pope for almost 32 years. “In November, 1848 [the year of the flight of Pius IX to Gaeta], the German bishops of the Romish body assembled at Wurzburg, to consult together concerning the best means to proceed in this critical period. . . . Shortly before this, however, an organization of far-reaching significance had been effected, in which also—and prominently— the laity were to co-operate, viz., the Pius Society, a Roman Catholic counterpart of the Protestant Church Diet. ... In October, 1848, at Mayence, . . . the first union of this kind was formed under the name of Pius Society. Here all the single unions w’ere formed into a great collective union under the name of ‘Catholic Union of Germany’; although in practice the
April 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER-
123
shorter name of Pius Society has been preferred. . . . A second assembly was held at Breslau, where the papal letter was received, and where the assembly openly expressed it that ‘a united Germany was ONLY POSSIBLE WITH A CATHOLIC CHRISTIANITY.’ Here a new society was also organized, the Vincentius Society, for missionary work at home. ... In the United States there is hardly a large town in which one or the other of these societies is not to be found. The tendency is the same, although the name may be different. The purpose of these organizations in the United States is to bring the state as much as POSSIBLE UNDER THE INFLUENCE AND CONTROL OF THE hierarchy, and the political arena is the field of labor. Already they influence the legislatures, schoolboards; yea, we may say they form a state within the state.”—McClintock & Strong Cyclo., Vol. VIII, “Pius Societies.”
*21914. September 3, Cardinal della Chiesa was elected the successor of Pius X and took the name of Benedict XV. 1917. August 1, Benedict XV issued his "famous peace note”, "which President Wilson answered on behalf of the Allied and Associated powers, saying that the ideals which [the pope] had expressed were their ideals, but that the Central Powers appeared unwilling to acknowledge or accept them.” —The Americana, Vol. Ill, "Benedict XV.”
431918. November 11, beginning of great war-chest drive in the United States, in which seven organizations participate. "There is, of course, wide-spread dissatisfaction with the arrangement—most especially because the Catholic War Council, which includes the Knights of Columbus, will receive $30,000,000. The position is taken by those who object to the united budget that the Knights of Columbus, as an organization, has no more right to cantonment and trench privileges than have other secret societies, and that the Catholic church should have no privileges in the camps and on the field that are not extended to other religious bodies. . . . The Catholic church, in particular, will stand out in the open as a political organization which, during the entire length of the war, left no stone unturned to advance papal interests. . . . And among the charges to be preferred against the Catholic church after the war will be her peculiar participation in cantonment and trench privileges, and the mandatory method by which she secured a place in the war chest.” —The Apostolic Review, Nov. 19, 1918.
441918. November 30, the New York Evening World says the pope desires to attend the peace conference in order that he maj' gain some “temporal power”, and adds that the Vatican is seeking to establish a private telegraph office in the Vatican with private wires to all governments, so as not to have to use the Italian telegraph lines.—The Watchtower, Jan. 1, 1919, pages 4, 5.
451919. January, Benedict XV completely frees Italian Catholics from all inhibitions against partici
pation in Italian political movements. His relations with the royal court of Italy were more cordial than those of any pope since 1870, and the celebrated “Roman Question” was left by him in a fair way of settlement. At the beginning of Benedict XV’s “reign” about twenty nations had formal diplomatic relations with the Vatican. At its close, in 1922, there were more than thirty-one. Relations with France had been restored, and the British Empire had taken steps to have a more intimate representation. Negotiations were pending for an exchange of envoys with Tokyo, Japan. —The Americana, Vol. Ill, “Benedict XV.”
481919. March 11, an Associated Press dispatch from Paris read as follows:
"It has become known that Pope Benedict has addressed an appeal to the powers emphasizing the urgency of the speedy conclusion of peace with Germany. It is understood that the pontiff states that the Vatican possesses reliable information that the situation in Germany, socially and economically, is very-grave, and that he fears the spread of Bolshevism with such rapidity that it might result in the establishment of a Bolshevik state, which, in turn, might become allied with Bolshevik Russia.”—The Watchtower, April 1, 1919, pages 100, 101.
471919, March 23, the first meeting of Fascists in Milan, Italy. May, Adolf Hitler attends his first Nad meeting in Munich, Germany. September, the National Catholic Welfare Conference [Council, formerly] [NCWC] is organized in the United States.
48	At the close of the World War in 1918 the Roman Catholic Hierarchy realized the opportune time had arrived to begin efforts toward regaining temporal power previously had by that institution. The Hierarchy did begin her efforts then -which culminated successfully on February 11, 1929, when it was publicly announced that the papacy’s temporal power had been restored.
49	Now it is important to determine, if possible, what is the meaning and application of the “seventy years” mentioned in the prophecy, what is meant by the harlot’s being forgotten, and what is the meaning of “the song of the harlot”. (R.V.) Suffice it to say at this point of the study that the prophecy appearing at verses 15 and 16 has fulfillment before thebeginning of the “howl”, as mentioned in verses 1 to 14, which “howl” clearly marks the beginning of the battle of the great day of God Almighty. Next will be considered that part of the prophecy last recorded.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
Tf 1. What is now seen to have been the purpose directing and governing the affairs of the nation of Israel r.fl those people who had dealings with Israel? For whs: present situation was that provision made?
U 2,3. Where were Tyre, Zidon, Chittim, and Tarsi.',sh? and how were they related? What does this mean in fl-s fulfillment of Isaiah 23: 6?
124
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
f 4. Justify the inquiry, “Is this your joyous city,” Explain and apply the further expression, “whose antiquity is of ancient days.”
5, 6. Why is it said, ‘1 Her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn ”! With related scriptures, show why this will be done, and how.
7,8. How have ‘ ‘ Tyre, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine” done as declared at Joel 3: 4-61 How, according to Joel 3: 7,8, will the Lord God deal with them for so doing!
T 9,10. What judgment awaits modern Tyre, according to Amos 1:10! Why, as stated in context, will the “lire” bo visited upon her! Why did Jesus address that crowd as “serpents, progeny of vipers”, and question the possibility of their escaping Gehenna!
If 11. How does Jesus’ charge at Matthew 23: 15 fit the work of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy! Show that Isaiah 23: 8 fittingly describes in prophetic phrase the Roman Catholic organization.
If 12-17. Point out the purpose of the question, “Who hath purposed this against Tyre!” With related scriptures, apply the answer given in verse 9.
18-20. Identify the ‘ ‘ daughter of Tarshish ”. “ Pass through thy land as a river-”: how, and for what purpose! What
is meant by the statement here, “There is no more strength”! What does this prove!
H 21-23. How and when will Jehovah ‘stretch out his hand over the sea’ as here foretold! What “kingdoms” will he shake, and how! Point out the “merchant city” here foretold. To whom will Jehovah give command concerning it, and how will that command be executed!
24-26. Point out the “oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon”. How has she been ‘rejoicing’! and why shall she rejoice no more! When and how will she ‘arise, and pass over to Chittim’! Why shall she have no rest there!
f 27-29. Account for the expression, in Isaiah 23: 13, “Behold the land of the Chaldeans.” Explain and apply the statement, (a) “This people was not.” (b) “The Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness.” (c) ‘ ‘ They set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof.” (d) “He brought it to ruin.”
If 30. Apply verse 14.
If 31-47. What has been suggested as to fulfillment of Isaiah 23 in the order in which the prophecy is recorded! Relate historical facts as agreeing with the conclusion that the latter part of the prophecy recorded in Isaiah 23 applies before the fulfillment of the first part of the prophecy.
If 48. What points now call for determination in the further consideration of this prophecy!
PROPHECY
HOW may we know when we have a proper interpretation of a prophecy? At the very outset we must understand that “no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation’’. (2 Pet. 1:20) If man gives a private interpretation to a prophecy, that interpretation is merely his private opinion and is without value, because no man is authorized by the Word of God to give such an opinion. Many attempts have been made to interpret prophecy, and failure has resulted because the rules laid down by the Lord have been ignored. Since no prophecy is of private interpretation, it follows that the Lord God himself interprets prophecy by causing to come to pass events in fulfillment of what he has foretold; hence it is impossible for man to understand prophecy until such events have come to pass showing at least a partial fulfillment of the prophecy. Until God’s due time to understand prophecy it is not understandable. Then it is first understandable by the covenant people of God who have his spirit.—1 Cor. 2:10.
To determine whether a prophecy (and the prophet speaking it) is false or true Jehovah made these rules: That the prophet must speak in the name of Jehovah, thus indicating authority to speak; his words of prophecy must tend to turn the hearer to Jehovah and to the honor of his name; and the prophecy must at some time come to pass. (Deut. 18:21,22 ; 13:1-5; Jer. 28:13-17) The fulfillment of a prophecy would necessarily be in harmony with these rules. The events coming to pass must be in harmony with the prophecy as it is written, must tend to vindicate the name of Jehovah, and must honor and exalt his name and not honor and exalt the name of any human creature. If the interpretation tends to laud and magnify the name of man, then such is not a true interpretation, because it is contrary to the Word of God. (Job 32:21, 22;
Luke 16:15) In carrying forward his purposes God uses his duly constituted agencies, but all honor is due to Jehovah, and not to the agency.
Aside from Jesus Christ no individual is foretold or foreshadowed in the selection and development of the members of God’s organization. It necessarily follows that in the fulfillment of God’s prophecy no individual among God’s covenant people is or will be identified. It would be contrary to the Scriptures to single out some individual and say that such individual is fulfilling prophecy. It would be like the eye saying to the hand, I am all-important and you are nothing.—1 Cor. 12:12-22.
Jehovah’s ‘elect servant’ is his Christ, and he deals with the “servant” as one. Members of the body are therefore considered collectively, and not individually. Jehovah God is the Master, and the “servant” is his instrument for his purpose, and all honor is due to the great Master. It is Jehovah the Master who says to his ‘elect servant’: “Behold, the former things are come to pass [meaning, some prophecies which I showed you have been fulfilled], and new things do I declare; before they spring forth I tell you of them.” (Isa. 42: 9) When a prophecy is partially fulfilled and is in course of fulfillment Jehovah permits his covenant and anointed people to see the meaning thereof, and these in turn must declare the meaning to others who might have an ear to hear. Some prophecies have been fulfilled, and some are in course of fulfillment; and, by the rules laid down governing the fulfillment of these, by his grace and his spirit God makes known to his ‘elect servant’ some things that are shortly to come to pass, and thus the “new things” he now declares to them “before they spring forth ’ ’.
Prophecy was written aforetime for the specific
April 15, 1937
STe WATCHTOWER.
125
benefit of God’s covenant and anointed people. (Bom. 15:4) It follows, therefore, that the fulfillment must take place and be made known to some of these anointed ones while on the earth, because otherwise the announced purpose would be defeated. The anointed will not need comfort and hope after they have boon received into glory and made in the likeness of the glorified Christ Jesus. Comfort and encouragement are for their benefit while they are on the earth, and particularly for the remnant on earth “in the last days ’ Since the purpose of prophecy’s being fulfilled is to vindicate the name of Jehovah, its fulfillment must involve the people whom he has taken out of the world for his name and must also identify the class that is opposed to God and his purposes.
When events come to pass and are known, we call these the physical facts. If such events coming to pass involve God’s covenant people and distinguish them from God’s enemies, and the events tend to honor and vindicate God’s name and they fit the things foretold in the prophecy, then we may know that we have God’s interpretation of the prophecy and therefore the right interpretation. For that reason prophecy cannot be understood until God’s due time to understand it and until it is fulfilled or in course of fulfillment. However, prophecy already fulfilled or in course of fulfillment enables God’s anointed people to understand the meaning of other prophecies written in harmony therewith and foretelling what shall come to pass in the very near future.	1
Elsewhere (see Prophecy, pages 71-76) the Scriptural proof has been submitted showing that the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of God took place in the spring of 1918. The early chapters of Ezekiel’s prophecy fit and confirm the work that God’s organization has been doing since that date. That which the prophet sets forth is of the keenest interest to the anointed of the Lord when viewed in the light of recent events and the one coincides with the other. This shows why prophecy could not be understood prior to 1918. It was then that ‘the heavenly temple was opened’ and God’s faithful covenant people were permitted to have a vision of heavenly things and to see them in the light of events coming to pass in the earth before their eyes. After using his covenant people in connection with the fulfilling of prophecy, and without their knowledge and understanding thereof, the Lord gives them an understanding. To be able to look back and see how the faithful ones have been used by the Lord in having a part in the fulfilling of prophecy is a real encouragement and comfort to them and brightens their hope for the greater things set before them.
Numbered amongst the sixteen “literary prophets” of Jehovah is Ezekiel. Ezekiel was twenty-five years of age when carried away with other Israelites as captive to Babylon. His name means “God will
strengthen” or “the strength of God”. True to his name, he was strengthened of the Lord and hence well pictures the company of God's covenant people who are devoted to Jehovah and who are “strong in the Lord and in the power of his might”. These are “strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man”. (Eph. 6:10; 3:16) It was in the fifth year of the captivity that the word of the Lord came to Ezekiel and he had his first vision. He was then thirty years of age, that being the age required to be attained to do the work of the priesthood.—Ezek. 1:2.
It seems quite probable that Ezekiel and Daniel were in the same company of captives, for it seems that they were carried away captive at the same time, to wit, in the year 617 B.C. The divine record shows that they were both pleasing to Jehovah; hence they were not carried away as capthes because of their own wrongdoing, but to serve the purpose of God and to foreshadow things that must come to pass in “the last days”. This was the first captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon. “And he [Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon] carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the king’s mother, and the king’s wives, and his officers, and the mighty of the land, those carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon. And all the men of might, ... all that were strong and apt for war, even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon. ’ ’—2 Ki. 24:15,16.
It is interesting to here note and compare with this scripture some facts that came to pass in 1918 and 1919 as heretofore written in The Watchtower. “From 1918 to 1919 was a period of great travail and suffering. At that time the church was practically in captivity to Babylon, which is one of the names for Satan’s organization.”—See The Watchtower December 15, 1928, page 373.
The year 617 B.C., when Ezekiel was carried away captive, very well corresponds with the year 1914 (A.D.), the beginning of the World War. There was an effort made by Satan’s organization to commandeer all religious organizations for the purpose of winning the war, and those of God's covenant people were not only threatened but many of them were forced into the war and the work of proclaiming the truth was hindered everywhere. Not until 1919, or five years after the beginning of the war, was the way again open to freely witness to the truth. The year 1919, therefore, corresponds with the year 612 B.C., which was the time that Ezekiel received the vision and was commissioned by the Lord to act as a priest and to represent God as a prophetic witness.
This apparent correspondency in dates would tend to prove that the ‘Elisha work’ of God’s covenant people was due to begin, and did begin, in the year 1919 with the assembling of that people in general convention at Cedar Point, Ohio. That was the time the Golden Age magazine was launched and the work
126
STe WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of giving witness of the truth to the people was revived. It was then and there that God made his covenant people aware of the fact that he had commission' d them to ‘preach this gospel of the kingdom to all the nations as a witness’, and it was there called sharply to their attention that God had begun his reign through Christ Jesus, earth’s rightful King. On the fifth day of September, 1919, that covenant people of God was given a vision or understanding of the distinction between the ‘Elijah work’ and the ‘Elisha work’ of the church; that is to say, that the experiences of Elijah had foreshadowed a certain work to be done, which was now completed, and the experiences of Elisha foreshadowed another work to be done by the same people, which work had to begin at that date. (See The Watchtower, 1919, page 292.) As ‘the hand of the Lord was upon Ezekiel’, so was the spirit and the power of the Lord upon his people when they saw for the first time the work marked out for them to do and which had been foreshadowed by the experiences of the prophet Elisha. The work of God’s “servant”, broken up during the war, now began to take on new life, the first part of which was to begin the organization thereof and then go forward with the work.
The year 606 B.C. marks the date of the desolation of Jerusalem. The year 606 B.C. would correspond with 1925, when “organized religions” were plainly seen to be in bondage to Satan, and to be a part of Satan’s organization, and to have been for ever cast away from the Lord. Shortly thereafter the book
Deliverance appeared, exposing Satan’s organization, and particularly the hypocritical religion thereof. Also about that time God revealed to his people the delusion of “character development” as a necessary qualification for the kingdom, and also the “prisoners” yet in Babylon began to be made the subject of special study. (See The Watchtower May 1, 1926, and November 15, 1926.) In 1935 they were identified.
“Chebar” was the name of the river by the side of which Ezekiel got his first vision. It means ‘ ‘ length ’ ’, that is, “extent of time,” and seems to indicate that the fullness of God’s time had now come and his kingdom must now be established and that the work of announcing that kingdom, as foreshadowed by Elisha, must begin. Daniel had a vision at the river, probably the very same river, and at which the dates 1914, 1918 and 1926 were foreshadowed, and he confirms Ezekiel's prophecy.
Ezekiel’s first vision was had five years after he was taken captive. That vision represented and foreshadowed the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to the temple of Jehovah for judgment upon the true house of God and upon the professed house of God, which judgment results in the destruction of the latter house, or “organized religion”. The Israelites had misused and abused God’s temple, and Jehovah caused Ezekiel to prophesy of the destruction of Jerusalem. Nominal spiritual Israel, or “organized Christianity”, so called, has misused and abused God’s temple, and God’s judgment of destruction is pronounced against it.
SAR
CHRIST JESUS, the glorious Prince who is filled with Jehovah’s spirit, and who holds under his command all the holy angels, or “seven stars”, addresses a message to the Sardis church. “And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write; These things saith he that hath the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars; I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God. Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard; and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee. Thou hast a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy. He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit [Jehovah by Christ Jesus] saith unto the churches. ’ ’—Rev. 3:1-6.
One authority gives the meaning of the word <S7ndi.«
DIS
as “prince of joy” or “song of joy”. Sardis was the ancient capital of Lydia, in Asia Minor, the residence of the royal and rich famed Croesus. The residents were in ill repute among other nations for their voluptuous habits of living. The years 1878 to 1918 marked the period of the Elijah work of the church. That was also a period of time for the amassing of the greatest wealth amongst men of the world. Money-making and the love of money especially marked that period. During that same time the truth was preached concerning the kingdom, and the church on earth was in the midst of the money-mad rush. Doubtless many who came to a knowledge of the truth were affected thereby and were ‘drowned in the sea’. (1 Tim. 6:9; Rev. 20:13) In that period of time many heard the truth and greatly rejoiced for a time and sang forth their joy to the Lord. Then the desire for material wealth and the ease that it brings was permitted to cool the zeal of a number in the truth and cause their hand to slack and their tongues to remain silent.
The time approached for the Lord to appear at his temple for judgment, and those in the church fulfilling the condition described in Revelation 3:1-3 concerning Sardis are addressed: “I know thy works, that thou
Aran. 15, 1937
STle WATCHTOWER.
127
hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.” Otherwise stated, they have had some works but without real faith. A faith without works is dead; and works without faith prompted by love are also of no value.— Jas. 2:26.
Paul tells those who give special credit and honor to men that they are carnally minded. (Rom. 8:6; 1 Cor. 3: 3,4) In the period of time mentioned many claimed to believe the truth and accepted it as “the best religion yet”. They especially liked the social features of being with the “truth people”. They attended meetings and conventions; appeared pious and sanctimonious; claimed to be developing a sweet and beautiful character; would be seen at prominent gatherings, loving to entertain the favorite speakers at dinings, and occupying a prominent place at the public meetings; distributed some tracts; made some contributions to the funds needed; made somewhat of a display of their material wealth, which was supposed to give them a better standing than ‘ the common herd ’; and they loved to act as satellites of the most prominent amongst the elective elders and leaders. When any service was to be performed that required one to be in the limelight they sought such with eagerness. But when the brunt of the fight was to be borne they were not there. They were not willing to tell out plainly the truth concerning Satan’s organization, fearing they might offend some or make themselves appear ridiculous. That such a condition has existed in the church during the past fifty years prior to the cleans^ ing of the sanctuary (Dan. 8:14) no one familiar with the facts has the slightest doubt. Therefore the Lord said through the Messenger (verse 2): “For I have not found thy works fully performed.”—Diaglott.
These thus described hold to the fundamental truths, but such faith could not survive without activity. Therefore the Lord says to them (verse 2): “Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die.” Failing to perform their “reasonable service” (Rom. 12:1), which is not outward sanctimoniousness or shining amongst men, they were about to die, and they must awaken to their privileges. The Lord continues (verse 3): “Remember therefore how
thou hast received, and heard; and hold fast, and [change thy course of action].” ‘Be sorry for the action that you have been taking, and become active,’ would be the real meaning. “For godly sorrow work-eth repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.” (2 Cor. 7:10) Failing to heed this warning such would receive the grace of God (that is, “the ministry of reconciliation”) in vain. (2 Cor. 5:18-6: 3) Then the Lord tells them that should they fail to watch he would come to his temple unobserved by them and they would be ensnared by that to which their selfishness held. (Luke 21: 34, 35) That some in this condition would awaken and bestir themselves is clearly indicated by the fact that the Lord gives them warning, that they may have the opportunity thus to do.
Amongst them were those in a somewhat similar condition, to whom he says: “Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.” (Vs. 4) Such keep themselves unspotted from the world by refusing to be identified with the world, Satan’s organization, and hating even their own fleshly weaknesses. (Jas. 1: 27; Jude 23) Clearly the promise is that those who would reform and devote themselves to the Lord he would cause to be identified with him, and ‘they should walk with him in white’, which would mean that they would walk worthy of their vocation and receive his approval.—Eph. 4:1.
Then they.are told (Rev. 3:5) that the overcomers shall be clothed in white raiment and their name shall not be blotted out of the book of life. Manifestly this means that they would receive the Lord’s approval and that he would register them among his approved ones. He also says (verse 5): “I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels,” which would be further evidence of his approval and his acknowledgment before his angels and before Jehovah that they are members of his household. Therefore let all of the ‘Sardis company’ who have the spirit of Jehovah hear and take heed. (Luke 12:8) The Lord is at his temple and even today there may be some in this condition who might be fully recovered to the Lord.
LET
PHONOGRAPH WONDERFUL INSTRUMENT
Dear Brother Rutherford:
“Kingdom Greetings.” Realizing how precious is your time, day and night consecrated to the Most High, we have hesitated in times past to write to you; but now we have come to the point where we cannot find scope amongst ouisehes of our expressions of joy and thankfulness for the wonderful provision of our heavenly Father for his people in these times of special need. The waters of truth are swirling about us in such abundance that we find ourselves all but ovei whelmed and completely lifted off our feet by Jehovah’s bountiful flow of knowledge.
We are overjoyed by Jehovah’s loving-kindness in making known to his humble servants the understanding of the prophetic drama of Joseph and his brethren; and this ghes us hope and encouragement, and hence great zeal, as we whole-
TERS
heartedly embrace his further wonderful provision in the vindication of his holy name,—the phonograph. Day and night we plot and plan how better to use our every moment “as to the Lord ’ ’.
With the Lord’s grace we start the spring in the auxiliary service, looking forward to the time, and we hope in the very near futuie, that Jehovah will lead us into the ranks of the pioneers.
We feel the need, dear brother, at this time to share with you our joy not only as being associated with you in the King’s service but also in this literal way. We thank you also for your personal message of February 2, in which you make so clear to us the Lord’s will, and what a privilege we have now in bearing this new implement of aggression against the enemy of Jehovah.
And so, dear brother, standing shoulder to shoulder with you,
128
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
singing aloud the praises of Jehovah and his King and Vindicator Christ Jesus, we rise up against her in battle, rejoicing that we are counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.
May Jehovah’s richest blessings continue to be your lot. Willi Christian love we are
Your brethren by the Lord’s grace,
Gordon N. Philps
Wm. J. Smith—Canada.
JEHOVAH CONTINUES TO ENLIGHTEN
Devr Brother Rutherford:
The assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses now in session at Winnipeg, Canada, gladly accepts this opportunity of com eying to you our deep appreciation of the light of truth which continually shines forth through the columns of The Watchtower.
The clear Scriptural presentation in the articles dealing with the great multitude gives us great joy and thankfulness to Jehovah as he continues to enlighten us through his own appointed channel.
The marvelous unfolding of Malachi as presented in The Watchtower fills us with zeal and praise to Jehovah, also thankfulness to him for the channel through which he dispenses the meat in due season.
We appreciate the great fight now in progress and rejoice to have part therein.
“TO GIVE SOME IDEA OF THE ENTHUSIASM”
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Just briefly, I thought you would be interested to have one or two extracts from the letters [received here] just to give biiiiii' iditi of the enthusiasm of the brethren:
• • Letter from Brother Rutherford received re further work with phonograph and records. Read it to company today; must say vote was unanimous re our co-operation with Society.”
* ‘ Personal and private communication received. Taken up in company Sunday evening. I made special trip to Souris on Sat-urdnv ; both companies enthusiastically received the advance not n o of our new work and unanimously got behind it. As a diri i t result you may enter our order for four phonographs and R'vvn sets ot records.”
“In reply to the president’s letter the Qualicum Beach company gladly desire to have a part in this work and accordingly order three complete sets; two phonographs. All instructions u ill Im> closely followed. ’ ’
•‘The brethren here at Clute are indeed rejoicing to hear of the further work with the phonograph in store for all God’s people, and to know we are privileged to have a part in it. ’ ’
‘‘Your communication containing wonderful letter by Brother Rutherford received. It helps to enlighten us, not only of greater
tests of faith and courage, but also of more intense and closer-to-home experiences which we by God’s grace are privileged to engage in. For this experience the recent Wat eh towers have been building us up in knowledge, understanding and faith for this very tihie, giving us greater assurance that we are being directed by Christ Jesus at the temple of God.”
“Received Brother Rutherford’s letter regarding further new work. Held special meeting yesterday afternoon; took up the matter fully regarding our work with war and fighting equipment. It was decided that every company publisher should have a phonograph and the company should have as many as we could possibly get. We all realize the fight is on.”
“Received a letter from the president at 4 p.m. At 7: 30 p.m. committee met to prepare arrangements. Special meeting called for Wednesday evening, and the whole company voted unanimously to secure 20 sets for company, use and a further 510 discs for individuals. Twenty-two phonographs ordered. This all in one evening. When the ammunition arrives we will be prepared.”
At Kingston the active publishers are six. They state:
“The Kingston company would like to have six phonographs sent and 42 records for each, and two extra, sets to use with the macliines we have.”
Another company just sends an order, but it is for 27 phonographs and 47 special sets.
The results of the Toronto meeting I was pleased to write you recently, and since that meeting orders have poured in from this company for 74 phonographs and 44 special sets.
It is appreciated that you are extremely busy, but I feel sure that this brief report will be a pleasure to receive. We rejoice in all our privileges of service and trust that all will now put their shoulder to the wheel and be. ready to start out on the date which has just been announced from Brooklyn, viz., April 18.
With warm love, I am
Your brother and servant by His grace,
P. Chapman.
GIVES ONE COURAGE
Dear Sir:
Just a word in regard to your broadcast, the free lecture on “Armageddon”. It was fine. Heard every word; and it gives one courage to get out in the field and do more witnessing. Oh, how you do speak from the shoulder!
I can’t remember how many times on my knees before my radio while listening I implored Jehovah God to piotect you from all danger and all harm. I am waiting to see if they (the R. C. H.) will debate. That will be something to write home about. May the grace of God bless and keep you always. Best wishes. I am,
Mrs. Thomas Miller, Massachusetts.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
J. C. BOOTH
Cheyenne, Wyo		...May	1.2	Denver, Colo. ..		May	13-18
Larnnile, Wjo			4,5	Glenwood Sp’gs,	Colo. "	20. 21
lort Collins. Colo. .	44	6	Grand Junction,	Colo. “	22, 23
Loveland, Colo		41	7,8	Cedaredge, Colo		25. 2G
Greeley, Colo		 Fort Morgan, Colo.	....	9,10	Paonia, Colo. ...		27
		12	Durango, Colo.		29-31
Itlver Bend, Colo. ...	*«	14	Ackmen, Colo. .		June	2
M. L. HERR
Wilmot. Ark...........May
Lak" Village. Ark.....-
Monticello, Ark.......“
Warren, Ark.......... “
Gould, Ark............"
1’1 tie Bluff, Ark..— “
Mahern. Ark...........“
Hot Springs Ark......."
Big Fork. Ark.........“
Boles, Ark.............“
2
4
5
6
7
8
8
11, 12
13
14. 15
Fort Smith, Ark.....-May 10,17
Ozark, Ark.............“	19
Lamar, Ark............ “	20
Fayetteville, Ark......"	21
Springdale, Ark........“	22, 23
Gently Ark.........._... “ 25,20
Kogers, Ark............“	27, 2s
Harrison, Ark.......“	29
Mountain Home, Ark. "	30
Formosa, Ark...........“	31
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Savannah, Ga. 		_...Mny	2-4	Vienna, Ga. ..........	...May	20
Taylors Creek, Ga.	44	6	Fitzgerald, Ga		44	21
Collins, Ga				“	7	Ocilla, Ga		44	22
1'valda, Ga			“	8	Ty Ty, GA		44	23
Hawkinsville, Ga.			“	9	Albany, Ga			“	25
Fort Valley, Ga. ...		"	11	Bainbridge, On. 				26
Macon, Ga			12.13	Thomasville, Ga. ...		“ 27	2X
Lagrange, Ga. ....		“	14, 15	Valdosta, Ga		44	29
Columbus, Ga				"	16. 17	Waycross, Ga	...		“ 30	31
Cordele, Ga		♦« ■ ■...a.	19	St. Marys, Ga		...June	1
S. H. TOUTJIAN
La Grande, Oreg.......May	1,2	Walla Walla, Wash. May 15.16
Wallowa. Oreg......... “	4	Colfax, Wash............“	18, 19
Baker, Oreg............“	5	Benewah, Idaho ........“	20,21
Weiser, Idaho .........“	6, 7	Spokane, Wash..........“	22, 23
Nampa, Idaho ..........“	8, 9	Ravalli, Mont...........“	25
Boise, Idaho ..........“	11,12	Pablo, Mont............“	26
Orofino, Idaho .......“	13	Whitefish, Mont. ______“	27, 28
Lewiston, Idaho _______"	14	Kalispel, Mont..........“	29-31
A. S. WRIGHT
Guymon, Okla...... ?' iy L2
Boyd, Okla.....-.....”	4,5
Shattuck, Okla. ....... “	6. 7
Fargo, Okla............ “	<?
Woodward, Okla. ........	9
Alva, Okla. __________May	11
Enid, Okla..............“	12.13
Fairview, Okla. _______“	14.	15
El Reno, Okla. _________“	16
Hydro, Okla. __________May 18,19
Clinton, Okla. _________ “	20
Dill, Okla...............“	21
Elk City, Okla.__________“	22. 23
Texola, Okla. _______May 25, 26
Altus, Okla.........._... " 27,28
Frederick, Okla.........“	29
Lawton, Okla..........."	30
Cyril, Okla.____________“	31
fflie WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE O TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”*Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth, for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges
systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Gbeat Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Monev Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..............34	Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian.........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African.........Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription pneo may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of exniration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postofjlce. Act of March 3, 1819.
“GLITTERING SWORD"
The coming testimony period, “Glittering Sword,’’ from June 5 to 13 inclusive, will afford a most generous opportunity for the people of good will to get the Lord’s latest provision, to learn how they may find protection and preservation from Jehovah’s Glittering Sword. During this period the kingdom publishers will offer the people a 50c combination; this to consist of the two books Riches and Preset vation and four booklets, including Protection, Uncovered, and Armageddon. Till then the Informant will give fuller and further details concerning tills period, and all publishers will inform themselves therefrom and proceed accordingly. Your promptitude in preparing all needful things for this period will be pleasing to the Lord and blessed. Please report to this office the result of your service.
“ARMAGEDDON”
This new 64-page booklet is a thriller and of absorbing interest. It contains the president’s public address on that subject, which held spellbound vast European and American audiences, and also includes a clear Scnptural discussion of who will survive that dread conflict. The release of this booklet for regular house-to-house witnessing is announced elsewhere. Meantime you may procure the booklet for your own information and preparation, at 5c a copy.
COMPANY SERVANT
Proclamation of the kingdom message is all-important now. It is the duty of the anointed to vote as to who shall be company servant; but “hewers of wood and drawers of water’’ (Josh. 9: 21-27) may serve. (Deut. 1G: 12-15; 29: 11) When there are none in the company capable of filling the places of company servants or service committees and there are Jonadabs who have the ability and zeal, let the Jonadabs be placed on the sen-ice committee and give them opportunity to serve. The work should not drag because some of the company have lack of zeal. The gospel must now be proclaimed.—Matt. 24: 14.
NEW PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph of new design, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and covered with brown cloth and having rounded corners. It weighs only 9 pounds 13 ounces. However, with the three phonograph discs which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound is just as strong as that of the previous model, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonograph is timed properly, at 78 r.p.m., and should be cheeked from time to time. This new model, including three discs, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittance should accompany orders. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
Vol. LVIII
May 1, 1937
NO. 9
"SONG OF THE HARLOT”
“Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten: make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.”—Isa. 23:16.
PART 3
T EHOVAH’S DAY’ is that term used in prophecy I and relates to the time when Jehovah enthrones his commissioned King and sends him forth to rule. (Pss. 2:6; 110:2) It is also referred to in the Scriptures as “that day”. It marks the time when Christ Jesus the King began to interrupt the rule of Satan which he had so long carried on unhindered. It is marked by the beginning of the war in heaven, which resulted in the ousting of Satan and his angels from heaven and casting them down to the earth. (Rev. 12:7) Practically at the same time the World War began on the earth. It is the time of the beginning of Satan’s overthrow, which will ultimately culminate at Armageddon. Reference to that time is made in the prophecy of Isaiah 23:15, where it is written: ‘ ‘ And it shall come to pass in that day.” At this point the prophecy in fulfillment moves back from a consideration of the things that will come to pass at the beginning of Armageddon and gives consideration to things or causes directly provoking the conflict. The time for the beginning of the fulfillment of this part of the prophecy in Isaiah 23:15 is in the year 1914 (A.D.) when the enemy is ousted from heaven. As shown by the historical facts, published in the previous issue of The Watchtower, in the year 1914, and for several years prior thereto, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy did not rate as a temporal ruling power in the earth. During that period of time it was claimed that the pope was “the white prisoner” at the Vatican.
3	Seeing that ancient Tyre pictured the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, which is therefore modern Tyre, it will be of aid in the examination of the prophecy if we keep in mind the objective or chief purpose of the Hierarchy, which purpose is, to wit: To rule over the nations of the earth as the claimed representative of Christ, with the false slogan, “Chris-tus Rex,” that is, “Christ the King,” meaning, in fact, the pope, the head of the Roman Catholic “Hierarchy of Jurisdiction” on the earth. Such has been the objective of the Roman Catholic organization from the beginning, but she has received setbacks from time to
time, and which the organization attributes to the opposition of her enemies.
3	Says the prophet of Jehovah: “It shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre [modern Tyre, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization] shall be forgotten.” Forgotten by whom ? By her former illicit paramours who have committed fornication with her. She is forgotten as a temporal power. The political ruling powers counted her out as regards temporal power, viewing the pope as merely a spiritual adviser, without much influence, not to be feared. It does not necessarily follow that the Hierarchy is forgotten for seventy years. The prophecy clearly fixes the time when she is forgotten, by saying: “In that day . . . Tyre shall be forgotten.” A comparison of the language of verse 15 with that of verse 17 more clearly shows this: That there is a period of time in which the harlot is forgotten and that time of forgetting her of which the prophecy takes notice is “in that day”, that is, the day of Jehovah; and that it is at the end of seventy years that the Lord will visit Tyre. The Lord’s visit to Tyre manifestly is not for her upbuilding, but for her adverse judgment, which visit begins with Jehovah’s “strange work” and concludes with the beginning of Jehovah’s “strange act”.
SEVENTY-YEAR PERIOD
4	The prophecy of Isaiah here considered was paralleled by the prophecy uttered by Jeremiah, in which latter prophecy the “seventy years” was associated with the seventy years of desolation of Jerusalem. Concerning this Jehovah’s prophet Jeremiah said: “Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land [Judah and Jerusalem], and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about [including Tyre], and will utterly destroy them [in the type, for seventy years], and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolations. . . . And this whole land [Canaan] shall he a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations [including
131
132
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Tyre] shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years. And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation [by ousting Satan and his angels from heaven; which began in A.D. 1914], saith the Lord, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and will make it perpetual desolations.” What land will God make perpetual desolation ? (Vs. 9) Certainly Tyre is included, because it is written: “And all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea.”—Jer. 25: 9-22.
8	God’s prophet Zechariah speaks of the antitypical fulfillment of this prophecy upon spiritual Israel as pictured by Jerusalem, and the time is clearly marked out. (See Zechariah 14:1,2, book Preparation, page 281.) It was not necessary for spiritual Israel to be desolated the full, literal seventy years in order to fulfill the typical picture of ancient Jerusalem’s desolation. The desolation of spiritual Israel was accomplished between 1914 and 1919, or within a period of about four years. In that time spiritual Israel, that is, the remnant, fulfilled the picture of the return of the captivity from Babylon to Zion, and thus the seventy years of desolation antitypically was counted as completely fulfilled. The important thing was the desolation, and not the mere length of time thereof.
8	Note now that Jeremiah counts Tyrus’ desolation of seventy years as running concurrently with the seventy years of desolation of Jerusalem; therefore as in the case of spiritual Israel, so with Tyre in the modern fulfillment, that is, as applying to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy; The desolation or absence of temporal power, or the time in which she is forgotten, would not require literally seventy years. The important point here is the desolation, and not the exact length thereof. Furthermore, the foregoing period of desolation is “in that day”, hence could not begin until the beginning of the day of Jehovah, to wit, in 1914.
T In the type or picture the two equal periods running concurrently, seventy years upon modern Tyre, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, would be counted as ended at approximately the same time as the desolation upon the remnant of New Jerusalem is ended, that is to say, about the end of 1918 or beginning of 1919. It would therefore not be at all necessary to measure back from November 24, 1918, to November 24, 1848, in order to locate the time. It suffices, then, that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy was forgotten and neglected “in that day”, that is to say, from 1914 to 1919, and that the forgetting was by her former political associates who had committed fornication with her, classing her as a temporal power. If the physical facts show that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy was forgotten or neglected by the political powers from 1914 to 1919, that would be a further corroboration of the conclusion that the fulfillment of the seventy-year period is as hereinbefore stated.
“FORGOTTEN”
8	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy tried to seat herself in a prominent temporal position during the World War, but failed. During that time the pope was generally under suspicion, by the allies in particular, and that with good reason. Although the pope tried to screen himself by claims of being neutral and maintaining strict neutrality, his claims naturally were not considered sincere. Note the following historical fact: “London, Treaty of (191'5). A secret agreement concluded between Italy, France, Great Britain and Russia on 26 April and finally signed on 9 May 1915, declaring the terms under which Italy agreed to enter the war on the side of the Entente Allies. ‘By the future treaty of peace’ Italy was to receive the Trenlino, the whole of Southern Tyrol, as far as its natural and geographical frontier, the Brenner Pass; . . . The Holy See was not to be permitted to intervene by diplomatic action in regard to peace or questions arising from the war.”—The Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 17, pages 632-633.
8	We see a secret agreement of the Entente Allies to ignore or forget the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and specifically the head thereof. A publication issued at Washington, D.C., in March 1929, known as The Protestant, Volume 9, Number one, page one, paragraphs three and four, says: “Throughout the World War diocesan periodicals of the Hierarchy in this country [the United States] urged the papal ambition to sit in judgment on the belligerents as arbiter of peace. It was Italy that defeated that aspiration. In the pact of London [treaty of 1915 above mentioned] that country executed a covenant barring the pope from any part in the conduct of hostilities or the terms of peace. Italy had excluded the Papacy from both peace conferences at The Hague. But the concordat [of 1929] removes that obstacle. Instead of the resolute adversary of the Roman See, Italy becomes its foremost confederate. ’ ’ This proves that the pope tried to have illicit relationship with the political powers of the nations during the World War period but was pushed to the side and forgotten during that period, that is, between 1914 and 1919, and this corresponds exactly with the time spiritual Israel was under restraint by Satan’s organization. The old whore’s charms did not allure the greedy nations just at the time of the war, because they wanted all the prospective pie. These facts exactly fulfill the prophecy concerning the “forgotten harlot”. The old woman was hanging down her head and wearing long, black clothes during that time. But, behold, she woke up at the end of that period, as the prophecy foretells.
10	Says the prophecy (Isa. 23:15): “According to the days of one king.” In the type the “one king” was the Babylonish line of kings, from Nebuchadnezzar to Belshazzar, of the land of the Chaldeans. But in the antitype or fulfillment of the prophecy “in that day” from 1914 forward, Christ Jesus, the enthroned King
May 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
133
of Jehovah, began and has continued his reign. “Like the days of one king” (Leeser); “according to the days of a certain king.” (Rotherham) These two latter translations help to clarify the matter and manifestly refer to the “King of the Chaldeans” and the antitypical desolation-period fulfilled from 1914 to 1918 as above stated. The World War closed November 11, 1918, and it was shortly after that time that the tight position of the pope began to be lifted and the “forgotten” period began to end. When the peace conference began to be discussed the pope immediately got busy and tried to get a seat at that conference. On November 30, 1918, the New York Evening World published a statement to the effect that “the pope [then Benedict XV] desired to attend the peace conference in order that he might gain some temporal power”; also stating that the Vatican sought to establish a private telegraph office and lines at the Vatican, “with private wires to all governments, so as not to have to use the Italian lines.” (See The Watchtower January 1, 1919.) The Italian government, up to that time, had kept the ‘old lady’ in the background. The Peace Conference opened on January 18, 1919, when the League of Nations compact was presented, and later adopted, and at that conference the pope made efforts to gain a 3eat on a par with the political governments or nations, but failed. All these facts show that in that period of time above mentioned the old lady was forgotten.
11	The events above mentioned were approximately seventy years after November 24, 1848, at which time the pope, in disguise, fled from Rome. On February 8, 1849, the Italian government divested the pope of all temporal power. But these facts appear to be merely incidental to the prophecy, and not in fulfillment thereof. These facts would help to conceal the true meaning of the prophecy for a time and until God’s due time for it to be understood. The prophecy (vs. 15) further says: ‘After seventy years [of desolation typical and antitypical] shall Tyre sing as an harlot.’ Other translations render this part of the prophecy in this manner, to wit: “It shall be unto Tyre as in the song of the harlot” (R-V.); “shall it befall Tyre according to the song of the harlot” (Rotherham); “there shall be unto Tyre as the song of a harlot” (Douay); “shall it happen to Tyre as in the song of the harlot.” (Leeser) Note that it is not a song by the harlot, but “as in the song of the harlot”; and that appears to be the reason why Leeser in translating this text puts verse sixteen in quotation, and thus verse sixteen is “The Song”. That “Song of the Harlot” must be and certainly is a prophecy of the Lord concerning the harlot religious system, that is, the Roman Catholic organization, allies and supporters, and which prophecy foretells her conduct immediately following the end of the period in which she is forgotten. The song begins to revive her traffic and patronage and her efforts to gain her chief objective,
to wit, to rule the nations of the earth as the vicegerent of Christ and in a dictatorial wrny.
12	The words of “the song of the harlot” are addressed to the harlot herself, that is to say, to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and at the period after the end of the World War in 1918, and which is after Satan and his wicked crowd of angels had been cast out of heaven and down to the earth and when Satan began to gather his forces, visible and invisible, to Armageddon. In this action or work Satan brings forward and puts into action his religious institution, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. This also marks the time when the Lord builds up Zion and sends forth the remnant as his witnesses to proclaim his name and kingdom throughout the earth. The words of “the song of the harlot” are these: “Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten: make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.” (Isa. 23:16) This song is not sung to magnify the name of Jehovah, but for the contrary purpose. “And the harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. ’ ’—Isa. 5:12.
13	The harlot is a “street-walker”, and she conducts herself in her best wearing apparel, paints her face, and sallies forth to accomplish her business. She resorts to “an harp”, that is, instruments to make a pleasing sound to the ear of her prospective paramours, including those she once had, and also new suckers, such as the United States, and the professional politicians who run it. She adds whatsoever she can to her attractive charms and carries on her seductive work, and in doing this she stages a hypnotizing background of entrancing sound. The “harp”, as used in the prophecy, pictures the equipment or instrumentality of the old harlot by which she would add power and influence to her religious squawks or doctrinal lies in order that she might inveigle others into her trap and gain control over them. Those instruments antityp-ically are such as the Jesuits, Fascists, Nazis, “holy year” fiasco, Holy Name Society, Catholic Action, Knights of Columbus, anti-communistic schools, the Catholic press, the National Catholic Welfare Conference, the Legion of Decency, controlling moving pictures and moving-picture censorship, feigned, and hypocritical patriotism exhibited in compulsory flagsaluting, the building of monuments and images at the expense of religionists, and all suchlike movements, by and through which she “struts her stuff” and bamboozles and hoodwinks the credulous population, hoping thereby to further her, cause and gain her great objective, to wit, to rule the nations of the earth by dictators. Since the World War the old harlot has daily increased her boastful, scornful attitude and arrogance in parading herself before the peoples of the earth.
134
*3Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
14	The harlot, that is, the Roman Catholic organization, goes up and down the earth with her instruments of sound under the leadership of the Devil and in opposition to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, who are now singing the praises of Jehovah and his King. The harlot puts forth her best endeavors to crush everything that makes known the truth as God has put it in his Word. In striking contrast to the conduct of the harlot Jehovah pictures his faithful witnesses with the Lord in this beautiful symbolic phrase: ‘ ‘ And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire; and them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God. And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. ”—Rev. 15:2, 3.
18	The song of praise to the Most High announces that his kingdom is the only hope of the world and that Christ will now reign in righteousness and will destroy all hypocrisy and wickedness; and this song greatly disturbs the old “whore” and she whangs her harp with all her power and energy and uses all her power and influence to get the harpers of the Lord out of the way. Her persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses in every country is conclusive proof of this statement. The facts well known, and which are coming to pass in this day, exactly fit the prophecy, and this shows that now is the time, from and after the end of the World War, that the old whore is employing all her “harlot charms” to draw the nations and the people under her control, that she may rule to the satisfaction of her selfish and wicked ambition.
18	And where does she go to sing the Harlot song? The prophecy answers: “About the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten.” She once had temporal power, then she was forgotten during the time that the political crowd thought best to ignore the old woman; and again, following the war, conditions are changed, and it is the appropriate time, as she thinks, for her to go out and round up her old, and some of her new, paramours, putting on her most attractive air, and thereby inducing fornicators to turn again to her. And in what “city” does she parade? Not amongst God’s faithful people, not in the temple of Zion, but she goes about the “city” symbolically designated as “Christendom”, the nations that are willing to have the name of Christ indirectly attached to them for commercial purposes. Such is the city of the “ten kings”. As a “street-walker” the old and experienced harlot accosts each king or ruling power of the nations, and sings her songs, that is to say, she puts on a show before them by which she expects to dazzle the kings. Since the end of the World War the harlot, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, has been exhibiting herself, clothed in her peculiar garments by which she
is identified; appearing with painted face and flattering words and at much expense, which expense money she collects from the “Catholic population”, she goes on her campaign of enticement and seduction. She calls it “Catholic action”. It could be dubbed also “Devil’s visible action”. The Jewish rabbis and the so-called “Protestant” clergy fall right into the old harlot’s arms, receive a few lessons from her, and then take their place in the show, attempting to make the politicians and the commercial men believe that their best interests require that they associate themselves with the religious, that is, the “harlot” organization.
1T	The old harlot, since the World War, has gained complete control of Italy, and Germany, and wherever in those nations her paint and enticing words fail she uses force of arms. She poses as honest, and hypocritically says she represents God and Christ, the great Prince of Peace, and at the same time she organizes and launches a rebellion against the government of Spain because that government kicked her out and refused to yield again to her seductive charms. Her priests and other underlings, wearing clerical robes and armed with sword and gun, go forth to murder the people of Spain in order to carry out the harlot’s wicked design to gain control of that nation. Just at the present time the old “harlot” is putting on her big show at Washington, D.C., endeavoring to establish diplomatic relationship between the United States and the Vatican, and Washington is getting quite drunk with the wine of her fornication. The United States is quite a youth, not so fully acquainted with the harlot as the other nations, and is well likened in the prophecy to a young man getting his eyeteeth cut. Often a young man who is simple yields to the seductive influence of an enticing harlot who sings songs and exhibits herself in public places. The United States appears to be in the class of such simpletons.
18	Jehovah God, foreknowing the present-day conditions and the activities of the harlot religious organization, caused an appropriate proverb to be recorded long ago, and which now is applicable, to wit: “And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths a young man void of understanding [United States], passing through the street near her corner; and he went the way to her house, in the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night; and, behold, there met him a woman with the attire of an harlot, and subtil of heart. (She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house; now is she without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at every corner.) So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, I have peace offerings with me; this day have I paid my vows; therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face; and I have found thee. I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with fine linen of Egypt. I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. Come, let us take our fill of love until the morn
May 1, 1937
Tfie WATCHTOWER-
135
ing; let us solace ourselves with loves: for the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey.” “With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced him. He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter or as a fool to the correction of the stocks; till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life.” “Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.” —Prov. 7: 7-19, 21-23, 27.
19	Will the United States yield to the harlot’s blandishments and fall? It so appears. The old “harlot” has her instruments everywhere in the land working overtime to get control of the United States and every branch of the government, and the politicians are falling to her enticements, and many of the people who are dupes and easily deceived are likewise yielding. Fascists and Nazis are one and the same thing and are instruments employed with great effect by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to gain control of the nations. Each day the strength of that organization grows in the United States. The people in general appear to be asleep to the danger. The harlot even controls the moving-picture business in order to keep the people’s thoughts on everything except the danger that besets the nation. It is indeed a frightful time. It is the nighttime and the people slumber. Darkness covers the land, and gross darkness is upon the people. (Isa. 60:2) The harlot organization and her instruments are busy during all hours of the night.
"The old “harlot” sings the prophetic song, as it is written: “Make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.” This she does in order to add to her charms and her power. Her endeavor is to induce the political crowd to believe not only that she is their spiritual guide but that she should exercise temporal power and supremacy over all of the political organizations. Inducing the politicians to yield to her blandishments she will do business with them and through them and thereby gain control of the people and rule as a counterfeit Christ over the nation and ultimately over all the nations of ‘ ‘ Christendom ’ ’.
91	The aggressive campaign of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of the present time is called by that organization “Catholic action” and shows beyond all doubt that the present is considered the time for the old “harlot” to gain temporal control of the nations of the earth. She therefore squawks her songs, which songs are lies, of course, because that is her stock in trade, as God foretold. Now she boastfully says, as the prophet of the Lord foretold: “We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves”; nothing can “prevail against” us. (Isa. 28:15) With glaring, brazen hypocrisy she calls attention to her supposed attractiveness and desirability. Hiding the real facts from others, she poses as the rightful censor of the truth. She tells the Federal Communications
Commission, and the owners and operators of radio stations, what they shall and shall not broadcast. She tells the people what they shall and shall not hear or read. She dictates to legislative bodies, to the judges of the courts, and to the other political officials of the land. She takes the lead in compulsory saluting of flags contrary to the fundamental law of the nation. She poses as very patriotic and insists on the schoolteachers’ taking an oath,-which never before was thought of in America, and she bluffs the legislative and judicial power to try to sustain her. Claiming to be patriotic, she is a traitor to every country under the sun. She takes oaths of allegiance to governments with a reservation that it is all right to quickly violate them. She poses as the guardian of the people to insure a clean social condition, and underneath and behind the scenes carries on all manner of uneleanness. Amongst her instruments that she uses are ultraselfish men called “Jews”, who look only for personal gain, and who therefore readily yield to and join with the Hierarchy in any unrighteous schemes. The Catholic organization in fact controls the moving-picture business and on every possible occasion in the exhibition of pictures attempts to magnify the merits of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. She raises a great hue and cry about communists’ being a danger, and this she does in order to attract the people’s attention away from her own crookedness and to enable her to take advantage of the people and slip her own instruments into positions of power. Her instruments and her songs seem to be endless, and therefore, in fulfillment of the prophecy, she sings many songs, and the political dupes with gaping mouths are led right into her snare. The prophecy is now being rapidly fulfilled.
22	And what is the real purpose of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy action? Says the prophet: “That thou mayest be remembered”; that is, that she may get back her position of temporal power. Her great ambition is temporal power and rule of the nations of the world, and therefore she must be remembered by het political paramours. Religion, which she wrongfully claims is ‘ ‘ Christianity ’ ’, is used by her to gain political power. She is determined now to have to do with the treaties and make treaties with the nations and to bring all religious practices under her control and to suppress everyone who does not declare that she is the representative of God on earth. She is determined to suppress everyone who dares declare the truth of God’s Word. Jehovah’s witnesses are commissioned to speak the truth, and therefore Jehovah’s witnesses constitute a stinging thorn in the flesh of the old “harlot” because they lift high the banner of the Lord, pointing the people to the declaration of Jehovah that his kingdom and his King is the hope of the world and that there is none other. The kingdom of God under Christ, as proclaimed by Jehovah’s witnesses, is the only thing the Roman Catholic Hierarchy now really fears. The old “harlot” is now very dili
136
f^e WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
gent to hide from the people her long and bloody record as inquisitionists and the many crimes she has committed, and when her allies and filthy record, as recorded in history, are mentioned and the truth of God’s Word is told about her, she howls, and with great crocodile tears says: “That speech is shocking to our religious susceptibilities.” The facts conclusively prove the fulfillment of the prophecy.
“ABOMINATION”
28	The “abomination of desolation”, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, and by the Lord Jesus, is that which claims to rule in the place and stead of God’s kingdom under Christ Jesus. The League of Nations was set up for that very purpose, claiming the right and power to rule the world. But have in mind what constitutes and controls the League o F Nations. At the very beginning of the organization of the League of Nations the Roman Catholic Hierarchy sought a place or seat in that conference and she there began to put on her show to get into it and to dominate the League. When that ‘beast came up out of the pit’ (Rev. 17:8) immediately following the end of the World War, the old “harlot” climbed on the back of that beast and has been riding since, and exercising the guiding control of the League of Nations, claiming the right to rule and vigorously attempting to rule the world in the place and stead of Christ Jesus; therefore the “abomination that maketh desolate” is the League of Nations and is labeled by organized religion “the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth”. “Organized religion,” with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in the lead, is the binding tie and the chief part constituting the League of Nations, which claims the right and which attempts to rule the world in the place and stead of Christ. (See Light, Book Two, page 103.) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the leader of “organized religion”, is the guiding power of the League of Nations, and she expects to exercise even greater power, and doubtless will, in the very near future, regardless of what the combine is called. The old “harlot” is riding on the back of the “beast”, and therefore is the dominating part thereof. The objective of the League of Nations is to rule the world contrary to God’s purpose, and therefore the League of Nations and the Hierarchy are one, constituting the ‘ ‘ abomination that maketh desolate ’ ’, and it stands where it ought not to stand; and this is a warning to everyone who loves God and Christ to flee to God’s organization under Christ.—Matt. 24:15,16; Mark 13:14.
•VISITS TYRE’
2<	The prophecy then declares that Jehovah visits Tyre; and surely that visit is not in her favor, but for judgment against that wicked organization. When docs the Lord visit her? The prophecy answers: “And it shall come to pass, after the end of seventy years, that the Lord will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to her hire,
and shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth. ’ ’ (Isa. 23:17) Other translations of this text are: “And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years that Jehovah will visit Tyre.” (A.R.F.) “So shall it be at the end of seventy years that Jehovah will visit Tyre.” (Roth.) This shows that it is from and after 1918 that Jehovah visits Tyre, and during the time in which the Lord is restoring his remnant from Babylon and using them for his purpose. As Jehovah permits the Devil to remain, so for a time he permits the old “harlot”, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, to remain in existence to operate against his kingdom and his witnesses. First Jehovah visits her with the proclamation of the truth against her, and in doing this he commands his witnesses to ‘arise against her in battle’. (Obad. 1) This is Jehovah’s “strange work”; and, this strange work being completed, he visits her and executes judgment upon her, and that marks the beginning of his “strange act”, which is the second part of his visit. During the first part of his visit, as in case of his visit to Sodom, Jehovah gathers the evidence against her as to her activities as a harlot operating with a harp and song. During the first part of the visit, says the prophet, “she shall turn [shall return (R.V.) ; will return (Roth.)] to her hire.” She returns to her hire as a harlot and uses that hire with which to commit fornication with the rulers of the earth.
25	Note this part of the prophecy says: “And shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth”; according to the Revised Version: “Shall play the harlot with all the kingdoms of the world.” Such is exactly what the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization is doing, and has been doing from and after 1918, and will continue to do until the beginning of Armageddon; and while she is doing that Jehovah is doing his “strange work” of exposing her wickedness. The activity of the old “whore” in committing harlotry with all the kingdoms of the world appears to be more than merely establishing diplomatic relationship with all nations and being recognized as a temporal power. It surely means the carrying out of the objective of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to set up a Fascist government controlling the nations of the earth, that the Hierarchy may arbitrarily rule the nations in a dictatorial manner.
DEVIL’S OFFSPRING
26	The League of Nations is the child of the Devil by his “woman”, “organized religion,” brought forth in opposition to Jehovah’s “man child”, which shall rule the world. (Rev. 12:5) The combination of the League of Nations is made up of religion, politics and commerce, religion being the binding tie and riding on the back of the beast and claiming the right to rule. The old “whore” gains her dominating position in this
May 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER-
137
combine when she ‘returns to her hire and plays the harlot with all the kingdoms of the world upon the faee of the earth This is further proof that the combine is the abomination that maketh desolate. Corroborating this conclusion, note Revelation 17:1, 2: “And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters [as ancient Tyre did] : with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication [which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has done since 1918, while rejecting the kingdom of God, the ‘Stone laid in Zion’], and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication.”
87	During the past few years the Fascists and Nazis have grown at a tremendous speed, thus showing that the “inhabitants of the earth” are made drunk with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy’s lying, poisonous doctrines, her “wine”, and the fornication and drunkenness continue to increase: ‘ ‘ For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.”—Rev. 18:3.
28	The combine of the nations, under the influence of “organized religion”, was lined up behind the Hague International Arbitration Court, which during the World War went out of sight but quickly eame up out of the pit following the World War: “And the beast that was, and is not [during the World War], even he is the eighth [world power; namely, the combine of the League of Nations with Devil-religion riding], and is of the seven [previous world powers, existing before the World War], and goeth into perdition [at Armageddon, the harlot being first unseated and destroyed].”—Rev. 17:11.
20	While the old ‘ ‘ harlot ’ ’ rides the beast and thus symbolically is in control of it, the Protestant clergy drag along in the procession and shout: “This is the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth”; and the deluded and ignorant populace yell, and for what reason they know not. The old “harlot” returns to her hire, that is, uses her stock in trade, to induce others to commit fornication with her, and with her blandishments as a harlot thereby gains the upper hand of the nations and rides on the back of the combine, and thus the “abomination of desolation” is complete.
80	It was the Fascists’ leader, Mussolini, who first opposed the pope’s being recognized during the World War, and it was the same Mussolini who saw to it that the pope regained his temporal-power position in 1929, and since then the pope has not been known to seek a seat in the League of Nations, and the reason is, because he has pursued a more subtle policy, thereby obtaining a seat as the rider of the entire beast, and has the whole gang kissing his big toe.
81	The United States is not supposed to be a member of the League of Nations, but the prophecy says: ‘ ‘ She . . . shall play the harlot with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth” (R.V.), and this necessarily includes the United States of America. It is well known, by every person in America who really thinks, that the determination of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is to gain control of the United States and make it a government similar to that of Germany and Italy. Just preceding the election in the United States in 1936 Cardinal Pacelli, Papal secretary of state of the Vatican, visited the United States, and the result was that practically every Roman Catholic voted for Mr. Roosevelt, the man who had said previously that ‘ diplomatic relationship would be established with the Vatican as soon as the American people could be brought around to it’.
BRITAIN AND AMERICA
82	No one on earth can tell exactly what will come to pass; but those devoted to the Lord, and according to the divine rule of applying the well-known facts to God’s prophecy now in course of fulfillment, can well reach a reasonable conclusion as to what shall come to pass. The question is, Will Great Britain and America become Fascist under the dominating control of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy ? The Scriptures and the facts appear to fully support that conclusion. Within the borders of the British Empire and the United States of America the truth of God’s kingdom has had its greatest proclamation and witness, and that is exactly what the Roman Catholic Hierarchy hates. It is the truth of and concerning the kingdom of God, when proclaimed, that “shocks the religious susceptibilities ’ ’ of the Hierarchy crowd, because they hate that which lets God’s light shine and exposes them. For that reason the Hierarchy attempts to suppress the use of the radio and all other means of publication of God’s kingdom message. The prophecy of the Lord shows that modem Tyre, the Catholic organization, commits fornication with all the nations and gains her desire. When the Hierarchy has gained complete temporal power of the earth, that will in her mind fully establish the conclusion that her desire has been fully accomplished, and then she will say: ‘ ‘ Peace and safety ’ ’; and then the ‘ ‘ ten horns ’ ’, that is, all the ruling powers of the nations, receive power with the “beast”, the League of Nations combine being, in fact, a league of Fascism or combined Fascist governments, dominated by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. “And the woman [Devil’s visible religious organization, the harlot] which thou sawest is that great city [the Hierarchy organization], which reigneth over [combined Fascism,] the kings of the earth.”—Rev. 17 :12,18.
88	What was the real inducement that caused King Edward VIII to abdicate may be better understood in the near future. That Fascism now is gaining at an
138
WATCHTOWER.
Bkooklyn, N. Y.
alarming rate in Britain, there is not the slightest doubt. Also the Fascists and Nazis are rapidly increasing in the United States. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy is confident of putting to silence through its instruments everything and every activity that exposes the crookedness of the Hierarchy and makes known Jehovah God’s purpose. It is nighttime, so far as most of the people are concerned, and the old whore, while the people slumber, moves .forward with greater confidence. A complete fulfillment of the prophecy draws nigh. God caused the apostle Paul to write authoritatively concerning this very time, to wit: ‘ ‘ But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you. For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. ’ ’—1 Thess. 5:1-3.
84	Jehovah is now carrying on his “strange work’’, which serves to enlighten the people of good will and to show them the only way of escape; and only those who find that way will escape. The old ‘ ‘ whore ’ ’ sitting upon the back of the beast may soon be expected to say: 'Peace and safety, we have silenced all opponents.’ Then Jehovah’s “strange act” will begin, and sudden destruction comes upon her as travail upon a woman with child. There begins the howl, described by Isaiah 23:1-14; and destruction of Satan’s religious system, by which he has hoodwinked the people and made merchandise of them. As for the harlot, her triumph will be short and her end will be complete destruction.—Ezek. 27:12-34; Rev. 17:16,17.
“HOLINESS TO THE LORD”
85	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy’s “refuge of lies” will furnish no protection to her, but her bulwarks will be completely swept away when her doctrines are known to be false. At some time in the fulfillment of this prophecy it will come to pass as it is written: “And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord: it shall not be treasured uor laid up; for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing.” —Isa. 23:18.
88	Surely the words “her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord” could not refer to material merchandise, such as the anarchists might seize and confiscate, because it is written in God’s law: “Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow; for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God.” (Deut. 23:18) What, then, could be meant by “her merchandise” and “her hire”? Jehovah’s prophet, speaking concerning unfaithful Samaria, says: “And all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all the hires thereof shall be
burned with the fire, and all the idols thereof will I lay desolate: for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot. ’ ’ —Mic. 1: 7.
87	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy with an air of superiority, and with great claim of power and authority from God, have approached the kings of the . earth and said to them in effect: “We bestow upon you the divine right to rule; we give you holy sanctions and heavenly blessings; and by reason thereof your positions as political rulers are sacred and are ordained of God, and therefore so far as the people are concerned you are viewed as constituting the earthly ‘higher powers’ and we who compose the Hierarchy arc the spiritual higher powers and superior to all other earthly power.” In this fraudulent representation and manner the harlot proceeds to gain control over gullible men. Such constitutes the merchandise and hire of the harlot by which she draws men into her clutches. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has fraudulently posed as the representative of God with full divine authority to bestow blessings on kings, while in truth and in fact she is the representative of the Devil. The Hierarchy uses ‘the hire of the harlot’ to induce the political power to believe that she should dictate the policy of the world, and thus carry out her purpose to set up a dictatorial rule of the earth.
38	But now the time arrives when Jehovah turns the tables on the old wench. Jehovah does not bring the merchandise and ‘hire of the harlot’ into his temple, but by carrying on and doing his “strange work” Jehovah exposes the wickedness of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the religionists, and thus he counteracts the effects of her merchandise and hire and causes the same to work against the religionists, and the result is beneficial to those who love righteousness and hate iniquity. This Jehovah does by causing the people to have their eyes opened to the truth and to clearly see that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the leader of religionists, is a part of Satan’s organization, and those people of good will, who thus see and identify the Roman Catholic organization as a part of Satan’s organization, separate themselves from that wicked organization and hasten to Jehovah’s ‘city of refuge’, the place of holiness. Therefore when “her merchandise and her hire” are fully exposed and revealed by the truth, these truths turn those of good will to holiness to the Lord. Jehovah’s witnesses have part in this “strange work”, in this, that as his commissioned servants they carry God’s message of warning to the people of “Christendom”, which message of truth is a true guide to all the people in or outside of “Christendom” who desire to take the right course. When the people of good will see and understand the truth, then the false doctrines which they have been taught by the Hierarchy work against the organization of Satan and to the glory of Jehovah, the Holy One, and thus become “holiness to the Lord”.
May 1, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER.
139
89	Says the prophet: “ It shall not be treasured nor laid up.” (Isa. 23:18) Her merchandise and lying shall not be brought into the temple of Jehovah, but it shall be used against and operate against the harlot. As to the “merchandise” and “hire” of a material kind, that is, all the material wealth of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, that, to be sure, shall be left behind the old harlot when, at the beginning of Armageddon, the religious system shall be destroyed. It all, in truth, belongs to the Lord, because the earth and the fullness thereof are his. (Ps. 24:1) At all times such material things have belonged to the Lord, but have been misused and abused by the religionists. Those who survive Armageddon will find better use for such, because they will use material things to the glory of God in his service. “For her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord.” The word “dwell”, as here used in the prophecy, means to abide and remain as a remnant. (Isa. 7:3; Pss. 27:4; 61:6,7) The promise of Jehovah is that those persons of good will who ‘seek righteousness and meekness’ may be hid during Armageddon and dwell thereafter on the earth. (Zeph. 2:1-3) It is such that the Lord Jesus leads unto the fountain of life, feeding them and fulfilling their desires, and those are the ones that praise Jehovah day and night.—Rev. 7:10-17.
49	During the World War, when spiritual Jerusalem, God's faithful remnant people on the earth, seemingly had come to the end of their way, modern Tyre, the religious organization aforementioned, exulted; as it is written: ‘ ‘ Son of man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken that was the gates of the people; she is turned unto me; I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste.” (Ezek. 26:2) But soon and in God’s due time he turns the tables on the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and that wicked organization is laid waste, and Jehovah’s witnesses are shown as praising the Most High after the Hierarchy goes down. When that calamity befalls the religionists the persons of good will, composing the great multitude who have proved their integrity by obeying Jehovah’s commandments, will then dwell in the presence of 1he Lord and will sing his praises for ever: “Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name; the upright shall dwell in thy presence.”—Ps. 140:13.
41	Again says the prophecy: ‘ ‘ For her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently.” (Isa. 23:18) The so-called “spiritual and religious” foods provided by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and which is her “merchandise”, being exposed by the light and unfolding of Jehovah’s Word, these truths become prpphetic food for those who are fed at Jehovah’s table, which includes, to be sure, those of the great multitude, which the Lamb of God shall feed. (Rev. 7:17) The revelation of Jehovah’s prophecy stripping bare the ecclesiastical frauds and disclosing Jehovah’s judgment against such fraudulent merchandise becomes spiritual “meat in due season”
for those who love Jehovah. Prophecy in fulfillment and being understood proves to be their spiritual nourishing and profitable to those who love God. When the people of good will see these things, then no longer are the old “harlot” and her allies, by the use of her “merchandise” and lying, able to keep those who love and serve Jehovah from eating and filling sufficiently, and they do eat sufficiently and are greatly satisfied and rejoice.
Further the prophecy says: “And for durable clothing [stately clothing (margin, R.V.)].” Clpthing symbolically stands for identification. When those persons of good will hear and act upon the truth, seeing that the “hire” and “merchandise” of the old harlot is a fraud and snare, they immediately wash up, that is, they ‘wash their robes and make them white in the blood of the Lamb’. (Rev. 7:14) They thus identify themselves as servants of Jehovah God. They get on the Lord’s side and no longer have anything to do with the harlot organization. Their devotion, service and praise are to Jehovah and his King, who sits upon the throne and who shall for ever rule the world in righteousness. The faithful great multitude have a “stately” appearance.
SUMMARY
43	Briefly summing up the prophecy of the 23d chapter of Isaiah, this appears as its message to those who love Jehovah and who joyfully obey his commandments:
"" Ancient Tyre represented commercialized religion and religionists, of which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is modern Tyre and in the lead. “The king of Tyrus” means the Devil himself; while “the prince of Tyre” stands for the visible, religious representative of the Devil on earth.
45	“Zidon” also stands for Devil religion, including both “heathen religion”, so called, or paganism, and all other religious allies of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
"““Ships [that is, vessels] of Tarshish” stands for the various subordinate organizations of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, which support and do the bidding of the Hierarchy and carry on her menial work.
47	“Harlot,” an unchaste woman, stands for Satan ’s organization, of which religion is the most subtle part visible to man and used to seduce others from Jehovah God.
"8	The purpose or objective of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is and ever has been to gain control of and rule the nations of the earth.
For many years the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization was recognized as a temporal power ruling over the kings of the earth. She lost that power for a time, and regained it in 1929. During the World War the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the harlot, sought a place among the nations in matters pertaining to war
140
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and peace, but was cast to the side and forgotten. At the close of the World War, in fulfillment of the prophecy, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy began her activities to regain temporal power, and, as the once forgotten harlot, she goes about the nations singing “the song of the harlot”, that is, using seductive means to induce the political rulers of the nations to recognize her former position as a temporal power.
80	Fascism and Nazism mean one and the same thing and are the instrument of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the child of the Devil, to gain control of the earth by the Hierarchy and turn all people against God and His kingdom. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy classes everyone that is opposed to her as “red” or “communist”, and this is done to incite the people against those who stand for whatsoever is right. The Hierarchy is particularly opposed to and persecutes Jehovah’s witnesses, because they proclaim the truth of God’s name and kingdom and point to God’s kingdom as the only hope of the world.
8X	The prophecy seems clearly to indicate that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy operating its organization of Fascism, together with other religious allies, will gain control of the leading nations of the earth, including Britain and the United States, and then that hypocritical religious organization will cry out, as prophetically written, “Peace and safety.” This part of the prophecy is set forth in Isaiah 23:15-18.
82	When the Hierarchy has reached her zenith of glory and supposed absolute security, then God, through Christ Jesus, completely wrecks the ‘old harlot’ organization, and that marks the beginning of Armageddon. This great “burden” or woe coming to the religionist element of Satan’s organization strikes terror into every one of her supporters, and these, by the prophecy, are shown as wailing and howling, because they clearly see that they are next in line for the expression of God’s wrath against them. This part of the prophecy appears in verses 1-14 of Isaiah 23 and shows that the woe comes upon the religious organization at the end of her very short period of seeming triumph.
83 Now Jehovah is carrying forward in the earth his “strange work”, exposing to view the wicked organization of Satan. He lays upon his witnesses the duty and gives to them -the privilege and opportunity of proclaiming his name and his kingdom in the earth, and thus they have a part in this strange work. When that strange work is done, then begins his “strange act”, which is the battle of the great day of God Almighty. During the period of his “strange work” the great multitude must take their stand on the side of Jehovah and his kingdom and prove their faithful obedience and maintain their integrity toward God. Jehovah now makes known these precious truths to those who love him that they may be comforted and have greater hope in this time of peril. Let all who claim to love Jehovah God prove their love for him
and his King by now joyfully obeying the commandments of the Most High. “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.”—Obadiah 1.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
jf 1. Point out what is meant by the prophetic term ‘Jehovah’s day'. What marks the beginning of fulfillment of Isaiah 23:151	.
If 2,3. Identify modern Tyre. What is her objective? How and when was she “forgotten”? What is seen in a comparison of the language of verse 15 with that of verse 17?
If 4-7. Compare the prophecy of Isaiah with that of Jeremiah concerning the “seventy years” and the “desolation” marking the end of that time.
H 8, 9. Relate facts which show when and how the ‘ ‘ harlot ’ ’ was “forgotten”.
K 10. Apply the prophetic expression, in verse 15, “according to the days of one king.”
K 11,12. What is the “song of the harlot”? When and by whom is it sung, and with what effect?
If 13. How and to whom has the “harlot” been ‘singing her song’? and what is her purpose?
1f 14. Contrast the conduct of the “harlot” with that of the faithful witnesses of Jehovah.
1f 15. Account for the “harlot’s” opposing and persecuting Jehovah’s witnesses.
1f 16. Describe her ‘going about the city', and the show she puts on there.
1f 17-19. Point out some of the results of her hypocrisy and duplicity, and her present purpose and objective therein. Explain her so fully beguiling the people while she proceeds to gain control of the nations.
1f 20, 21. What is the nature of her song? and what are some of the tactics she employs, and instruments she uses, to accomplish her selfish purpose?
1f 22. What is the leal purpose in the “harlot’s” efforts to be “remembered”? Describe her procedure as she seeks to accomplish 1hat purpose. Why is she so determined to prevent the declaration of the truth of God's Word and to conceal or obscure the facts on record concerning her?
1f 23. Identify the “abomination that maketh desolate”, and point out facts in proof of such identification.
1f 24,25. When does Jehovah “visit Tyre”, and how? How does “Tyre” then proceed in her activities as a “harlot” as foretold in Isaiah 23: 17? and what is her purpose therein?
If 26. What facts and scriptures further prove the identity of the “great whore”?
T 27,28. How is Revelation 18: 3 fulfilled? Revelation 17: 11?
If 29-31. Account (a) for the action by the Protestant clergy in relation to the League of Nations, (b) For the change of policy of the pope since 1929. (c) For the present situation in the United States in this connection.
1f 32. Just what is the purpose of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in its attempt to control the means of public information? How is this particularly manifest within the borders of the British Empire and the United States of America at the present time?
1f 33. How does the present situation indicate that fulfillment of 1 Thessalonians 5: 1-3 draws near?
If 34. What is the nature, and the purpose, of Jehovah’s “strange work”? Then what follows, and with what result, as indicated by prophecy?
U 35-37. Explain the term “her merchandise and her hire”.
7 38. How shall “her merchandise” “be holiness to the Lord ’ ’ ?
If 39-42. Why shall it not ‘be treasured or laid up’? How will it be (a) “for them that dwell before the Lord”? (b) “To eat sufficiently”? (c) “For durable clothing”?
1 43-52. In summary: Who, or what, in the fulfillment of this prophecy, is seen to have been pictured or represented by ancient Tyre? By the king of Tyrus? By the prince of Tyre? By Zidon? By the strips of Tarshish? By the harlot? What is clearly the purpose or objective of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy? How had the “harlot” been “forgotten”? and how has sho been ‘singing her song’, and been “remembered”? What methods and instruments lias
May 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER,
141
she used ? and with what results, and present prospect I What will follow her reaching her zenith I
T 53. How is Jehovah carrying on his “strange work’’! and
for what purpose? What does this mean, as to privilege and responsibility, to those to whom Jehovah has made known these precious truths?
EVIL SERVANT
FOR three and one-half years the disciples of Jesus walked with him and learned that he is the Christ, the Son of the living God. One of them, called Judas, while claiming to believe on and serve Jesus Christ, was at the same time in a conspiracy with the enemy to bring about the death of Jesus and to destroy his work, and, knowing this, Jesus named him “the son of perdition”. Later the Bible record discloses that Judas was a type of a class of persons who covenant to serve God and Christ and who become unfaithful, and who are therefore the instruments of the Devil.
For twenty years or more one W. F. Salter was the trusted representative of God’s organization on earth, the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. Claiming to believe in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, and often so stating, and while in the pretended service of the Lord’s organization, that man was in a conspiracy to bring about the destruction of the Lord’s work and the death of some of the Lord’s servants. His duplicity being discovered, he was, because of his unfaithfulness, relieved of his position and duty in the Lord’s organization. About a year later this same man enters into a further conspiracy with the enemy to commit more wrong. He got someone to write an article attempting to prove that the Lord Jesus Christ is not present. That article he printed and caused to be distributed amongst many of the Lord’s servants in different parts of the earth, together with a covering letter, which letter and article purported to come from the head office of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. Manifestly this was done in order to practice fraud and deception upon the faithful ones. He caused the printing to be done in the United States, and had his papers posted in the mail at Brooklyn, New York. In his letter of so-called ‘instructions’, and which purported to be instructions from headquarters, the demand is made that the letter and article be read to the various companies at a stated time, and further stated that organization instructions are mandatory and this instruction must be carried out and the letter read.
Then he issued another paper, had that printed and sent throughout the earth to the various offices and servants of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, and in which letter he resorts to lies and manifests a vicious and malicious, lying disposition, attacking the president of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, and making many statements which he knew at the time are deliberate lies. He demanded that his letter be answered through The Watchtower. The Watchtower columns are not open to the discussion of matters with those who are opposed to the Lord, and certainly not to printing the argument of one against the presence of the Lord, when this question of the Lord’s presence has been thoroughly covered by the publications of the Society.
The Lord Jesus denounces such as conduct of those who are the evil servants, using this language: “But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken: the lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”—Matt. 24:48-51.
Judas hanged himself, “and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.” (Acts 1:18) The evil servant is the head or chief part of the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” and concerning which it is written: “And then shall that. Wicked [the man of sin, the son of perdition] be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.” (2 Thess. 2: 8) No notice would be given of this fact and wicked conduct except for the protection of the Lord’s people, whom Salter has attempted to deceive. This is The Watchtower’s answer, and the answer of the president of the Society, to his aforementioned publications.
KEEP not thou silence, 0 God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, 0 God. For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lifted up the head. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They hate consulted together with one consent: they are confederate against thee. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and pensh: that men may know that thou, uhose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Host High over all the earth.—Psalm 83.
GOOD HOPES FOR 1937-1938
TSE work of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society is the preaching of the gospel of Jehovah’s kingdom. Every consecrated child of God is privileged to participate in this work. Since the organization of the Society the work during the year has always been outlined in proportion as the Lord provided the money through his consecrated children. We continue to follow that example, as appropriate in the church.
Each one who has been enlightened by the truth appreciates the fact that this blessing came to him as a gracious gift; and as he has a zeal for the Lord he appreciates his privileges of using time, energy, and money in telling the message to others. Some who are doing as much house-to-house witness work as their conditions allow are also blessed with some money which they desire to use in the Lord’s service, to the end that hungry souls which they cannot personally reach may be fed upon the precious kingdom-gospel.
The custom of setting aside each week so much to be used in the Lord’s service has always proved beneficial to the giver. A notice to the Society that you hope to give so much, enables us to outline the work, based upon what is expected.
Upon receipt of this issue of The Watchtower kindly write two cards, exactly alike. One of these put aside for your own record of what you have prom
ised ; the other, send to us. Or, if you prefer, put it in the form of a letter, keeping a copy of the letter for your own reference. We suggest that it be brief and that nothing be written except the following:
By the Lord’s grace I hope to be able to give to his work for spreading the gospel during the ensuing year the amount of $.................. I will remit in such amounts and at
such times as I can find convenient, according as the Lord prospers me. (Signed)__________________________________
Kindly address this card to
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, Treasurer’s Office,
117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Brethren residing outside of the United States should write their respective offices in the countries where they reside, and remit their “Good Hopes” to such offices.
Of our own selves we can do nothing, but we are assured that the prayers of the righteous avail much. Hence we ask the brethren to present us daily before the throne of heavenly grace, that we may be given wisdom and grace to use the money to the best advantage in spreading the gospel to the Lord’s glory and to do the work entrusted to us.
SERVICE LEADERS AND REGIONAL SERVANTS
ONCE each year the companies of Jehovah’s witnesses and their associates in the United States have been asked to renew their requests for service leaders for the ensuing year.
The Society sends out representatives who, as regional servants, serve all companies that are organized for service, and such other groups as request aid in getting organized. It is the desire of the Society to keep in touch with and help every such organization. To this end we request that the secretary bring this matter to the attention of the company immediately, and furnish us with the following information, answering all questions, if possible, and send the answers to The Watch Tower, Brooklyn, N. Y. Isolated brethren who wish to have a part in the service are requested to do likewise.
Mark each answer to correspond with the letter shown before each question below. Write plainly, and give street address where possible, as telegrams cannot be delivered to a post-office box.
(a)	State the number in your company who are in harmony with the Society and the work it is doing.
(b)	Are those interested in the kingdom work organized for field service?
(c)	Average number of publishers reporting monthly.
(d)	Are field service activities arranged for on Sundays, Thursdays, and Saturdays?
(e)	If not organized for service, would you like to have the assistance of a regional servant to help you organize?
(f)	Are conditions such that your company can entertain a service leader or regional servant?
(g)	Is your territory covered by radio stations carrying Brother Rutherford’s lectures?
(h)	Does your company own and use any sound equipment? State which: sound car, P.T.M., or phonograph.
(i)	Give full name and street address of the company secretary.
(j)	Give name and address of another to whom we could send notice.
(k)	Give the name of your railway station.
(1)	If in the country, state distance from station and if the brother will be met.
142
LETTERS
Bellingham, Wash., April 15, 1937 Dear Brother Rutherford :
Enclosed find two printed letters, evidently sent out by Salter, one from New York post office, the other envelope mailed at Brooklyn. Envelope marked No. 1 was received on the 12th of this month, and the one marked No. 2 received on the 14th inst. In No. 1 envelope there is a letter supposed to be written by the Society, instructing the company servant to read his (Salter’s) printed letter to the company on the 11th inst. or at an earlier date or as soon as possible after the 11th inst. However, it is purely Salter’s own diabolical, duty work. You will notice that envelope No. 1 is stamped with the Society’s stamp for the purpose of deceiving the gullible saps. How one can stoop to such low level of wickedness is beyond me to comprehend.
I noticed Salter's deflection on January 1933, when he was taking a trip from Mexico to Canada. At every place he stopped he caused much confusion among the brethren, not only doctrinally, but also speaking disparagingly concerning the establishment of divisional campaigns by the Society; also ridiculing the Watchtower articles. This (his conduct) I reported to the Society at that time.
On my way to Wenatchee I will stop at Mt. Vernon, Everett and Seattle to see if the company servants received the same letters.
Anything I can do in undoing the effects of these letters of Salter I will be pleased to do. Of course, no one who is well established in the present truth can be affected by the Devil’s attacks if they have made the present truth their own and are wholly devoted to Jehovah. Let the others be weeded out.
With fervent love and best wishes, I am
Your brother by Jehovah’s grace,
S. H. Toutjian.
April 13, 1937 Mr. S. H. Toutjian, Brooklyn, New York.
Dear Brother Toutjian:
Thank you for yours of the 15th, in re the enemy’s assault through Salter. It is said there are two causes of insanity, one the disintegration of the brain tissue, and the other the effect of the influence of the wicked spirits. Salter gives every evidence of laboring under this disability. The fact that he resorts to fraud and deceit and forges the name of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society for the purpose of getting a message before others, shows he is of an unbalanced mind.
We are in a real fight against Satan and his forces. Our business is to proclaim the truth and not to bo disturbed by what the enemy does. So encouiage and comfort the brethren everywhere you go. Remember the words of the psalmist: “Fret not thyself because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity; . . . Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him; fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thyself in any wise to do evil.” (Psalm 37: 1,7,8) Personal assaults upon me are of no material interest. I expect these from the enemy. By the Lord’s grace, I will proceed with His work regardless of the same. I have full confidence that no one of the temple will be disturbed by the acts of the wicked one, but will press on with greater zeal in the proclamation of the kingdom message. You may use this letter wherever you have occasion. With much love and best wishes, I remain
Your biother and servant by His grace,
NEW YORK
Brooklyn WBBR Su 9:10am Su 4:30pm Su 7:30pm
Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:13am Su 6:30pm Mo 10:30am Tu 10:30am Tu 6:30pm We 10:30am We 6:30pm Th 10:30am Th 6:30pm FrlO :30am Fr 6:30pm
Buffalo WGRSu 9:55am
Su 10:45pm
Buffalo WKBWSu 5:55pm Freeport WGBB Su 10:25am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:55pm
White Pl. WFAS Su 6:00pm Tu 10:55am Sa 10:55am
NORTH CAROLINA Greensboro WBIG Su 10:30am HighP’t WMFR Su 10:35am Raleigh WPTF Su 3:30pm
We 3:30pm Fr 3:30pm Wilm’gton WMFDSulO:30am
Su 12:25pm Su 4:30pm
NORTH DAKOTA
Valley C’y KOVC Su 12:30pm Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
OHIO
Akron WJW Su 11:30am Su 3:25pm Su 6:00pm
Su 10:15pm
Cleveland WHK Su 11:00pm Tu 1:45pm Th 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
Columbus WBNS Su 7:45am Su 12:30pm	Mo 3:15pm
We 3:15pm	Fr 3:15pm
Greek Su 8:30am
Columbus WOOL Su 10:00am Tu 3:45pm Th 2:30pm
Sa 1:45pm
(Continued from page 144)
Columbus WHKC Su 5:25pm Mo 1:55pm	Tu 1:55pm
We 1:55pm	Th 1:55pm
Fr 1:55pm
Portsm’th WPAY Mo 11:00am We 11:00am Fr 11:00am
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 10:50am
Su 12:25pm Su 5:00pm
Enid KCRC Su 10:15am
Su 1:25pm Su 3:00pm
Muskogee KBIX Su 10:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 5:55pm
Oki ’a City KFXR Su 12:25pm
Su 6:00pm Su 7:25pm
Ponca City WBBZ Su 9:55am
Su 12:55pm Su 4:55pm
Shawnee KGFF Su 1:10pm
Su 3:55pm Su 5:25pm
Tulsa KVOOSu 9:25am
Su 10:05am Mo 4:55pm
OREGON
Astoria KAST Tu 7:00am
Th 2:55pm Sa 11:55am
Portland KWJJ Su 10:45am
Su 4:15pm Su 9:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Allentown WSAN Mo 4:00pm
We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Easton WEST Su 10:25am
Su 11:55am Su 9:25pm
Grcensb’g WHJB Su 10:15am
Su 4:00pm
Harrisb’g WKBOSu 12:45piu
Su 3:55pm Su 5:55piu
Philad ’a WTEL Su 12:30pm
Su 1:25pm Tu 5:30pm Pittsburgh KQV Su 10:45am Pittsb’gh WWSWSu 10:45am
Su 5:00pm Su 9:00pm
Wilkes-B. WBRE Su 10:40am
Su 2:45pm Su 6:30pm
Williamsp. WEAK Su 6:15pm
Su 7:45pm Th 7:35pm
York WORK Su 12:25pm
Su 3:00pm Su 6:25pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Greenville WFBCSu 8:00am
Su 3:30pm Su 9:30pm
Spart’b’g WSPA Su 10:30am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:40pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Huron KGDY Su 9:25am
Su 12:30pm We 5:55pm
Sioux Falls KSOO Su 9:10am
Su 9:45am Su 4:30pm
Watert’n KWTN Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm Su 1:55pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPI Su 10:40am
Su 1:10pm Su 4:25pm
Jackson WTJS Su 10:30am
Su 12:15pm Su 2:25pm
Knoxville WNOX Su 10:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 9:45pm
Memphis WNBR Su 12:00 nn
Su 2:15pm Su 5:35pm
TEXAS
Brady KNELSu 9:30am
Su 12:55pm Su 4:30pm
Dallas WRR Su 9:30am
Su 4:00pm Su 9:00pm
Dublin KFPL Mo 8:50am
We 8:50am Fr 8:50am
El Paso KTSMSu 9:10am
Su 1:15pm Su 6:30pm
Lubbock KFYO Su 10:55am
Su 1:55pm Su 4:25pm
Paris	KPLT Su 9:10am
Su 10:25am Su 5:00pm
Pecos	KIUN Su 10:55am
Su 1:00pm Su 5:00pm
Pt. Arthur KPAC Su 9:30am
Su 2:15pm Su 4:30pm
San Angelo KGKL Su 9:30am
Su 10:40am Su 1:30pm
SanAntonio KABC Su 9:00am
Su 5:00pm
Spanish Su 1:00pm
S.	Antonio KMAC Su 7:55am
Su 2:55pm Su 7:55pm
Weslaco KRGV Su 9:45am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:45pm
UTAH
Price KEUB Su 11:45am
Su 1:25pm Su 3:15pm
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Mo 8:30pm
We 8:30pm Fr 8:30pm
VIRGINIA
Harrisonb. WSVA Su 12:15 pm
Su 2:30pm Su 4:45pm
Petersb’g WPHRSu 8:55am Su 10:25am	Mo 8:55am
We 8:55am	Fr 10:15am
Sa 8:55am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15pm
Roanoke WDBJ Mo 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Everett KRKO Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 3:00pm
Seattle	KIRO Su 10:25am
Su 5:15pm Su 9:00pm
Spokane KGASu 9:15am
Tacoma	KMO Su 10:00am
Su 3:00pm Su 5:55pm
143
THE WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time Is shown In each Instance.]
ARGENTINA
Bahia Blanca LU2 Su 11:30am Buenos Aires LR2 Su 10:50am Los Andes, San Juan
LV5 Su 10:30am
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES Albury 2-AY Tu 9:45pm Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Grafton 2-GF Tu 7:30pm Gunnedah 2-MO Su 7:00pm Newcastle 2-HD Su 10:30am Su 6:30pm Su 11:40pm We 6:30pm W’gaW’ga 2-WG Su 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane 4-BC Su 7:30am Cairns	4 CA Su 7:00pm
Marybor’h 4-MB We 9:45pm Townsville 4-TO Su 9:15pm
TASMANIA
Ulverstone 7-UV Su 6:25 pm
Su 10:20pm We 6:25pm
VICTORIA
Bendigo 3-BO Su 7:00pm
Hamilton 3-HA Su 6:45pm
Melbourne 3-AK Su 2:15pm
Su 10:00pm
Swan Hill 3-SH Su 7:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlie 6-KG Su 7:00pm
Northam 6-AM Su 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Wallonia-Bonne Esperance (201.7 m) We 7:00am
BRAZIL
Sao Paulo PRF-3
Spanish Su 5:55pm
German Tu 5:55pm
English Th 5:55pm
CANADA
BRITISH COLUMBIA Kelowna CKOV Su 1:45pm
ONTARIO
Cobalt CKMC Su 3:15pm
Hamilton CROC Su 10:00am
Su 1:30pm Su 8:30pm Polish Su 6:20pm
(1st and 3d Sundays)
CHINA
Shanghai XHHE Su 5:00pm
CUBA
Camaguey CMJF Su 11:45am
Havana CMQ and
shortwave COCQ 9740kc USA Eastern Standard Time Su 5:45pm Spanish Su 5:30pm
Santa Cl’a CMH1
Spanish Su 11:00am (1st and 3d Tuesdays) 7:30pm
FRANCE
Radio Lyon Sa 6:50pm
French We 7:25pm
French Sn 7:25pm
PARAGUAY
Asuncion ZP1 Su 10:30am
SPAIN
Madrid	EAQ 9860kc
USA Eastern Standard Time We 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm Spanish Su 6:45pm
URUGUAY
Montevideo CX10 Su 12:15pm (Radio Internacional)
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm ’ham WAPI Su 10:15am
Su 4:30pm We 5:15pm
Decatur WMFO Su 12:30pm
Su 2:00pm Su 4:00 pm
Dothan WAGF Su 9:30am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:00pm
Gadsden WJBY Su 1:15pm
Su 3:00pm Su 4:55pm
M ’tgomery WSFA Su 4:00pm
We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Selma WHBB Su 10:10am
Su 1:00pm Su 4:10pm
Tuscaloosa WJRD Su 10:30am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:30pm
ALASKA
Anchorage KFQD Mo 8:10pm
We 8:10pm Sa 8:10pm
Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Jerome	KCRJ Su 4:00pm
Phoenix KOY Su 9:20am
Su 12:45pm Su 5:30pm
Tucson KGAR Su 12:55pm
Su 5:45pm
Spanish Su 9:30am
ARKANSAS
Hot Sp ’gs KTHS Su 10:15am
Jonesboro KBTM Su 8:30am
Su 10:25am Su 4:55pm
CALIFORNIA
Bakersf’Id KPMC Su 10:30am
Su 1:15pm Su 8:25pm
El Centro KXO Su 4:30pm Mo 10:30am Tu 4:30pm We 10:30am Th 4:30pm Fr 10:30am Sa 4:30pm
Spanish Su 4:35pm
LosAngeles KMTR Su 2:55pm Mo 2:55pm Tu 2:55pm We 2:55pm Th 2:55pm Fr 2:55pm Sa 2:55pm
Merced KYOS Su 8:45am
Su 1:45pm Su 3:00pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:00am Su 4:00pm Su 7:00pm Mo 11:30pm Tu 7:45pm Tull:00pm We 8:15pm Th 7:45pm Sa 7:45pm
COLORADO
Alamosa KGIW Tu 4:15pm
Th 4:15pm Sa 4:15pm
Durango KIUP Su 1:00pm
Sterling KGEK Su 2:30pm
CONNECTICUT
N. Britain WNBC Su 8:00am
Su 8:10am Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilmington WDELSu 1:15pm
Su 5:45pm Su 9:30pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Washington WOL Su 10:00am
Su 1:00pm Su 6:30pm
FLORIDA
Lakeland WLAK Su 9:30am
Su 12:30pm Su 5:00pm
Orlando WDBO Su 11:00am Tallahassee WTALSulO: 00am
Su 1:00pm Su 4:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens WTFI Su 9:25am
Su 11:00am Sa 7:00pm
Atlanta	WATL Su 10:50am
Su 2:00pm Su 9:00pm
Augusta WRDW Su 11:00am
Su 2:00pm Su 4:30pm
Griffin WKEU Su 9:40am
Su 2:45pm Su 4:30pm Rome WRGA Su 10:50am
Su 5:00pm Su 8:50pm
Waycross WAYX Su 9:10am Su 10:45am Su 12:45pm
HAWAII
Hilo	KHBC Su 10:00am
IDAHO
Boise	KIDO Su 10:55am
Su 7:00pm We 4:00pm
Idaho Falls KIDSulO:0Uam
Su 1:00pm Su 4:00pm
Nampa KFXD Su 10:00am
Su 11:40am Su 7:15pm Pocatello KSEI Su 10:15am
Su 3:10pm Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 4:45pm
Su 6:45pm Su 9:00pm
Rockford WROK Su 9:15am
Su 12:55pm Su 3:45pm
Rock Is. WHBFSu 9:15am
Su 12:45pm Su 4:00pm
Tuscola WDZ Su 9:35am
Su 11:55am Su 1:40pm
INDIANA
Evansville WGBF Su 9:25am
Su 2:25pm Su 4:30pm
Hammond WWAESulO:15am
Su 3:25pm Sul0:00pm
T.	Haute WBOW Su 12:00 nn
Su 2:00pm Su 4:00pm
IOWA
Davenport WOC Su 10:00am
Su 12:15pm We4:15pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:55pm
Su 2:55pm Su 3:55pm
KENTUCKY
Paducah WPAD Su 10:00am
Su 2:45pm Su 8:30pm
MAINE
Augusta WRDO Su 10:00am
Su 1:15pm Su 4:00pm
Bangor WLBZ We 4:45pm Presque I. WAGM Su 9:45am
Su 12:30pm Su 1:55pm
MARYLAND
Baltimore WCAO Su 10:30am
Su 12:45pm	Su 10:45pro
Frederick WFMD Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 5:00pm
Hagerst’n WJEJ Su 10:25am
Su 1:40pm Su 9:15pm
MASSACHUSETTS
Boston WCOP Su 9:30am
Su 10:45am Su 1:10pm
Boston WHDH Su 9:45am
Su 1:30pm Su 3:00pm Boston WMEX Su 10:30am
Su 4:55pm Su 7:45pm
MICHIGAN
Detroit WJR Su 10:00am
Kalamazoo WKZO Su 8:20am
Su 9:00am Su 9:55am
Muskegon WKBZ Su 10:30am
Su 3:15pm Su 5:55pm
MINNESOTA
F’gus Falls KGDE Su 10:00am
Su 1:45pm Su 7:15pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’g WFOR Sp 1:00pm
Su 3:30pm Su 5:30pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 10:30am
Su 1:30pm Su 2:45pm
St. Joseph KFEQ Su 10:00am
Su 1:35pm Su 3:40pm
NEBRASKA
Lincoln KF AB Su 9:30am Scottsbluff KGKY Mo 5:30pm
Tu 5:30pm Fr 5:30pm
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Laconia WLNH Su 10:10am
Su 2:10pm Su 6:55pm
NEW JERSEY
Asbury P. WCAP Su 12:45pm
Su 2:45pm Su 9:00pm
Newark WHBI Su 9:55am
Su 6:25pm Su 9:00pm
NEW MEXICO
Carlsbad KLAH Su 10:55am
Su 1:00pm Su 5:00pm
Roswell KGFL Su 5:00pm
Mo 8:00am Mo 6:55pm
(Continued on page 14S)
SSOg OHi!	&^C- ✓IB£ RL
JMJCH	
waKK ,,/^jHjfi^^n^^b^^^^ ilirt sKMfefc - / w« :8®« srj f< W^®^SsaLL * ' rWIllKfili "■g^Staafaa	
—			 	^r==.*ggggggg- g-^?	
	frw^ as i»w f<of y -ov'AA |g? <.< 1 — ■ ~~ *JS- ✓ K< ■is		
;S	& R p h I1 RsTv Sj - ,f		A
*s\	xWSF'^WM ? h AjI VSA	vs7	\S== <', 1 *i , <sff 1 \ \®x '	<n /	\ s'~;rf>	— ZX Z^Q t .' \W^T V rclFb		
1	TOWFRt		
1	/ / uj	<. . —^atl^1^ *^*	’ *'"*'		"■
\	' *^dmn,^atof theKigWw Isaiah 2i-tl. Vol. LVIII Semimonthly	No. 10 MAY 15, 1937 CONTENTS Understanding 	     147	f w K' r J	1 1 w
	J	Relationship 	    ...	149		
	Father and Children 	 			 . 149	II;	w
	Purpose .. .... _.. 		  _.		 149		
	Anointed 		      150		
	Requirements _.. . 	 _ 	 _	151	lit	lllltIL
	Understanding 	  _	.	151		
	Strife 	  153 Self-Will 	153 Proper Course	  154 \	Appearance and Deportment 		156 Wisdom ...	     156	ft	i
	5 Letters re Evil Servant		 159 Service Appointments __ „ 	 160	1	V L
	Conventions 	  146		
	“Glittering Sword” _	~ _	146		
	“Armageddon” 		     146	»;	pl
? V	New Portable Phonograph	146	A	
; t	v SWB;il^=^==--_'^<		
4	»W'i' llMI;iW///////hl(llllr<		
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13*
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus arc children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne qf authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by Intel national Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..............34	Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian..........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African.........Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription puce may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on addiess label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will bo sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. T., Postoffice. Act of March S, 18'0.
CONVENTIONS
The Watchtower joyfully announces the following conventions for Jehovah’s witnesses and companions: Paris, France, August 21-23 inclusive, which will serve for Great Britain und Continental Europe; Columbus, Ohio, September 15-20 inclusive, which will serve the United States, Canada, and others who may be able to attend.
The president of the Society expects to be present at both conventions. Make your arrangements for vacations during those periods. Let all of his people ask Jehovah to make these conventions a great witness to the honor of Uis name.
More information in later issues of The Watchtower.
“GLITTERING SWORD”
The coming testimony period, “Glittering Sword,’’ from June 5 to 13 inclusive, will afford a most generous opportunity for the people of good will to get the Lord’s latest provision, to learn how they may find protection and preservation from Jehovah’s Glittering Sword. During this period the kingdom publishers will offer the people a 50c combination; this to consist of the two books Riches and Preservation and four booklets, including Protection, Uncovered, and Armageddon. Till then the Informant will give fuller and further details concerning this period, and all publishers will inform themselves therefrom and proceed accordingly. Your promptitude in preparing all needful things for this period will be pleasing to the Lord and blessed. Please report to this office the result of your service.
“ARMAGEDDON”
This new 64-page booklet is a thriller and of absorbing interest. It contains the president’s public address on that subject, which held spellbound vast European and American audiences, and also includes a clear Scriptural discussion of who will survive that dread conflict. The release of this booklet for regular house-to-house witnessing is announced elsewhere. Meantime you may procure the booklet for your own information and preparation, at 5c a copy.
NEW PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph of new design, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and coveicd with brown cloth and having rounded corners. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces, which is 5$ pounds lighter than the previous model manufactured by the Society. With the tlnee phonograph discs which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound is just as strong as that of the previous model, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonograph is timed properly, at 78 r.p.m., and should be checked from time to time. This new model, including three dises, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittance should accompany orders. Also specify the particular dises wanted.
Vol. LVIII
May 15, 1937
No. 10
UNDERSTANDING
“ With all thy getting get understanding.”—Prov. 4:7.
JEHOVAH repeatedly emphasizes the importance of understanding on the part of his creatures who love his approval. The present time is a time of great peril, fraught with many dangers to those who have covenanted to be the servants of the Most High. There is no good reason for any of God’s servants to be ignorant of their enemies that lurk in the way attempting their destruction; but it appears that some are negligent or ignorant, or both. We are at the time of the greatest climax of the history of man and of the earthly journey of the church. Those who will stand with the Lord in these evil days are those who have been called and chosen and who continue to walk lawfully, who are entirely faithful, and who are maintaining their integrity toward God. To all those who are in the Lord’s organization the importance of understanding cannot be overstated. It appears important that again the necessity for understanding be brought to the attention of God’s people and that the value thereof be emphasized.
2 Understanding does not mean merely to be intelligent and to grasp ideas and unravel deep problems or questions. In addition thereto it means that one must be discreet; it means to be prudent, to discern and to take a wise course and, above all, to have a proper discernment and appreciation of the creature’s relationship to the Almighty Creator. As man progresses in information and knowledge of and concerning* God and his purpose, and if that man’s heart is right toward God, he continues to increase in his appreciation and he grows in understanding. Before applying specifically the necessity of understanding at the present time it is well that some of the scriptures emphasizing the importance of understanding be first considered.
’Jehovah’s remnant now on the earth are fully aware of the abundant Scriptural proof that Moses was a type foreshadqwing Christ Jesus, the great Prophet, and that the Israelites on their trek from Sinai to the promised land pictured God’s covenant people, who are expected to maintain their integrity and who must do so if they would live. Moses led the Israelites almost to the banks of the Jordan river. There in Moab Moses recounted to the chosen people of God the many wonderful things God had done for
147
them, and he enjoined upon them the necessity of full obedience to God’s commandments. God foreknew, of course, that there would be stubbornness and lawlessness among that covenant people,'and he pointed out to them the necessity of having a proper understanding and faithfulness on their part, which would be shown by full obedience to his commandments. To them he said: “Take heed, and hearken . . . ; this day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day. ’ ’—Deut. 27: 9,10.
* Those words apply even more emphatically at the present time to God’s covenant people. The covenant made at Moab was a covenant of faithfulness and foreshadowed the covenant for the kingdom of God under Christ Jesus, which requires absolute faithfulness on the part of the creature. God is always faithful, as the Scriptures state, and those on the other side of the covenant must be faithful. At the temple judgment those who are approved receive such approval that they may “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness ’ ’, and they are brought into the covenant for the kingdom, and henceforth they must prove entirely faithful unto God and maintain their integrity, if they would live. From that time on the understanding of the faithful remnant must increase and they must appreciate more fully than ever their proper relationship to God and to Christ Jesus. All in that covenant who ultimately gain the victory through Christ Jesus must continue lawfully and obediently faithful unto God. It necessarily follows that all in the covenant who do not continue faithfully obedient will fall away and be destroyed. No one should deceive himself or permit himself to be deceived into believing that from the mere fact that he is taken into the covenant for the kingdom he is certain and sure to participate in the resurrection with Christ Jesus and reign with him. The condition of faithfulness must be faithfully met and performed to the very end. (Rev. 2:10) Such is the unchangeable rule by which all the remnant must be judged.
5	The Jonadabs or great multitude are not a party to the -covenant for the kingdom, and are not to be
1-18
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. V.
made a part of the royal house; but by reason of their association with God’s organization and in consideration of the care and protection they receive from the Lord they are in an implied covenant at least to be faithful to God and his kingdom. They must continue to seek righteousness and meekness, and as their knowledge increases their obedience must be in keeping therewith. Note now that God through Moses spoke these words: “Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God; your captains of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, with all the men of Israel, your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water. ’ ’ (Deut. 29: 9-11) They were addressed specifically to those in the covenant whom the Lord had led out of Egypt, but there were others considered also, and this is shown by these words: “Thy stranger that is in thy camp.” Those words referred not to the ones who are in the covenant directly, but to those who by reason of seeking protection with God’s organization must, in order to continue in his favor, be faithfully on God’s side, and that rule applies now to those who have fled to God’s organization, namely, the “other sheep”, or Jonadabs.—John 10:16; 2 Ki. 10:15.
8	The things pertaining to Israel were written aforetime for the special admonition and benefit of those upon whom the “ends of the world are come”. (1 Cor. 10:11) Having come to that time, then the ones embraced in the things written aforetime are those who have separated themselves from the world and put themselves under the Lord. The Israelites, who were God’s covenant people, and with whom the covenant was made in Moab, foreshadowed those today who are in a covenant with God, which covenant for the kingdom requires faithfulness on their part; whereas ‘the stranger in thy camp’ foreshadows those who are of good will toward God and who arc known as the Jonadabs, and who will compose the great multitude. (Rev. 7:9,10) Such have found refuge in the camp or organization of the Lord, having fled from Satan’s organization, and are classed now as strangers in the camp or organization by reason of not being directly in the covenant. They arc, however, bound to be faithful, if they would continue in God’s favor. To them Jehovah now says, “Seek righteousness, seek meekness”; and no man can obey this commandment unless he continues to study God’s Word and conform himself thereto and be faithful to God and his organization. His relationship to God is that of one receiving protection from the Almighty, whose power is unlimited, and which is exercised in behalf of those whose hearts are perfect toward him. The scriptures concerning understanding are of peculiar importance, then, both to the remnant and to the Jonadabs at this time, and for that reason such scriptures are here considered that both the remnant and the Jonadabs may
have a better appreciation of their relationship to God and their relationship to each other.
7	The Scriptural record shows that there was strife among the Israelites who were under the leadership of Moses, and also shows that those who were not wise and had not understanding were not pleasing to the Lord and were not permitted to remain in positions of importance amongst his organized people. To the Israelites, therefore, Moses at the direction of Jehovah said: “How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife? Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.”—Deut. 1:12,13.
8	That appears to be the fixed rule, that the Lord does not permit those who engage in strife to occupy positions of importance among his people and in his organization. One may be placed in a position of responsibility and hold it for a time, but if he pursues an unwise course, ignoring the Scriptural admonition, he will not remain in that place.
9	God chose the Israelites and made them a nation separate and distinct from all other nations, but only a few persons of that nation remained faithful to the end and received God’s favor. God has chosen the true followers of Christ Jesus as his people and has brought them into a covenant for the kingdom, and made them his “holy nation, a peculiar people”, selected for a purpose. (1 Pet. 2: 9,10) It is certain from his fixed rule that only those who arc faithfully obedient to God’s commandments will continue in that holy nation and will live. Therefore Jehovah said to the Israelites, and his words apply with greater force to the remnant now on earth: “Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land .whither ye go to possess it. Keep, therefore, and do them: for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people. Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; but teach them thy sons, and thy sons’ sons.” (Deut. 4: 5, 6, 9) Thus the Lord emphasized the importance of his people’s keeping constantly before their minds the things which he requires. The human mind and organism, defective by reason of inheritance, require constant study and application that the right rule may always be pursued. The Israelites, who departed from the Lord, were void of understanding: “For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in them.” (Deut. 32:28) They did not have an appreciation of their relationship to God. With stronger reasoning is it necessary now for those who will live to have understanding, that is to say, to know and appreciate their proper relationship to their Creator.
May 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
149
RELATIONSHIP
10	Jehovah God is the Creator; man is the creature; and this is true with reference to the new creature in Christ Jesus. (2 Cor. 5:17) The creature is entirely dependent upon the Creator for life, blessings and happiness. The creature man begins to get some sense when he fears the Creator; as it is written: “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise wisdom and instruction.” (Prov. 1:7) “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and the knowledge of the holy is understanding.” (Prov. 9:10) “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise endureth for ever.”—Ps. Ill: 10.
11	The creature who begins to have understanding not only has respect for the Creator but stands in awe and fear of his unlimited power, his complete justice, his perfect wisdom, and his boundless love. He sees that his own continued existence depends upon rendering himself acceptable unto the Lord. He realizes that in himself he has no strength and that he cannot be compared in any way to the great Creator. In that attitude the creature begins to have some understanding and some wisdom. If he has a sincere desire to grow in understanding he seeks to be guided by the perfect will of the Almighty Creator. He learns of his own inherited imperfections and sinful condition and he desires to be made whole and to know the Creator. By reason of this proper attitude or condition of mind God draws the creature to Christ Jesus, and the man learns that God has sent into the world his great and beloved Son Jesus to be the Savior of the world, and he learns that no man can come unto God but by and through Christ Jesus. (John 14: 6) He learns that he must be entirely subject to the will of the Creator; he believes that God exists and that he rewards those who diligently seek him and serve him in his appointed way; and he believes also that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer and Savior of the men who exercise faith in the merit of his sacrifice. Appreciating his own imperfections, hd then sees the necessity of rendering himself in obedience to God’s will. He denies himself and knowingly and gladly takes the course that all sensible creatures should take; that is, he voluntarily agrees to do the will of God. He learns that the Devil is the wicked one, the adversary of God and the great enemy of all men, who tries to turn men away from God and to destroy them, and therefore the creature flees from the Devil and seeks protection through Christ Jesus in God’s organization. He having covenanted or agreed to do the will of God, his relationship to God at this point changes.
FATHER AND CHILDREN
12	God receives man and extends his favor to him by reason of his faith and his agreement to be obedient to God’s will. He justifies man in order that the man
so justified may take the next step, that is, to follow in the footsteps of the perfect man, Christ Jesus. Justification granted unto man extends to him the right to live as a man, which right he surrenders in obedience to the will of God. It is the will of God that such creature may be called to the high calling, and therefore His will that he should die with Christ Jesus. God then brings him (that creature) forth as his child and acknowledges the creature as such, and therefore God becomes his Father, that is, the Giver of life to the creature, to this one who has fully agreed to be obedient to his will. God begets that person, which means that he acknowledges him as his own, and this is according to his will: “ Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.” (Jas. 1:18) “Blessed be that God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy, has begotten us again to a living hope, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. ’ ’—1 Pet. 1: 3, Diaglott.
13	The baptism of the man in water is a symbolic ■ testimony that he has agreed to be fully and completely subject to the will of God. That he may live for ever with Christ Jesus he must be baptized into Christ’s death. (Rom. 6:3-8) God baptizes the creature into the death of Christ, and now the creature must die a sacrificial death, even as the man Christ Jesus died, if he would live with Christ and reign with him. (2 Tim. 2:11,12) Being brought forth and acknowledged as a son of God, he is now a new creature in Christ Jesus: “Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.” (2 Cor. 5:17) The relationship now existing is that of Father and son. The creature is now in the family of God under Christ Jesus, the Head thereof, and he has left behind all things of the earth, and his hope is entirely for the things heavenly. (Col. 3:20,21) His right to life as a human creature has expired, and therefore concerning such it is written: “For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.” (Col. 3: 3, 4) Henceforth if he lives he must live as a part of the family of God under Christ.
PURPOSE
14	It has long been thought by many that the purpose of Jehovah God in bringing forth sons who are made a part of Christ is to save men and to take them to heaven. That is not his purpose. It is true that salvation and life in heaven result to the faithful, but the salvation of man is only incidental to God’s real and primary purpose. The great and primary purpose of Jehovah God is the vindication of his name and to clear it of the reproach brought upon his name by the arch rebel, the Devil. He has appointed Christ Jesus to the high office of Vindicator. He sent Jesus into the world to deliver God’s message of truth concerning his purpose,
150
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and he appointed and anointed Jesus as King of the world that in due time the world might be ruled in righteousness and that all obedient ones under that rule might live. Therefore, in response to a question put to him, Jesus said: ‘I am king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.’—John 18:37.
18	It follows, then, that every person whom God puts into his family under Christ Jesus must hear the voice of Christ Jesus and be obedient thereto and walk as Christ Jesus walked, always faithful and true to God, maintaining his integrity toward him. Those who are in Christ Jesus must therefore do what Jesus does, because they are called to follow where he leads them; they are taken out from amongst men and made new creatures in Christ Jesus for the sake of God’s name, that they may bear testimony to his name and his purpose. For this reason the apostle states concerning those in Christ JesuS: “But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a purpose; that you may declare the perfections of him who called you from darkness into his wonderful light.”—1 Pet. 2:9, Diag.
ANOINTED
16	The ones thus taken out for the purpose of Jehovah’s name are called to the heavenly calling, and in due time they are chosen and anointed. That means that they are commissioned to perform certain specific duties, among which duties is that they must be witnesses of Jehovah God, having received from Jehovah God the commission of authority to represent him and speak in his name and deliver his message; and concerning those thus taken into Christ it is written: “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken-, hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that arc bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn. ’ ’ —Isa. 61:1, 2.
17	The relationship now is that of Father and son and Master and servant. Jehovah God is the great Master, and the creature is the servant. Christ Jesus himself is the elect Servant (Isa. 42:1), and the members of his body are the servants of God and of Christ. How may one know that he is of this family of God ? The Scriptures answer: “The spirit itself testifies together with our spirit, that we are children of God. And if children, also heirs; heirs, indeed, of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if, indeed, we suffer together, so that we may be also glorified together.”—Rom. 8:16,17, Diag.
18	No part of this text can be ignored, and the specific condition therein mentioned is, “If, indeed, we suffer together, .so that we may be also glorified to
gether. ” Having heard the Word of God, and having exercised faith in God and in Christ, the one starts in this way. Now the creature must ask himself, and therefore examine himself, to sec whether or not he is in the faith: ‘ ‘ Have I rendered myself in obedience to God’s will? Have I responded to the heavenly call or high calling? Have I fully and unreservedly devoted myself to God and set my hopes and affections upon things heavenly and not on the earth? Have I gladly taken and do I gladly take upon me the reproaches that reproached God and Christ Jesus, and am I willingly walking with Christ Jesus, suffering with him as he suffered for righteousness’ sake? Have I the zeal for the Lord and his house, and am I performing my vow of consecration fully?” One examines himself in this way in the light of the Scriptures and determines from the witness of the spirit whether or not he is the Lord’s child. It is the called, chosen and faithful ones that shall be for ever with Christ in glory. It is not sufficient that a man merely names the name of the Lord and calls upon him. Since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple those who are in Christ Jesus and approved have been gathered unto himself, and their discernment of God and his purposes has been greatly increased by reason of the light shining in the face of Christ Jesus and reflected to those who are of the temple. Such approved ones in the temple are sent forth in obedience to the Lord’s commandment, and that commandment they must obey, to be witnesses for Jehovah and proclaim the truth of and concerning his kingdom.
18	In addition to the foregoing questions then let the creature ask himself: “Am I rendering myself in obedience to the will and command of the Lord, gladly in his name proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and making known in public what I have learned in secret?” If all of these questions can be answered by one in the affirmative, he may know and appreciate the fact that he is the child of God, his Father, and that Christ Jesus is his elder Brother and Lord; and all such must answer these questions in the affirmative and continue faithful in that way if they ever are received fully into the kingdom.
“OTHER SHEEP”
20	After the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of Jehovah and gathering unto himself those who are then in the way for the kingdom, the Scriptural evidence is that then the Lord begins to gather unto himself his “other sheep”. Such “other sheep” are the ones who hear the Word of God and believe it. They exercise faith in God and in Christ Jesus as the Redeemer of mankind. They have an honest and sincere desire to know the will and purpose of Jehovah. They discern the Devil as God’s enemy and their own enemy and that they have been subjected to the Devil’s organization. They change their course of action by believing on God and in Christ and by fleeing from Sa
May 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
151
tan’s organization and seeking refuge in God’s organization under Christ. They begin to grow in knowledge and see the necessity of obedience to God’s commandment to seek righteousness and meekness. They study God’s Word and seek to know his will and to do it. They put forth their best endeavors to render themselves faithful unto God and unto Christ as the Redeemer of man. They see that God has made provision for faithful men to abide for ever on the earth. Their hope is that they may live for ever on the earth. They have found refuge in God’s city or organization, and there they see that they must remain and render themselves in obedience to God's commandment until the completion and glorification of Jehovah’s anointed spiritual creatures. They do not die with Christ Jesus a sacrificial death. Their hope is for life on earth as God’s people. They are pictured as wearing robes of white, which identify them as having exercised faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus as the great ransom price and as taking their stand on the side of God and his kingdom.—Rev. 7: 9-15.
21	Justification, or the right to live, is not theirs yet, but will be granted unto them, through Christ Jesus, in due time, if they prove their faithfulness and maintain their integrity. Such are the “other sheep’’ described in the Word of God and who compose the great multitude. The relationship of the great multitude is that of subjects to the Lord Christ Jesus, and by and through Christ Jesus God will grant to such life everlasting, if they meet his requirements, and the life of such shall be upon earth in complete happiness, .’en-dering glory unto God. Thus the Scriptures clearly show the distinction between the two classes, the heavenly and the earthly, and the relationship of each to the Almighty God and to Christ Jesus.
REQUIREMENTS
22	Of all creatures whom he approves God requires faith and obedience, as it is written: “He hath shewed thee, 0 man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?’’ (Mie. 6:8) All then who receive God’s approval must render justice unto all others. They must love mercy, and when opportunity is afforded they must extend that mercy to others. They must shun everything that pertains to malice, and, instead of disregarding the rights and privileges of others, they seek to do good unto all as they have opportunity. They must walk obediently with God, as he has pointed out they have to walk, and which course is marked out in his Word; and therefore for such it is written: “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.” (Ps. 119:105) To all such Jehovah alone must be their God, and to all such God has given the great privilege of knowing him and his provisions through Christ Jesus, and that such provision is life. (John 17:3) The very least that the creature can do is to obey
God’s commandments to the best of his ability. Unto all such the Lord Jesus says: “Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required.” (Luke 12:48) God is the great Giver, and the creature is the one who receives the benefits, and God requires of such that he perform that which the Lord God lias commanded him to do.
23	God’s first and greatest commandment to all creatures is: “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.” (Matt. 22:37,38) That means that there is no division of affection between God and any creature. The creature must unselfishly devote himself to the Almighty God in exclusion of others. He must have no other God. He must not compromise by serving Jehovah a while and trying to serve and receive the favor of any of God’s enemies at any time. Then says the Lord: “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” (Matt. 22:39) That means that the man recognizes that the rights and privileges of other creatures are equal to his own, and therefore he desires to do and does unto others what he would have them to do to him. He puts himself on an equality and demands nothing more for himself than he is willing to give to others. “On these two commandments,” says the Lord Jesus, “hang all the law and the prophets.” (Vs. 40) These requirements are made of all creatures whom the Lord approves.
REMNANT
24	All of the foregoing is required of the remnant, and still more is required. The relationship of the remnant now on the earth to God and Christ Jesus requires them to be on the alert to get understanding and hence to appreciate the relationship that they bear to God and Christ. They must appreciate that as the anointed ones of the Lord they are the official representatives of God and Christ on the earth. To the remnant has been committed or entrusted the great privilege of delivering the testimony of Jesus Christ in obedience to God’s commandments, and if they continue to be of the remnant they must faithfully obey his commandments and thereby prove their love for God and Christ. Therefore says the Lord Jesus to such: “To whom much has been entrusted, of him [more] will be demanded.” (Luke 12:48, Weymouth) As the ambassadors of Christ and the servants of God on earth much has been entrusted to them, and in order to receive God's approval and maintain their integrity toward him they must render a full account of their stewardship in harmony with his commands, and the moving cause for doing such must be love or unselfishness. All such obey God’s commandments and delight so to do.
UNDERSTANDING
25	Now to these is the text of greater importance than to any other: “With all thy getting get understanding.” To get understanding is of the very great
152
SFfie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y..
est importance to the remnant. They must get a proper appreciation of their relationship to God and Christ. If one who has thus been called and brought into God’s family is vain and wise in his own conceits, he is void of understanding. “He that followeth [vanity] is void of understanding. ” (Prov. 12:11) He must keep always in mind that Jehovah is the Most High and that the creature is the servant, of whom God requires full obedience. Therefore he must think soberly of himself, and not think more highly of himself than he ought to think. (Rom. 12:3) He must not seek the praise of men nor even to be a pleaser of men, but must seek always to please the Lord God and have his approval. “Not with eyeservice, as menplcasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart.” (Eph. 6:6) “Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh: not with eyeservice, as menplcasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing God.” (Col. 3: 22) There are those who claim to be of the remnant and who seek to shine before men that they may be highly commended by others. Their immediate reward, and the sole reward they receive, is the approval of men, but not the approval of God. Jesus declares that that which is highly esteemed amongst men is an abomination in God’s sight.— Luke 16:15.
28	It is the duty of those of the remnant to render aid and comfort, particularly to the “other sheep” or Jonadabs, by helping them to gain a knowledge and an appreciation of God’s purpose as expressed in his Word. (Ezek. 9:4) These “other sheep” have come into the Lord’s household or organization, and they are not to be pushed aside and kicked or spurned, but are to be treated with kindness, that they may be aided. From time to time it is reported that some who claim to be of the anointed remnant continue to manifest amongst the Lord’s organized people the “elective elder” spirit and really hinder the proclamation of the truth and oppress the Jonadabs. Such persons lack understanding, and it is exceedingly important for them to get understanding and get it quickly. One who claims to be of the remnant propounds this question: “Can Jonadabs prepare or carry matters in opposition to the brethren of the remnant who are not present at a service meeting through illness or some other cause ?' ’ While this question is lacking in details, yet it appears to express more than is really written therein. If the service committee find it impossible to be pre ent at a duly appointed meeting and others of the company attend that meeting, then those of the committee who are unable to attend should notify those attending of the program that is to be carried out. If no such notice to them is sent, and only the Jonadabs are present, it is entirely proper and right that such Jonadabs should arrange a program of study or service in the field and carry it out. Surely the study of God’s Word, and the service in obedience to his commandments, shall not suffer because of the absence of some who
think themselves of the remnant or who are of the remnant. It appears that sometimes a man thinks he is of the remnant when in fact he is not. It also ap-. pears that some who are classed as Jonadabs show much more of the spirit and zeal of the Lord than those who claim to be of the remnant.
27	Suppose the Jonadabs be in the majority of those attending company meetings, what position should they occupy? Numbers do not necessarily count on what is the proper course. Those who are of the remnant will show the spirit of the Lord, and that is always unselfishness. They will entirely refrain from lording it over others, whether such others be of the remnant or of the Jonadabs. Those who have the spirit of the Lord will not claim to be so extraordinarily wise and important. They will manifest kindness to the Jonadabs and remember that the Lord is in control of his organization, and that all who claim to love the Lord should conform to the instructions that come through his organization. The Lord has laid upon the remnant the obligation of taking the lead, and when such are present all will recognize that it is the duty of the remnant to do so; but no one of the remnant should assume the position of a boss and shove the sheep around, and attempt to rule them in' an arbitrary and harsh manner. It is the obligation and duty of the remnant to sec that the instructions relating to the organization are carried out, and it is the prerogative of the Jonadabs to have a part in doing service unto God. Therefore those of the remnant or anointed should take the lead and the Jonadabs should go along with them, and the spirit of unselfishness and complete devotion to the Lord should be the guide. All such should show their love for God and be fully obedient to his commandments to honor his name and do his work. Christ Jesus is the Greater Jehu, who is driving the chariot. One who thinks himself rn elder in the company is not driving the chariot. He is a servant also, and all others who love the Lord will walk with those who manifest the spirit of the Lord, and it is the privilege of all such to follow organization instructions. The Lord has laid upon his anointed servants the duty and obligation of taking the lead in the matter of service, and if he is assigned to that duty he will perform it with meekness and humility and, above all, be prompted by unselfishness. If he takes such course, that will be an example of God’s flock and others will be pleased to walk along the same way.
28	It is the privilege of the “other sheep” to find refuge in the Lord and his organization, and then all, both the remnant and the Jonadabs, should proceed in full harmony and in peace. The Jonadabs or “other sheep” will appreciate that the Lord has arranged for his church to take the lead in carrying out his rules. He has instructed them upon whom the responsibility rests as to who should vote. No one should desire to cast a vote merely to gratify some personal desire to put some one particular person in a position of respon
May 15, 1937
f?Ke WATCHTOWER,
153
sibility or to put himself there. Let everything be done in order and to the glory of God. If the commandment is obeyed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy brother as thyself, then there will be no difficulty. If one of the remnant becomes heady, selfexalted, and angrily expresses himself in wrath against the Jonadabs or others, he has very little understanding. But if he is kind and considerate and slow to wrath and avoids contention, he shows that he possesses understanding: "He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding; but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.” (Prov. 14:29) “Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that hath it; but the instruction of fools is folly. Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones. ’ ’ —Prov. 16: 22, 24.
28 Those who think themselves of the remnant and who disregard the instructions of the Lord are following a fatal course. “The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain in the congregation of the dead.’’ (Prov. 21:16) Those who are of the remnant set a very poor example when they attempt to drive others. If there be among them some of the Jonadabs who attempt to assume a position that they should not, then the Jonadabs should be instructed in the Scriptures, and this should be done in kindness; and if he has the right spirit he will be meek, that is to say, willing to be instructed and to walk in righteousness. When he shows a different spirit, then he can be dealt with by showing him that his concuct is entirely out of harmony with the Lord’s will.
STRIFE
80 Strife amongst the people of God shows a lack of understanding on the part of those who participate in it. It shows a lack of appreciation of the relationship of the creatures to God. There appears from time to time to be strife in some of the companies of those who profess to be of the remnant. Such is entirely out of harmony with the Scriptures, and therefore very wrong. There can be no strife or quarrels unless someone or more are at fault. It is often true that both sides to the strife are at fault. If those who profess to be servants of the Lord God and of his anointed remnant indulge in strife, they are certain to lose the favor of God, as it is declared in Galatians 5:15. “Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it is established.” (Prov. 24:3) Wisdom is manifested, therefore, where there is understanding and the course taken is in harmony with God’s command. Those who possess'the wisdom that comes from above appreciate their relationship with God and Christ. They fear God and dwell together in peace amongst themselves and see to it that they are united and that they are standing shoulder to shoulder fighting on the side of the Lord and against the common enemy. “Only let the lives you live be worthy of the [gospel] of the Christ, in order that, whether I come
and see you or, being absent, only hear of you, I may know that you are standing fast in one spirit and with one mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith of the [gospel]. Never for a moment quail before your antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them a sure token of impending destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation—a token coming from God.”—Phil. 1:27,28, Weym.
SELF-WILL
81 Some who think themselves to be of the remnant in the Lord’s organization, and who occupy positions of responsibility of service amongst God’s people, seem determined to exercise their own will power in entirely a selfish way. Some fear that they might appear to be of less importance in the eyes of others than they really are. A case in point is this: The Society outlines a specific course of procedure for doing the witness work and sends that outline to the various companies of God’s people. An arrangement is made to carry on a work with the phonograph, and all of the witnesses throughout the earth are asked to work together in the same way and manner. The information is received by the company service committee outlining the course to be taken, and the service committee decide that they will ignore the outline given and do the work according to their own ideas or will. They therefore decline to carry out organization instructions, because by so doing certain individuals would not appear to shine in the eyes of others. The individuals desiring to shine insist on personally delivering a message. What is the difficulty? Such self-willed ones do not have an understanding. They do not recognize that the Lord is directing his work, that the Lord Jesus at the temple has his own good way of doing things, and that he transmits to his anointed ones the necessary information, and if the instructions sent out are wrong, then the responsibility is to the Lord and not to the local service committee. Is it wrong for one to be self-willed and act independently ? Concerning the Lord's work, yes, it is wrong. There must be unity of action in God’s organization. Each one who really loves the Lord not only is eager to do the will of God but delights to do so, and needs only to ascertain what is the will of the Lord and then does it. A selfish person wno feels his own importance thinks he must carry out his selfish way; and that shows a lack of understanding on his part, and that he puts his own opinion above the instructions received through the Lord’s organization. He fails to discern what the Lord has said to all of his people: “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.” —Prov. 3: 5, 6.
32 One who has a sincere desire to obey this admonition of the Lord honestly and sincerely prays God to make him, the creature, do God’s will. He has no desire to act selfishly or presumptuously. His one de
154
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
sire is to perform the will of the Lord, recognizing tne Lord has an organization and his own way of instructing his people. The service committee of a company should be glad to carry out organization instructions as received. Someone must outline the method of work and send forth the instructions concerning the outline. That part of the Lord’s organization on earth performs the duty as assigned to it, and is responsible to the Lord, and surely the Lord has one way, and not divers ways, of carrying on his work. If a mistake is made the Lord will correct it, and that duty of correcting will not be left to some local service committee. Anyone, of course, seeing something done improperly or which appears to be out of order or not done the best way, is privileged to call it to the attention of the one sending out the instructions and suggest a better way that may be followed; but it is not the privilege of any service committee to disregard instructions received and attempt then to carry out their own ideas contrary thereto. Such a course is bound to bring about confusion and strife, because some will want to follow instructions and insist on doing so, and the heady and high-minded, taking a different course, produce strife. Invariably strife results in every company where the “elective elder” spirit is manifested.
88 Those who possess and manifest the “elective elder” spirit appear to conclude that ,they are the bosses of the others of the company, and they manifest an ambitious desire to show their authority. In this they are entirely wrong and show a complete lack of understanding. In the regular and proper course of the witness work the local company receives communications, which should be read to the company. The secretary or company servant, receiving the communication, thinks it is important to first submit it to the service committee and let them deliberate about it and determine whether or not the company shall receive the communication, and in their own selfish wisdom they conclude that the place for such letter or communication is in the waste basket. That course not only is arbitrary, but is a usurpation of authority, and such usurpation shows that the committee so doing is void of understanding, that is, of an appreciation of their own relationship to the Lord and to his people. Such self-willed persons entirely ignore the Lord’s direction, to wit: “Ely son, keep thy father’s commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother.” (Prov. 6: 20) No one who is really on the Lord’s side can ignore the letter or spirit of this scripture. God is our Father, and he commands what must be done, and we must gladly obey. His organization is our mother. (Isa. 54:13) Christ Jesus is the Head of God’s capital organization, and all of the anointed are under him and must be obedient to his commandments. Failure or refusal to obey the commandments of God and turning aside from instructions of his organization show that the persons so doing are greatly wanting in understanding.
84 What should a company of the remnant of God’s people do when it is brought to the attention of the company that their service committee or company servant is acting arbitrarily? With calmness and sobriety the company should ask such committee or such members, who are thus acting, to step aside and let someone else take that position of service. All must bear in mind that the Lord’s organization on earth is his and that there are no earthly bosses, but all those who are part of his organization on earth are servants of the Lord, and that the ones who are more diligent and careful to observe the Lord’s instructions and do accordingly are the ones that are most pleasing to him. The-company must not commit the error of setting aside a committee merely to gratify some personal feeling. It is the Lord’s work in which his people are engaged, and they must do that work in the spirit of peace and must do it as unto the Lord and to his honor and glory. Contention and strife amongst those who profess to be of the remnant are entirely wrong. Our fight is against the common enemy, and not against each other, and everyone who really loves God and his people will put forth his best endeavors to serve in an unselfish way, having in mind that every servant must be accountable to the Lord. Where all are diligent to act as commanded by the Lord, there peace will reign, and there will be harmony amongst the workers and they will receive the Lord’s blessing. The remnant are in the temple, and everyone in the temple gladly says: “ I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, 0 Jerusalem.”—Ps. 122:1, 2.
38 Each one who is of the temple company will see to it that he is watching and working for the good of God’s organization. The anointed will stand together in complete unity and pray for continued peace and unity: “Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. Because of the house of the Lord our God I v> ill seek thy good.” (Ps. 122: 6-9) Where there are quarreling and strife in the company of those who claim to be of the Lord’s remnant there is lack of understanding, and those who persist in strife and disturbances are certain to be cast away from the Lord.
PROPER COURSE
38 What, then, is the proper course for those who have covenanted to serve God and Christ Jesus? David, the servant of God, who saw the Lord advance his son Solomon to an important position of service, prayed in harmony with the will of God for the prosperity of the Lord’s servant. “Now, my son, the Lord be with thee; and prosper thou, and build the house of the Lord thy God, as he hath said of thee. Only the Lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee charge concerning Israel, that thou mayest keep the
May 15, 1937
STe WATCHTOWER.
155
law of the Lord thy God. Then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfil the statutes and judgments which the Lord charged Moses with concerning Israel; be strong, and of good courage, dread not, nor be dismayed.” (1 Chron. 22:11-13) That outlines the proper course of the servant of the Lord in this day.
87	When Solomon was enthroned he did not pray that he might shine in the eyes of men, but he prayed that the Lord might give him understanding and wisdom; and the Lord was pleased therewith and granted his prayer; and such is proof that this is the proper course for all of God’s servants to pursue. Solomon then discerned and appreciated his relationship to the Almighty God, and later he fell away because he became void of understanding. The proper course of the servants of God today and at all times is shown by the prayer that Solomon uttered when he was occupying a position of responsibility toward God and his people: ‘‘And now, 0 Lord my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of David my father; and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in. And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude. Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad; for who is able to judge this thy so great a people ? And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment; behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise-like unto thee.” (1 Ki. 3:7-12) ‘‘And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore. ’ ’—1 Ki. 4: 29.
88	Those who are without understanding are worthy of death, because God gives life to no creature who exalts himself. (Rom. 1:31,32) ‘‘Only by pride cometh contention.” (Prov. 13:10) “Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.” (Prov. 16:18) The apostle, addressing those in the church of God, says: “If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness; from such withdraw thyself.”—1 Tim. 6: 3-5.
The same inspired apostle of the Lord sensed the danger that lurked in the pathway of those in the Lord’s service when he addressed to them these words:
“Who also declared unto us your love in the spirit. For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. ’ ’—Col. 1: 8-10.
40	Those of God’s people who are of Laodicea need to be very careful and watchful and diligent to obey the admonitions of the Lord’s Word, that they may have and continue in understanding; and having such in mind, the apostle wrote: ‘ ‘ That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.” (Col. 2:1,2) Thus is shown the necessity for complete unity of the remnant at the present time, that they may continue in understanding, which is a proper appreciation of their position before the Lord and in his organization.
41	Those who profess to be of the remnant and who are lacking in understanding are likened unto children. To such the message of the Lord is addressed, to wit: “Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men.” (1 Cor. 14: 20) Malice means to have no regard for the rights and privileges of your fellow creature; and in this everyone should be as a child. By “men” is meant those who have come to maturity in Christ and who therefore must be at complete unity, appreciating their position and responsibility before God. To the people of God are addressed these words: “Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive” (Eph. 4:13,14); and these words apply now, because the present is the time of complete unity, and those who are not at unity with the Lord are not in the temple.
48	There appear to be amongst the people of God some who have for years been in the way of the truth but who have been ‘ever learning, but never able to eome to a real knowledge of the truth’. (2 Tim. 3: 7) Having once been in Babylon and escaping therefrom, they still have soiled garments and consider “present truth” as “the best religion”, and therefore they continue to walk in that way. When Memorial time comes round, such persons show up and partake of the emblems, but they do it without understanding. When there is a special convention of the Lord’s people they attend and sit in the meetings, but they show a lack of understanding. When the time comes for service, by going from house to house to preach “this gospel of the kingdom”, they shun or disregard that service
156
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y,
and say that such may be all right for others but it does not apply to themselves, and they thank God that he has protected them from such service. In these things they show that they have not understanding. Having read the Studies in the Scriptures years ago, they conclude that all the truth that God has revealed is contained therein, and all of which they possess; and again in this they are without understanding. Some of such persons, wise in their own conceits and thinking more highly of themselves than they ought to think, conclude that God has delegated to them some special work of great importance, which is to be done in the future, and they conclude to sit down and wait until that time arrives, when they might be exalted to some high position of service. Again they are without understanding. They will be heard saying to others: “Get understanding; get understanding”; and they have no understanding themselves, not appreciating the proper relationship of the ereature to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus.
APPEARANCE AND DEPORTMENT
48	One who has understanding is wise, and his appearance and deportment are in keeping therewith. The understanding servant of God appreciates his relationship to the Lord. He is the representative of Jehovah and Christ Jesus to deliver to others the Lord’s, message. Addressing those who are commissioned to give testimony to the name of Jehovah he says: “ Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord. ’ ’ (Isa. 52:11) In keeping therewith the apostle admonishes his brethren in these words: “Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” (2 Cor. 7:1) Certainly this means a clean body, clean in physical appearance, and clean in mind. Regardless of the lack of money to supply the needful things, all persons can get water and clean themselves up. When appearing before others as the Lord’s representative the witness of the Lord should be gentle, pleasing, and his words should be gracious. Called to follow in the footsteps of the Master, he should keep in mind that ‘gracious words fell from His lips’. The witness should tell of God’s purpose to destroy the wicked and bless those who are righteous. But such speech should be without offense. It is.reported that some who think themselves the Lord’s representatives approach strangers and address them in words similar to these: “You are of the Devil, and you are going to be destroyed if you don’t take this literature and read it and believe it. ’ ’ Such is acting without discretion, and certainly without wisdom. Speak the truth of God’s Word and give God credit for it, and let the people know that you are delivering what the Lord says. An uncouth or seedy appearance, unkind and- harsh words, are entirely out of order with the servant of the Lord. Say the Scriptures: “Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge
among you? let him shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.” (Jas. 3:13) The true witness of Jehovah possesses that wisdom from above, and not the braggadocio, dictatorial and harsh spirit that moves the world. “But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.” (Jas. 3:17) Those who have understanding should by their facial expression disclose that they have joy in the Lord and they desire others to know what good effect the spirit of the Lord has upon those who love and serve him. Let Jehovah’s witnesses be clean in bodily appearance, clean in thoughts, clean in words and deed, and let their deportment be in keeping with the spirit of the Lord.
WISDOM
44	The wise man is he who learns what is the will of God and then is diligent to conform himself to God's will. He is teachable and with all sincerity seeks knowledge at the hand of the Lord; and because he does so he is blessed with the Lord in that way. “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.” (Ps. 25:9) Such persons learn to discern and appreciate that Jehovah God is the Most High and that he does all things unselfishly and in righteousness, that Christ Jesus is the Executive Officer of Jehovah, to whom Jehovah has committed the gnat work of vindicating his name; that God, through Christ Jesus, has taken out from among men a people for his name, and that such no longer follow their own selfish desires and ideas, but are guided by the Lord, and that they are certain they can accomplish nothing in themselves, but by following his way can accomplish his purpose. They discern and appreciate that God has taken out a people from the world and brought them into Christ, not because of the intrinsic value or merit in those creatures, and not that those creatures might be exalted to some high position ; but that he has called and chosen them because of their faithfulness in the performance of duty in harmony with his commandments and in obedience to his will. Such creatures know that their eternal life depends upon their faithfulness to God, because those who do not maintain their integrity he will not give life eternal. Such persons see themselves as the servants of the Most High, and they know that at all times they must deal justly with their fellow creatures, that they must love mercy, and that they must walk obediently with their God, and that self-exaltation will mean their own fall and complete destruction. Not only do they learn of, but they discern and appreciate their relationship to God and to Christ. Such have understanding, because they arc taking a wise course: “A man of understanding hath wisdom.” (Prov. 10:23) Such faithful ones in the temple have given heed to the admonition addressed to them, to wit:
May 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
157
“Sanetify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.” (Isa. 8:13) Such faithful ones do not desire the approval of men, but, on the contrary, shun such approval, that they may be pleasing unto the Lord. They do not fear men or devils, but trust in the Lord God and delight to obey his commandments.
45	The ones who are thus of the faithful remnant see that it is their privilege and duty to bear the message of the kingdom to the people of good will toward God and to help them to gain a knowledge of his Word, and at no time to boss or lord it over them. (1 Pet. 5:3) Those of the Lord’s anointed do not boast of their position in the Lord’s organization and continuously impress upon others about them that “lam of the anointed, and I am driving the chariot, and you who are of the Jonadabs must do what I tell you”. That spirit of boastfulness and braggadocio is entirely absent from the real anointed ones, and anyone who continues to manifest the boastful and braggadocio spirit is certain to fall. Let no one conclude that because one is once of the remnant he is always of the remnant and cannot fall away. Self-exaltation, pride, and boastfulness, is mockery in the sight of God, and no one can mock God with impunity. The person who is now of the remnant delights to obey the commandments of the Lord and is eager to go from house to house and ‘‘set a mark upon the foreheads of [them] that sigh, and that cry”, and that desire to know the Lord and his way. (Ezck. 9:4) Instead of pushing or shoving to the side the Jonadabs and lording it over them, those of the real remnant will gladly extend a helping hand to all who are seeking to know the Lord, and in doing so they will give all honor and glory to God. Religion and sanctimoniousness are hypocrisy and an abomination in the sight of the Lord, and for that reason the remnant hates religion and those who knowingly practice it.
PARAMOUNT ISSUE
46	In this day those who have understanding discern and appreciate what is the paramount issue and what is of paramount importance. The great question or issue that must now be settled, and which the Lord will settle, is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. For more than sixty centuries the Devil and his agents have reproached and humiliated God’s holy name. Jehovah has been longsuficring, but the day of his vindication is at hand. God has enthroned his King and scut him forth to rule and to destroy the enemy. Long ago God made known that in his due time he would exhibit his supreme power against the enemy in the complete overthrow of all enemies; but before doing so he would cause his name to be proclaimed throughout all the earth. (Ex. 9:16, Leeser) He has taken out of the world a certain class of faithful creatures and has put them under the command of Christ Jesus, the King, and to them Jehovah says: ‘‘Ye are my witnesses . . .
that I am God; and you must serve me and proclaim that there is none other.” The remnant are therefore placed in a position of responsibility and honor above all others of earthly creatures, but this honor they do not take to themselves, nor do they boast about how important they are. They are servants of God,"and they appreciate their position and delight to occupy that position which God has given them. “And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.” (Heb. 5:4) God, through Christ Jesus, has honored them by choosing them and putting them in positions of service in his organization, and they hold that position only if they have understanding and continue in wisdom and faithfulness. To them God will give the victory through Christ Jesus, provided that they are faithful unto death. (1 Cor. 15:57; Rev. 2:10) Such faithful ones are now honored and privileged to have part in the “strange work” of God (Isa. 28:21), and therefore to them the words of the apostle are now appropriate, to wit: “Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye sted-fast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord. ’ ’—1 Cor. 15: 58.
47	Now is the time when all such must ‘be men in understanding ’ and ‘ quit themselves like men ’. (1 Cor. 14:20; 16:13) Such are men in Christ, that is, they are mature ones. They love God, and hence they fear him and they do not fear man. They discern that this is the day of the Lord’s judgment and that all nations are gathered before him. They have received and appreciated the commandments of the Lord to go forth and give warning to the peoples of “Christendom” before the beginning of God’s “strange act”, and it is their love for God that moves them into action; and in going forth to serve they are not arrogant, but they are bold, that is, fearless: “Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment; because as he is, so are we in this world. There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear; because fear hath torment. He that feareth, is not made perfect in love.”—1 John 4:17,18.
48	Seeing that the kingdom is here, the faithful remnant understand and discern that the work of declaring God’s name and his kingdom must be done now, and they delight to have part in that work. Let everyone, then, who claims to be of the anointed remnant answer to himself these questions, and answer them before the Lord, to wit: Do you see and appreciate the great issue now to be for ever determined? Do you discern your relationship to him whose name must now be vindicated? Have you heard and appreciated the commandment of the Lord that “this gospel of the kingdom” must now be proclaimed before the final end ? Do you now spurn religion as of the Devil, and give heed to and obey the commandments of the Lord? Are you wholly on the Lord’s side and obeying his commandments, that you may receive life ? or are
158
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
you sitting idly by, ignoring his commandments and missing the greatest opportunity ever given to creatures on earth, and by so doing are certain to die? Remember that God has commanded his witnesses to obey the Lord Jesus, and that everyone who does not obey this great Prophet shall be destroyed.—Acts 3:23.
4# Those who will now maintain their integrity toward God will lay aside all murmuring, strife and contention; they will put aside all selfishness, and, moved by complete devotion to God and his kingdom, they will quickly avail themselves of the opportunity to bear witness to the name of Jehovah and his King and kingdom. This is the time of war, and it is a war of righteousness against wickedness, a war of truth against entrenched lies, and all who love God and righteousness will now with gladness do their part by lifting high the standard of the Lord that the people of good will may see the way of righteousness and the place of refuge. Those of the remnant possessing the spirit of Christ will take the lead, and the Jonadabs will march with them, and all together they will be singing the praises of Jehovah and of Christ Jesus and his kingdom, and all together participating in the service of the Lord. The Jonadabs are in an implied covenant to proclaim the truth, and thus identify themselves with the Lord’s organization. Therefore the remnant and the Jonadabs engage in the witness work together. Never before have creatures on earth enjoyed such a privilege, and never again will that privilege come, because the “strange work” is now being done, and when it is done, to completeness, there will quickly follow God’s act, “his strange act,’’ which will completely rid the earth of all enemies. Therefore, let everyone who loves God and Christ Jesus now hear and obey the commandment, “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.” (Obad. 1) Then soon we may sing- the victory song for ever to the praise of his name.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
fl 1. Why has Jehovah repeatedly emphasized the importance of understanding? Account for its now being again brought to the attention of bis people.
fl 2. What is meant by understanding ? On what conditions may one have understanding?
fl 3, 4. Point out (a) the prophetic position of Moses and of the Israelites on their way from Sinai to the promised land, (b) The nature, and importance then and now, of the words of Moses to the Israelites when in Moab.
fl 5. Explain whether the Jonadabs or great multitude are in a covenant with Jehovah, and what is their responsibility.
fl 0. Apply 1 Corinthians 10: 11 in this connection.
fl 7,8. Account for Moses’ words recorded at Deuteronomy 1:12,13. What important instruction is seen therein for God’s people at the present time?
fl 9. What great favor had Jehovah bestowed upon the isiael-ites? Did they appreciate their relationship to him? Why? and with what result?
fl 10,11. With scriptures and reasons, point out the proper attitude of the creature toward the Creator.
fl 12,13. With scriptures, explain how a human creature is brought into the family of God.
fl 14,15. With scriptures, point out Jehovah’s purpose in taking out some from among men and making them new creatures in Christ.
If IC. What docs it mean to be chosen and anointed? For what purpose is this done?
fl 17-19. How may one have the witness of the spirit that he is or is not a child of God and joint-heir with Christ?
fl 20, 21. Describe the course taken by those whom the Lord gathers unto himself as his “other sheep”. Are they now justified? What is their hope, and their relationship to the Almighty God and to Christ Jesus?
fl 22, 23. Apply Micah 6: 8, Psalm 119: 105, Luke 12: 48, Matthew 22:37-40, as to requirements, source of instruction, and responsibility, of all who will receive God’s approval.
fl 24. What is required of the remnant?
fl 25. As bearing upon the great importance of getting understanding, apply Proverbs 12: 11. Romans 12: 3. Ephesians 0: 6. Colossians 3: 22. Luke 16: 15.
fl 26. What is the duty of the remnant, particularly to the “other sheep”? Why does this matter call for careful consideration at this time? “Can Jonadabs prepare or carry matters in opposition to the brethren of the remnant who are not present at a service meeting?”
fl 27-29. If the Jonadabs be in the majority at company meetings, what then will be the position, obligation and duty of those of the remnant and of those ot the Jonadabs? Why? How does Proverbs 14: 29 serve to guide in the situation here considered? Proverbs 16:22,24? Proverbs 21:16?
fl 30. Account for strife among some of the companies of those who profess to be of the remnant. Why is such condition so serious? What light upon this matter is seen in Proverbs 24: 3? In Philippians 1: 27,28?
fl 31. Account for exercise of self-will by some who occupy positions of responsibility of service among God’s people. Describe a case in point. Is it wrong for one to be self-willed and act independently? and why? How does Proverb.® 3: 5, 6 fit this situation ?
fl 32. What is the rule as to responsibility in the Lord’s organization on earth? What may one do if something appears to be out of order or not done in the best way? Why is it not the privilege of the service committee to disregard instruction received and attempt to proceed contrary thereto?
fl 33. What is the regular and proper course of a local company in the witness work? How does Proverbs 6: 20 apply in this connection?
fl 34, 35. What should a company of the remnant of God’s people do when it is brought to their attention that their service committee or company servant is acting arbitrarily? Why? What will each, and all, of the temple company do in this regard? What of those in the company who peisist in strife and disturbances?
fl 36,37. What, then, as shown at 1 Chronicles 22: 11-13 and at 1 Kings 3: 7-12 and 4: 29, is the proper course for those who haie covenanted to serve God and Christ Jesus?
fl 38-40. What important instruction in this regard is seen at Romans 1: 31,32, Proverbs 13: 10 and 16: 18, 1 Timothy 6: 3-5, and Colossians 1: 8-10 and 2: 1,2?
fl 41. Apply 1 Corinthians 14: 20 and Ephesians 4: 13,14.
If 42. Show that the scripture at 2 Timothy 3: 7 truly foretold a class now manifest.
fl 43. What, in points of appearance and deportment, according to the scriptures quoted in this paragraph, should mark the servant of God who has understanding?
fl 44. Describe the attitude and course of action of those who ‘ get knowledge and wisdom, and with all their getting get ujiderstanding ’.
fl 45. How will those of the faithful remnant prove they appreciate their privilege and duty in relation to the people of good will?
fl 46. What is the great question or issue that must now be settled? What has Jehovah thus far done in this regaid? What is the position of the remnant? and how have they come into this position of responsibility and honor? IIov, only, will they hold that position? and with what outcome?
fl 47. Show that those having understanding discern and appreciate the instruction provided for them at 1 Corinthians 14: 20 and 16: 13 and at 1 John 4: 17,18.
May 15, 1937
Me WATCHTOWER.
159
U 48. What questions, then, should everyone who claims to be of the anointed remnant be able to answer favorably before the Lord? What is the declaration at Acts 3: 23?
H 49. What course of action will those take who will now main
tain their integrity toward God? Why? IIow will the remnant and the Jonadabs co operate therein? Why is the witness work so urgent, and faithful use of privilege so important, at the present time?
LETTERS RE EVIL SERVANT
April 12, 1937 Dear Brother Rutherford:
Z!e Salter’s letter: The following telegram was sent from this office on Saturday morning to each large company in Canada:
“Salter’s letter and instruction not from Society.
Fraudulent. Ignore it.’’
On Saturday evening a meeting was arranged and the following were present: The servant of companies, his assistant, Brother Sinclair, a faithful brother who has been long associated with the Toronto company, and myself. It was decided that the following afternoon, at the time of the assembly of all the units for service discussion, a motion be introduced to dis-fellowship W. F. Salter from the Toronto company.
Sunday afternoon at the service meeting I was in the chair, and toward the end of the meeting the position was laid before the brethren, of whom there would be between 300 and 400 assembled. The envelope with the Society’s address and the printed letter to yourself from Salter were displayed, and the covering unsigned, instructions were read to the company so that the brethren should realize the wickedness of those who were responsible for this action. Many of the elder brethren expressed their disgust at such an action. Brother Sinclair then came forward and read to the church the matter prepared. A copy of this is enclosed.
Someone in the hall then raised the question whether Brother Salter was present, and the chairman stated that if he were he would be able to hear for himself what was being said, and if he were not, he would be notified.
A. G. Cameron, former company servant and friend of W. F. Salter, raised his voice in favor of the letter, stating amongst his remarks, “I know the article in question; I aave read it, and read it carefully. It is true that Brother S.Jter has challenged Brother Rutherford to answer it point by paint, and I now challenge you, Brother Chapman, to answer it point by point and deal with it faithfully, because I firmly believe ■that the church has arrived at the crossroads. Up to this day we have all followed men, blind leaders of the blind and all making to the ditch. It cannot be denied that as an organization we have been mistaken in the past many times, and it cannot be denied that we are mistaken now.” To this the answer was given from the chair: “I am glad you have shown yourself at last, Brother Cameron. It has taken you twelve mouths to show yourself in your true colors.” The whole company evidenced their agreement by an unusual outburst of clapping.
Pointed remarks were then made by Brother Guest regarding Salter, showing that for at least three years he had not been in harmony with the organization. A sister in the rear of the hall (afterwards confirmed to be Salter’s former stenographer) asked if she might speak. It was ruled by the chairman, however, that the brothers were capable of dealing with the matter. Other brothers then expressed themselves in no uncertain way regarding their attitude toward this scheme to hurt the Lord’s people. Cameron endeavored to hold the floor again, no doubt trying to regain something he had lost. The time was getting on and there had been ample discussion to clearly show what was the mind of the church on the motion, and therefore the chairman did not give permission for him to speak further. Cameron shouted out several times, and refused to recognize the ruling of the chair. The company was then appealed to by the chairman as to whether they wanted to hear Cameron or not, and they replied with a great shout “No”.
Brother Sinclair was then called upon to again read and move the resolution. It was seconded, and the whole church were in favor, with the exception of three dissenting votes. These were Cameron, his daughter and G. Richardson. The meeting then closed.
This morning the servant of companies is sending a copy of the resolution passed by the church to V?. F. Salter by registered mail, so that we will be sure he receives it.
Re the resolution: Would you approve of a copy of this resolution’s being sent to the companies in Canada, so that they may be made aware of the decision of the Toronto company? Several brethren have stated that they would be glad if this could be arranged.
This morning many telephone calls have been received from brethren in different parts of Toronto stating that a copy of the printed letter has been received by them in the early morning post. These letters were posted in Toronto at 11: 30 p.m. Saturday.
It is very evident that it was thought that the brethren and this office would be deceived, and conclude that these arrangements had actually come from Brooklyn. It would also appear that a discussion of these points was anticipated yesterday, and hence a follow-up of the work by sending the letter to many brethren in Toronto for this morning.
The discussion of yesterday afternoon, and the decision by the church, has had the effect of giving the church an immediate stimulus to further activity, and it has assisted some brethren, who had wondered about Salter and Cameron, to have no further doubts, and to make straight paths for their feet.
With warm love, I am
Your brother and servant in Him,
P. Chapman.
COPY OF RESOLUTION PREPARED AND MOVED BY BROTHER W. A. SINCLAIR, AND PASSED
Almost a year ago the Society’s president, Brother Rutherford, saw fit to remove from office one to whom for years we had looked with confidence for leadership in the Lord’s work here in Toronto. At the time, and subsequently, through The Wat'-htower and Year Booh for 1937, the principles underlying this course of action and the reason for it were expressed.
At the time that the change of servant took effect, many in our midst looked for some word from the brother dischaiged to indicate sorrow, repentance or reformation in his.attitude toward the Society and brethren. Since that time, many others have patiently waited for some statement tending to clear the situation. Many have wondered as to the course of action to take.
Thus far, no public acknowledgment has been made.
In the last month or two, Brother Rutherford has quietly made arrangements for the greatest and strangest campaign against the enemy organization that has ever been undertaken under the Lord’s direction. On the eve of that campaign the Devil has seen fit to throw (as he thought) a bombshell into our midst, and we, as well as others, are in receipt of punted matter to be lead among and disseminated among the brethren and purporting to be sent by the Society. Associated with this literature is the name of W. F. Salter. Needless to say, a serious consideration of this matter would, to say the least, lead to doubt and dissension among the brethren.
I therefore move the following resolution:
“That in view of the facts set forth above, we, the company of Jehovah’s witnesses in Toronto and vicinity, failing to receive in the course of the next seven days, in wiiting, a clear statement of sorrow, repentance and reformation from the brother, do hereby disfcllowship the one known as Brother W. F. Salter.”
April 16, 1937
Dear Brother Rutherford:
To hand this morning is a further letter published by W. F. Salter. It was forwarded by Brother Hersee, who is at present doing a little pioneer work in Port Huron. I am forwarding this to you immediately in case it has not yet been brought to your attention. This is the first one to eome to our notice. I feel compelled to write a word to you that you may know of my love for you.
It has been my privilege to work in the Society’s office for the last fourteen years, and during that time I have grown to
160
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
truly love you because you magnify Jehovah’s name. Year after year your fearlessness in boldly facing all manner of opposition to publicly hold forth the Word of life, in exposing the Devil’s schemes and all forms of false worship in the church as well as out of it, in assisting Jehovah’s anointed and the people of good will, is complete testimony to your unselfish devotion to Jehovah, and that his favor, protection and blessing is with you in its fullness.
Your love for the brethren has been demonstrated over and over again by considering their needs. This is true, not only concerning the pioneers, but also toward the Bethel family in London, with whom I was privileged to associate and serve for many years. Your stay at the Bethel home in London was always a joy to look forward to. We knew you had our interests at heart, and you never spared yourself to find ways and means to show your love for us, and to make us happy in the Lord and in his service. This is without contradiction. It has been my experience to know you as an elder brother; yes, and time and again as a father and true counselor.
Again I repeat that I love and respect you as the president of the Society, because Jehovah has honored you with His great service. I know from personal experience that you are true, just and full of love for Jehovah and his people, who are your brethren.
The Bethel family also go on record as declaring their love for you, and that not out of hearsay, but out of close association with you. I am pleased to enclose with my own above declaration the one sent from the whole Bethel family.
Your brother and servant in the Lord,
P. Chapman.
April 16, 1937
Pear Brother Rutherford:
Twelve months ago you saw fit to remove from office W. F. Salter, who had been reported to you as not being loyal to the organization, and now, after twelve months, he has clearly shown his hand as being against the Lord, the Society and yourself. Therefore, we, the Bethel family at Toronto, make known the following:
That for years W. F. Salter showed himself to be thoroughly selfish, egotistical, and' had an undue sense of his own importance. He had not been loyal to you nor to the organization.
From the platform and in private conversation he would consistently try to undermine your influence in the minds of the friends, and impress them with his own ideas.
Also that for years he questioned that which came from the Watch Tower, questioned the evidence of the Lord’s being at His temple, and undeavored to put doubt into the minds of the brethren as to Jehovah and Christ Jesus’ being our teachers.
For this man now to pose as loving the Lord and his people clearly marks him as a hypocrite and a liar. Therefore we go on record that our full devotion is toward the Lord and the interests of his kingdom. Not only have we full confidence in the Lord that He is directing His organization and His work, but also that He has placed you in charge of the direction of the earthly affairs of His people.
This family is now at unity, whole-hearted in Jehovah’s service, and now dwells in peace, and unanimously sends this statement to you.
With our warm love to you, we are
Your Bethel Family at Toronto.
THANKFUL TO JEHOVAH
Dn.tR Brother Rutherford:
Jehovah’s publishers at the Victoria (B.C.) assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses take this opportunity of1 publicly expressing to Jehovah our appreciation and thankfulness for the privilege of declaring his great name; carrying his message to the people of good will and exposing the wicked Roman Catholic Hierarchy and those allied with them.
We also wish to convey to you our expression of loyalty and faithfulness to the Society, the visible organization of Jehovah.
We are thankful to Jehovah for The Watchtower, bringing to us the food convenient and the necessary instructions that we may maintain our integrity.
We are encouraged by your own loving zeal and courageous example in declaring Jehovah’s judgments and exposing every part of Satan’s wicked organization.'
With confidence we look to the complete overthrow of Satan’s organization and the vindication of the great and glorious name of Jehovah.
This resolution was adopted by all present.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
Sanford, N. C. ... Mny 31, June 1
Southern Pines, N. C. June 3
T. E. BANKS
Tarheel, N. C......... '*	4
Lawndale, N. C.........."	5
Asheville, N. C.......“	6, 7
Johnson City, Tenn. .. "	9, 10
Knoxville, Tenn........."	11. 12
Cleveland, Tenn.........“	13
Chattanooga, Tenn.	June 15,16
Shelbyville, Tenn.......“	17
Columbia, Tenn..........“	18
Nashville, Tenn.	“	10. 20
Clarksville, Tenn. ____'•	22,23
Memphis, Tenn..........“	24, 25
Decatur, Ala............“	20, 27
Jasper, Ala. __________••	29. 30
M. L.
Pangbnrn, Ark. _____June	2
Little Rock, Ark........“	3-6
Marvell, Ark............“	8
Elaine, Ark............ "	9,10
Oneida, Ark............	“	11
Helena, Ark.............“	12
Marianna, Ark...........“	13
Tyronza, Ark. __________“	15
Jonesboro, Ark.........."	16
Blytheville, Ark........“	17
HERR Mounds, III...........June	18,19
Paducah, Ky............ “	20
Mayheld, Ky.............“	22
Hopkinsville, Ky, ______“	23
Madisonville. Ky.....•• 24,	25
Drakesboro, Ky........, “	20
Beaver Dam. Ky.........."	27
Fordsville, Ky..........“	29
Vanzant, Ky, ___________"	30
Brandenburg, Ky.______July	1
R. H. BARBER
Rochester, N. Y	June	6. 7	Westfield, N. Y		...June	.0
Oakfield, N. Y	••	8	Jamestown, N. Y.	....	17
Medina, N. Y	••	9	Onoville, N. Y			*•	18
Lockport, N. Y		“	10	Franklinville, N. Y.	44 ....	20
Niagara Falls, N. Y	“	11	Perry, N. Y		44	21
Tonawanda. N. Y	“	12	Lyons, N. Y	 Auburn, N. Y		44	23
Buffalo, N.Y	“	13. 14		<4	27
Fredonia, N. Y. 	“	15	Binghamton, N. Y.	....July	4
Jacksonville, Fin. ...June 1,2
St. Augustine, Fla......“	3
Bunnell, Fla............“	4
Day tona Beach, Fla.	.. “	5
New Smyrna, Fla. ______“	6,7
Sanford, Fla............“	9
Orlando, Fla............“	10,11
Fort Pierce, Fla......  “	12
Okeechobee, Fla.........“	13
Belle Glade, Fla. _____“	14,15
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Lake Worth, Fla, .. .June 10,17 Fort Lauderdale, Fla. '*	19
Miami, Fla.............“	20.21
Naranja, Fla..........“	22
Key West, Fla..........“	24
Miami, Fla.............“	25
Fort Myers, Fla. ______“	20
Arcadia, Fla......._... " 27,28
Wauchula, Fla. ........“	30
Sebring, Fla. _______July 1
	J. C.	BOOTH	
Salida, Colo	.....June	4	Mills, N. Mex		J’ -e17. 18
Canon City, Colo	“	5	Mosquero, N. Mex. ...	. “	19
Cripple Creek, Colo. _ “	6,7	Estancia, N. Mex. ...	. “ 20,21
Colorado Sp’gs, Colo. “	9. 10	Albuquerque, N. Mex	*• 23,24
Pneblo, Colo		“	11, 12	Silver City, N. Mex.	. " 26, 27
Trinidad, Colo.	'•	13,14	Alamogordo, N, Mex.	.. “	29
Springer, N. Mex. 		'•	16	El Paso, Tex. 		.July 1-5
Chickasha, Okla June 2.3 Dunean. Okla. _______“	4
Win, Okla..................fi
Wilson, Okla.“	6
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Missoula, Mont. ...	.....June	2
Hamilton, Mont.	44	3
Rutte, Mont. ...	44	4, 5
Deer Lodge, Mont.		“	6, 7
Groat Falls, Mont.	«•	9, 10
Valier, Mont		....... '■	11. 12
Havre, Mont			“	13. 14
Lewistown. Mont.		16
Ryegate, Mont. ...	.......	17
Belmont, Mont.........June	18
Two Dot, .Mont..........“	19
Melstone, Mont..........“	20,21
Billings, Mont..........“	23	24
Roscoe, Mont...........“	25. 20
Big Timber, Mont.......“	27
Manhattan. Mont.........“	29
Pocatello, Idaho June 30.	July 1
Burley, Idaho ........July 2
A S. WRIGHT
Ardmore. Okla........June	8,9
Madill, Okla..........••	10
Milburn, Okla..........“	11
Ada. Okla. .........June 12.13
Wynne Wood. Okla._____“ 15,10
Paoli, Okla...........••	17,18
Purcell, Okla........June	19
Oklahoma City, Okln. “	20 27
Shaunee, Okla..........“	29. 30
Chandler, Okla. _____July	1,2
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street * Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. P. Rutherford President____W. E. Van Amburoh Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ 7- w^ 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
CONVENTIONS
The Watchtower joyfully announces the following conventions for Jehovah’s witnesses and companions: Paris, Prance, August 21-23 inclusive, which will serve for Great Britain and Continental Europe; Columbus, Ohio, September 15-20 inclusive, which will serve the United States, Canada, and others who may be able to attend.
The president of the Society expects to be present at both conventions. Make your arrangements for vacations during those periods. Let all of his people ask Jehovah to make these conventions a great witness to the honor of His name.
More information in later issues of The Watchtower.
“GLITTERING SWORD”
The coming testimony period, “Glittering Sword,” from June 5 to 13 inclusive, will afford a most generous opportunity for the people of good will to get the Lord’s latest provision, to learn how they may find protection and preservation from Jehovah’s Glittering Sword. During this period the kingdom publishers will offer the people a 50c combination; this to consist of the two books Riches and Preservation and four booklets, including Protection, Uncovered, and Armageddon. In recent issues the Informant has given further details concerning this period, and all publishers may inform themselves therefrom and proceed accordingly. Your promptitude in preparing all needful things for this period will be pleasing to the Lord and blessed. Please report to this office the result of your service.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people
of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W.,' Australia South African........Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Aot of March S, 1875.
NEW PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and covered with brown cloth and having rounded corners. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces. With the three phonograph discs which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound is strong, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonograph is timed properly, at 78 r.p.m., and should be checked from time to time. This model, including three discs, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittance should accompany orders. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
ANNOUNCING COMPANY MEETINGS
Many hearers of radio transcription lectures have the desire to meet with Jehovah’s witnesses and to study his Word with them. Hence wherever the kingdom message is radiocast, the time and place of meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses or of the new public meetings on the series ‘ ‘ Exposed ’ ’ should be announced after the transcription. The time on the air being paid for, the station manager ought to readily grant your request to make such announcement.
ADVERSARIES
“Because our conflict is not with blood and flesh, hut ivith the governments, ivilh the authorities, with the potentates of this darkness, with the spiritual things of wickedness in the heavenlies.”
—Eph. 6:12, Diaglott.
JEHOVAH has given command to his servants: “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her to war.” (Obad. 1, Leeser) This command could have its application only after the second coming of the Lord Jesus, when he is sent forth to rule amongst his enemies, and more particularly after his coming to the temple of God, when the Devil is gathering his forces to Armageddon preparatory for the battle of the great day of God Almighty. All the prophecy that is now revealed and made clear by reason of the physical facts, which God has caused to come to pass, proves beyond all doubt that Christ Jesus is at the temple; that he is dividing and judging the nations and causing the various ones to identify themselves and that all the forces of the wicked one are being gathered against those who serve God. All such are adversaries of God and his kingdom. Regardless of how much a Christian loves peace and quietude, this is no time to seek a place of seclusion and quietness. It is the time of war with the enemies. It must of necessity be the time of peace within the ranks of the Lord’s people, when they must dwell together in unity and fight in one solid phalanx. All of the temple company of God are now under the leadership of Christ Jesus, and all must be of one mind, which is the mind of Christ. God and Christ have risen up against the enemies, and all who are on the side of God and Christ must always take their place against the adversaries and do their part in the war.
IDENTIFYING THE ENEMY
2	It must be the will of God that those of the temple shall be able now to identify the enemies, that their attitude toward the same may be in full harmony with God’s will. Who, then, as shown by the Scriptures, are the enemies of the Lord and of those who serve him? The enemies of God and Christ Jesus are certainly the enemies of everyone who places himself on the side of God and his kingdom, and who gives his devotion and love and service to God and Christ. It is against such adversaries that the war is now being waged. It is against such that Jehovah now
commands his people and all of his organization to ‘rise against her in war’. The fight is not against some imaginary foe, but against the mighty host arrayed against all righteousness.
3	The arch enemy of God is Satan the Devil. All those who are in the Devil’s organization and under his domination are the enemies of God and of his people. The reason for the existence of that enmity must be fully understood and appreciated by the people of God in order that they may deport themselves in harmony with the will of God. Covetousness led Lucifer to become the enemy of God. He had an insatiable desire to have the praise of creatures, which properly belongs to Jehovah, and not to any creature. He . es> rted to fraud, lying and deceit, resulting in muider, in order to gratify his covetousness. He was sentenced to death and given the criminal names of Satan, Serpent, Dragon, and Devil. Among the first things he did after receiving those titles from Jehovah was to induce the murder of one of God’s faithful witnesses. It is therefore authoritatively said of him by the Lord Jesus that: “The devil . . . was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.”—John 8:44.
‘Jehovah’s judgment, entered against that wicked one, is death, and which judgment contains amongst other things these words: “I will destroy thee,.. . and never shalt thou be any more.” (Ezck. 28:16-19) That unchangeable judgment has not yet been executed, for the following reason, to wit: Satan the Devil challenged God to put on eartii men that would remain true and faithful to God when put to the most severe test, the Devil claiming that he could cause all men to curse God to his face. (Job 2:5) God could have ignored that challenge, but had he done so the question of Jehovah’s supremacy and unlimited power might not have been settled in the minds of other creatures. God accepted the challenge and suspended the execution of the judgment against Satan in order to give the Devil the full opportunity
163
164
$Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to prove his wicked challenge and then to have God’s power demonstrated against that wicked one and, before so doing, to have Jehovah’s name proclaimed throughout the earth.—Ex. 9:16, Leeser.
8	A host of angels joined the Devil in his rebellion against Jehovah God, and they too were sentenced to death, but the execution thereof has been withheld until God’s due time to destroy those adversaries. Awaiting tl at day, the Lord degraded that host of wicked angels by holding them away from the light of his purpose and by keeping them in the darkness. “The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.” (2 Pet. 2:4-9) All of those wicked angels are adversaries of God and of righteousness. That host of rebellious ones later seduced “the sons of God”, that is to say, angels who are on the side of Jehovah and of his organization. The Scriptures disclose that those “sons of God” were seduced or turned aside from the path of righteousness by fraud, practiced upon them by Satan and the demons, in this manner, to wit: Many persons, male and female, were in the earth who were the offspring of Adam; they were more nearly perfect than those now on the earth, and therefore the women necessarily were more beautiful to the natural eye and pleasant to look upon. The “sons of God” had power to materialize in human form and would necessarily materialize as handsome men. They were no part of Satan’s crowd, but Satan hit upon a scheme to entrap them and to bring further reproach upon the name of the Almighty God. The Devil had used Eve to start the trouble in Eden, and now he would again resort to fraud in the use of women to bring about more trouble and reproach upon God’s name. Satan’s wicked allies also had power to materialize in human form, and they did so appear in the earth as “giants” or nephilim. They, together with the Devil, fraudulently represented to the materialized “sons of God” that they could take those beautiful women for wives and rear up a superior race of people. Their real purpose, however, was to carry out Satan’s wicked challenge to turn all creation against God. It is written in the Scriptures concerning this matter: “The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose. There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men, which were of old, men of renown. ’ ’—Gen. 6: 2, 4.
• The offspring of that union between the materialized sons of God and the female descendants of Adam was a class of “mighty men”, “men of renown,” all of whom became grossly wicked, being developed under the tutelage of Satan and the wicked, rebellious angels, the nephilim. Of all creatures on earth at that time only Noah was perfect in his generation and stood firm
and maintained his integrity toward God. The wickedness in the earth was very great, and it appeared that Satan was gathering most of earthly creation on his side: “And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them: and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.”— Gen. 6: 5,13.
1 Only the creatures of flesh were destroyed in the flood, Satan and all of his wicked angelic host being permitted to continue in existence and to put forth their best endeavors to carry out Satan’s wicked challenge to turn all men away from God. Those angels or spirit creatures that joined Satan in his rebellion are like the Devil, maliciously wicked, that is to say, fatally bent on doing injury to others and reproaching God. They are all the adversaries of God and of all men who attempt to serve the Almighty God. Those wicked angels are yet alive and active in opposition to God and to all vho serve him. Concerning that wicked host it is written: “And with covetousness they will make gain of you with deceitful words; whose judgment of old [now from of old (A..R.V.)] does not linger, and their destruction does not slumber.” (2 Pet. 2:3, Diag.) Those words of the apostle apply at the end of the world, and, since the end of the world is here, the execution of that wicked crowd will soon take place. In the meantime all of those wicked adversaries are desperately fighting against God by attempting to destroy the human race, and particularly those human creatures who take their stand on the side of God and Christ and put forth their best endeavors to maintain their integrity. Before their rebellion the estate of those angels- was in God’s organization, forming a part thereof. When they joined the Devil in rebellion they cut themselves off, and therefore, as it is written, they “kept not their first estate”. They departed from the Lord and turned to wickedness. “And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.”—Jude 6.
8	It appears that that wicked host know that it is God’s purpose to destroy them, and therefore they and the Devil continue to fight against God and all who are on the side of Jehovah. Those wicked spirit creatures have been active since the flood, within the bounds to which they are limited. They were active when Jesus was on the earth, and when he rebuked them they replied: ‘And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean devil; and he cried out with a loud voice. Ah! what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.’ (Luke 4:33,34, A.R.V.; Matt. 8:29) It is this invisible host that the apostle mentions as
Juns 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
165
the adversaries of those who are serving God and his kingdom now.—Eph. 6:12.
VISIBLE ORGANISATION
8	Within a short time after the flood, and when the human race began to multiply, Satan brought into existence the visible or earthly part of his organization. Nimrod was made an object of adoration and worship, and this that God’s name might be further reproached. (Gen. 10:8-10) It was at this point in the history of man that the Devil brought religion prominently to the fore. From the time of the flood until now every people and nation on the earth have had and practiced some kind of religion, all of which religion and religious practices has brought reproach upon the name of Almighty God and turned great hosts of persons against Jehovah and his kingdom. It was the religious desire in the mind of Eve, planted there by the Devil, that she might have knowledge and wisdom of things equal to God, that led her into disobedience; and from then till now religion has been the chief earthly instrument employed by Satan to war upon Jehovah and his people. When God sentenced Adam to death, amongst other things he said to the old Serpent, the Devil, as it is written: ‘ ‘ And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.”—Gen. 3:15.
10	‘‘The woman,” as there used, means God’s organization; and ‘the seed of the Serpent’ means the offspring of the Devil’s ‘‘woman”, that is, of the Devil’s organization, symbolized by a woman, and of which seed Satan is the father. The seed of Satan has therefore ever been the enemy of God and righteous creatures. The wicked seed or organization of Satan embraces the host of wicked angels. The chief part of the Devil’s seed which is earthly is religion and religious organizations, which are operated by Satan to oppose God, and all of which tend to turn men away from God and to the worship of creatures or things. Religion has at all times been the binding tie that has held together the political and commercial traffickers and the military elements of the nations of the earth. Satan the Devil has builded great world powers of which he has been and is the invisible overlord or god. For this reason Jesus spoke of him as the “prince of this world”, meaning the invisible ruler of this world who was always opposed to God and Christ Jesus. (John 14: 30) As the invisible ruler of darkness Satan the Devil is the god of this world, and is so designated in the Scriptures. (2 Cor. 4:4) He makes it his business to blind men to the truth, that they may not serve God. Without a doubt, in the invisible part of Satan’s organization there are divisions or principalities, over which certain of the demons operate as the principal ones and hence rule a principality, and each principality exercises power over nations of the earth. (Dan. 10:13) It is there
fore Satan the Devil, his invisible principalities, his powers and his wicked princes or rulers, including all the wicked hosts and also including all the wicked agencies on the earth, which now constitute the adversaries or enemies of God and of a' who are on the side of God and for his kingdom. All those wicked hosts once had access to heaven, but since the coming of the Lord Jesus both they and Satan have been cast down to the earth and confine their operations to the earth, working particularly with the earthly division of his organization and against those on the earth who serve God and his kingdom.
ACTIVITY
11	The Devil and his angels have been active from the time of the rebellion at Eden until now, and will continue active until their destruction at Armageddon. As Satan “that old Serpent” is the arch deceiver, also all his wicked angels are deceivers, and the undisputed evidence shows that they continue to deceive men. They operate by gaining control of the mind of man and thereby compel or lead man to commit wrongful acts. When one undertakes to serve Almighty God and thereafter becomes unfaithful, he is easily a victim for those wicked spirit creatures. A striking example is that recorded concerning Saul, who was selected as the first king of Israel. The Israelites asked to have a king, and God yielded to their demands and permitted them to have Saul. The Almighty God gave a specific command to Saul that he must perform a certain duty, and Saul, although attempting it, deliberately failed, and because thereof he fell into the snare of the Devil and his wicked angels. It is written in God’s Word: “The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall bo safe. ’ ’—Prov. 29: 25.
12	When Saul the king was confronted by God’s faithful prophet Samuel, Saul said: “I have trail gressed the commandment of the Lord . . . bccauro I feared the people, and obej’ed their voice.” (1 Sam. 15:24) Such is the unbreakable rule with men who fear other men and for that reason disobey God and fall into Satan's snare. The Lord God withdrew his favor and protection from Saul. Then the Devil and his angels got complete control of Saul’s mind and caused him to make numerous attempts thereafter to commit murder. Saul then sought out the witch of Endor, a medium through whom the wicked spirits communicated with human creatures, and Saul consulted that wicked one. “Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and inquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar spirit at Endor.” (1 Sam. 28:7) This is proof that witches and familiar spirits were and are enemies of God and man and that they gain control of the mind of man and turn men away from God. On that occasion the wicked spirit further de-
166
Tfc WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ccived Saul by inducing him to believe that Samuel, who had lived previous to that time and died, was still alive. Samuel, being dead, could not communicate with anyone alive, but the wicked spirits induced Saul so to believe. (Eccl. 9: 5,10) In due time Saul died the enemy of God because he had feared man and had become unfaithful to God and had fallen away entirely to the Devil. (1 Sam. 28:7-20; 31:4,5) Witchcraft has been practiced from the time of Saul even to the present day. Covenant-breakers of this day are exactly in a condition similar to that of Saul.
WITCHCRAFT
13	Witches are those creatures who yield themselves as instruments for use by the Devil and his angels and permit themselves to be employed as mediums for communication between wicked spirits and men on the earth. Witchcraft is of the Devil and is the fruit of rebellion. Satan the rebel invented witchcraft, and he and his wicked spiritual allies employ and practice witchcraft to deceive human creatures. When Saul had disobeyed God the prophet of the Lord said to Saul: “For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, he hath- also rejected thee from being king.” —1 Sam. 15: 23.
14	Saul had followed Satan’s course and had rebelled against God’s commandment and committed the sin of witchcraft. Furthermore God’s law expressly prohibited the practice of witchcraft because it is of the Devil: “Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.” (Ex. 22:18) “There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.”—Deut. 18:10.
15	The practice of witchcraft has been carried on for ages and is practiced to this very day. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries a great wave of witchcraft swept over Europe and America. Many persons were tormented by the witches, who represented and acted for the wicked spirits, and particularly in England and Scotland there were many hideous scenes of witch torture and extermination. (The Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 29, page 431) In the early days of the American colonics strenuous laws were enacted against the practice of witchcraft. Every American familiar with history knows of the Salem (Massachusetts) witchcraft. The witches, under the influence and control of the Devil and the wicked angels aforementioned, claimed that they were able to ride through thin air on broomsticks, on pokers, or on animals, which, of course, is a physical impossibility. Deluded persons yielded themselves to the Devil and his angels and convinced themselves, no doubt, that they could do such things.
13	As another striking example, in this very year (1937) in Russia there have been a number of men
tried, convicted and executed for the crime of treason after having confessed to the commission of that crime and the performance of acts of which they could not possibly have been guilty. Those men came into court and pleaded guilty, knowing that their punishment would be death. They recited before the court acts performed by them in accomplishing the alleged crime that they could not under any circumstances have performed. They claimed to have traveled, for instance, from Moscow to Oslo, Norway, by airplanes, the number and description of which they gave, and which airplanes never were in existence. The confession and testimony of those men, and their pleas of guilt, and their execution upon their own statements, have greatly mystified people all over the world, and the public press and radio speakers have repeatedly been asked to state the reason therefor, and all have failed to state the reason because they have either deliberately ignored or are totally ignorant of the Word of God. Those men of Russia, who thus pleaded guilty and were executed, were, without a question of doubt, victims who had fallen under the control of the wicked angels and had pursued a course similar to that followed by King Saul when he fell under the wicked one’s influence. Those wicked angels injected into the minds of those poor men the delusion that they were guilty, and induced them to confess crimes of which they were entirely innocent.
17	Another instance of the operation of those wicked spirits is this, to wit: On the night of February 27, 1933, the building of the German Reichstag was burned, and that opened the way for Hitler and his crowd to gain complete control of Germany, which they gained immediately thereafter. That crime of arson brought about exactly what the Nazis desired. The Nazis themselves burned the building and then laid the crime at the door of political foes, many of whom were arrested. A Hollander named Van der Lubbe, described by the press as a half-wit, was arrested, together with several Communists, and charged with the crime of burning the Reichstag. John Gunther, an American journalist, was present at and reported the trial of this man. In his book Inside Ezirope are published the facts, and from which the following is quoted, to wit: “Van der Lubbe, a typical enough unfortunate by-product of modern civilization, was not only weak-minded; he had a deep grievance against society and authority, which his feeble brain sought to remedy by pyromania. He was a genuine arsonist. A homeless vagrant, wandering in the Berlin slums, he set several fires, and in his thick manner boasted about them. And Nazis heard him. The further facts revealed are that the Nazis had arranged for Van der Lubbe to be in the building with fire material so that they could make him appear as the guilty one. The fire that destroyed the building was the chemical fire set by the Nazis, who carried their material through the Goering tunnel, and timed it to go off at just that
June 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER
167
moment Van der Lubbe thought he set the fire. Lubbe retreated from the building in proud triumph and was arrested by the police, and that was what the Nazis had planned. Lubbe was an obvious victim of maniacal depressive psychosis.” Furthermore the authority above cited says: “The court was terrified every time Lubbe opened his mouth. ’ ’ Lubbe was put on the witness stand and admitted that he fired the building. He confessed to physical facts impossible for him to have committed. ‘ ‘ He was proud of his fire. He resented it deeply when anyone was put forward to share the credit of it. ’ ’ The public has been mystified about that fire since. What is the real explanation ? Without any question of doubt Van der Lubbe was the victim of the wicked spirits described afore, which wicked spirits had gained control of his mind and made him believe that he was the one who burned the building. Those wicked spirits produce insanity in anyone who yields to their influence.
18	There are numerous other instances of the operation of these wicked spirits in their attempt to seize control of the minds of men and plunge them into a desperate condition leading to destruction. Recently there has come an affliction upon the laboring element of the nations, and which is expressed in what is called “sit-down strikes”. Such has been a mystery to many persons, and is yet. The fact is that the same devilish crowd that operated the Nazis in Germany and conspired to have a weak-minded man to confess to a great crime likewise is operating upon the minds of men to produce a situation mystifying to the people and in an endeavor to bring about a destruction of the nations and the people.
19	From the time of the flood until now the Devil and his associated wicked spirits have been actively exercising power over men and nations. Just now, in the year 1937, that crowd of wicked spirits have gained a greater control over rulers and the people of the various nations than at any other time since the flood. Without any question of doubt the dictators in the various nations of the world today are under the influence of those wicked spirits. The object or purpose of those wicked ones is to carry out the Devil’s purpose from the beginning, which is to try to defame or reproach the name of Almighty God, and to turn the people away from Almighty God and to plunge them into destruction.
VISIBLE ENEMIES
20	The Devil and the host of wicked angels are invisible to human eyes, but they operate through visible creatures who are also the enemies of God and his kingdom. Religion, which originated with the Devil, makes fanatics of men. Strict obedience to God’s commandments keeps men sane. Religionists often become insane. Do not the faithful followers of Christ Jesus on earth engage in conflict with human creatures who are religionists? No. The words of the apostle, in the
text first above quoted, show that this is not their conflict. Human creatures are employed as instruments of the Devil and the wicked angels, and used by them to war against the followers of Christ Jesus. Many of these visible ones do so ignorantly. Many religionists are moved by the spirit of malice, covetousness, envy and murder, while others follow along with them in wrongdoing, being overreached by the Devil and his agencies. As the Devil was “a murderer from the beginning”, so he has induced the commission of murder ever since, and it is the fanatical religionists that have a desire to murder those who are doing right. That is the reason why Catholic priests and members of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have a desire to see the servants of Almighty God and his kingdom killed. It is not unusual to see some Roman Catholic priest advocating the murder of others. As an example, a Catholic priest, who publishes the Intermountain Catholic at Salt Lake City, Utah, editorially suggests (and doubtless for the purpose of inciting others to commit a crime) that ‘there would be a certain poetic justice in the act of impaling the body of Rutherford on tongs’. Also, the same editorial advises jail and the mob for such as are performing the service of Jehovah’s witnesses. To be sure, this is a subversive publication, but, since the enemy has control of this world, it goes on without challenge. It is certain that such murderous intent is due to the influence of Satan and the wicked angels operating on the mind of a fanatical religionist who desires to bring about the death of others who tell the truth concerning God and his kingdom and which truth exposes God’s adversaries. The same wicked ones even attempted to kill Jecus and did bring about his death through the operation of religionists. His faithful apostles suffered martyrdom at the hands of the same adversaries of God. Jesus told those religionists that opposed him and sought his death that they were of the Devil. (John 8: 40-44) This is proof that the invisible wicked host, the Devil and his host of rebellious angels, are the ones that fight against God and God’s people and all who serve Jehovah God.
21	Would any true follower of Christ Jesus commit murder? Certainly not. A true Christian cannot even hate his brother without being guilty of murder in the sight of the Lord ■ and this shows that he is not fighting against visible creatures. (1 John 3:15) Does any true Christian desire to inflict bodily harm upon any Catholic priest or any other person? Certainly not. No good could result from that, and the Christian must do good and not do that which is wicked. A true follower of Christ Jesus has no desire to fight against any man or to do any bodily harm or injury to any person, be that person Catholic, Jew, Gentile or infidel. The infliction of bodily harm upon the wicked ones by Jehovah’s witnesses is no part of their Christian work, and they are specifically commanded to refrain from any such thing. The true follower of Christ Jesus
168
QTie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyi-. N. Y.
is commanded to tell the truth and to leave all punishment to the Lord, who will render just recompense to the wicked in his own due time. (Rom. 12:17,19) The fact that religionists desire to do injury to and do inflict bodily punishment upon Jehovah’s witnesses is proof conclusive that such religionists are moved by the spirit of the Devil and his wicked angels. Hatred, ill will, and malice of one person against another open the door for the Devil and his wicked spirits to come in and take complete charge of the person who permits hatred, ill will or malice to dwell in his heart. The demons, swiftly taking advantage of that condition of mind and heart, seize the mind of the person in such condition and use the same as an instrument to fight against the followers of Christ-Jesus, and thus the human creature becomes an adversary of God and his people. This is one part of the warfare that the invisible host of the Devil carries on against God’s people in the earth.
"EVIL SERVANT”
22	The Scriptures disclose a class of creatures designated “the man of sin ... , the son of perdition”. (2 Thess. 2: 3, A.H.V.) That composite body is made up of men who have received some knowledge of God's purpose and have undertaken to serve God, and who claim to be the servants of God, but have turned themselves over to the Devil and permitted themselves to be used as his instruments. The chief part of that composite body is designated the “evil servant”, and is so described by the Lord Jesus Christ. Such are they that once made a covenant to do the will of God, and were looking for the kingdom of God under Christ and the second coming of Christ, and that made an open confession and declaration of being on the Lord’s side and on the side of his kingdom. They walked for a time with the faithful ones. At the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, judgment there began at the house of God (1 Pet. 4:17) to determine who is of the right heart condition and who of the wrong condition of heart. (Mal. 3:1-3; Matt. 25:26,30-33) At the beginning of that judgment all of the consecrated stood equal before the Lord and were gathered before the Lord for judgment. Those of a pure heart condition at that judgment arc approved by the Lord and gathered into the temple, and these have their minds illuminated and their hearts filled with joy. They put self and selfishness clear out of the way, and their devotion is wholly to the Lord and his kingdom. Those of an impure heart condition do not receive approval at this judgment, but rather disapproval, and they stand on the outside and for some time claim to walk with the faithful, and still claim to be children of God. Then their bad heart condition makes itself manifest. Being outside of the temple, they are denied the light of the temple, to be sure, because of their blindness or lack of understanding, and because of the selfishness in yielding to the influence of the
invisible rulers of this wicked world, and they manifest their wicked heart condition ■ and those are designated by the Lord Jesus as “that evil servant”. The words of the Lord Jesus Christ and the physical facts clearly identify that “evil servant” class. Concerning them Jesus says: “But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken: the lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”—Matt. 24:48-51.
23	It is clear, therefore, that the “evil servant” falls under the power and influence of Satan and the demons and becomes a part of the wicked organization and the enemies of the Lord God and his kingdom, and thereafter the Devil uses the “evil servant” to make war upon the faithful servants of the Lord. Before anyone can become a servant of the Lord he must be cleansed by the blood of Christ, and when that person becomes a part of the “evil servant” the demons have control of him and he is entirely unclean, and he is in a far worse state and condition than he ever was before. Concerning this Jesus says: “When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he saith, I will return unto my house, whence I came out. And when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished. Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in, and dwell there; and the last state of that man is worse than the first.”—Luke 11: 24-26.
24	A person once having a measure of the truth and then losing the light and turning to the Devil becomes the worst amongst the human agencies that are used by the Devil and that fight, against the faithful followers of Christ Jesus. Concerning such it is written: “For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace? For we know him that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.”—Heb. 10:26-31.
25	Judas Iscariot was a striking example and type of the “evil servant”. For three and one-half years he claimed to be the servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, and then the Devil got control of his mind and heart
June 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
169
and Judas betrayed Jesus into the hands of the enemy Satan, who, operating through religionists, brought about the murder of Christ Jesus. (John 13:2,27) Judas had pretended to believe that Jesus is The Christ, but manifestly he did not believe that Christ was present; otherwise he would not have yielded to the Devil. While he walked with Jesus there must have been a doubt in his mind that Jesus was the Christ. There was covetousness in his heart, ill feeling toward the Lord and his brethren, and that opened the door for the Devil to come in and take possession of him. The “evil servant” class first claims the presence of the Lord and so declares it, but manifestly those who compose that class do not sincerely and truly believe in the second presence of the Lord. They were professing the presence of the Lord at the temple judgment. Because of their impure heart, and being set to the side, then said they: ‘The Lord delayeth his coming’; and thereby they deny the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, and quickly join the enemies of God and begin the persecution of God’s faithful people. First they speak evilly of them, and then attempt to bring about their injury and destruction. The “evil servant” and the “man of sin” belong to the same company or class, but the “evil servant” is the most reprehensible of the entire company “the man of sin ’ ’. Such receive first the fundamental truths of God’s purpose, but they do not receive the love of the truth and hence they perish. (2 Thcss. 2:10) The “evil servant” becomes insane and no longer possesses the spirit of a sound mind. They become “vessels of wrath” fit only for destruction.—Rom. 9:22.
COVETOUSNESS
24	What causes one who starts on the way of serving God to later fall away? Lucifer was the first of that class, and it is written of him that covetousness was the cause of his rebellion and downfall. (Jcr. 51:13) All who follow after Lucifer get into the same wicked condition. God directed that those who should be the rulers of men, holding prominent places amongst the Israelites, should be “such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness”. (Ex. 18: 21) The man who fears God will not covet that which God has committed to another, because he will not presumptuously attempt to get what has not been assigned to him, knowing that God hates such. “He that hateth covetousness shall prolong his days.”—Prov. 28:16.
” Concerning the religionists (which includes those of the “evil servant” and those of the “elective elder” or ambitious spirit) it is written: “For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dcalcth falsely.” (Jer. 6:13) “And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them; for with their
mouth they shew much love, but their heart gocth after their covetousness.”—Ezek. 33:31.
23	About the same matter Jesus said: “Take heed, and beware of covetousness.” (Luke 12:15) No man can take unto himself the place of honor in God’s organization, because it is God who assigns each man to his place. “But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him.” (1 Cor. 12:18) “And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.” (Hcb. 5:4) One who claims to be a servant of God and who sees another in a position which he ambitiously desires to fill that he might shine and who, moved by this spirit, says: “That man will die soon and then I will succeed him and do a great work,” that man who thus states is moved by covetousness. One who has that spirit or desire in his mind or heart has fallen under the influence of Satan and the demons, and in due time that person will become the open enemy of God. of Christ Jesus, and of his kingdom. He does not fear God, and no one can make progress and be pleasing to God who does not fear the Most High. It is such covetous persons that the Devil seizes upon and employs as his visible instruments to make war on the remnant of her seed, who have the testimony of Jesus Christ, and who obey the commandments of God’. (Rev. 12:17) Covetousness is the worst type of selfishness.
20	Another description of the same instrument of Satan, and described in connection with the rebellious demons, is given by Jude, and which statement enables others to identify this class: “And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute boasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. These are mur-murers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men’s persons in admiration because of advantage. How that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit.’’-Jude 6.8,10.16,18,19.
"’Such visible enemies of God war against God’s people, and these arc not the ones against whom the Lord’s faithful on earth are commanded to rise up and fight. It is not these with whom controversies should be had. On the contrary, they are to be avoided. Those of the “evil servant” class employ soft speech and smooth words to beguile and deceive others who are seeking the truth. Concerning such the apostle, under the Lord’s direction, wrote: “Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye
170
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
have learned; and avoid them. For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.”—Rom. 16:17,18.
31	Those visible enemies of God and his people are mere tools or instruments of the unseen principalities, powers and wicked rulers that control this wicked world. Many of the political, judicial and military rulers of this world are enemies of God and of the ‘‘faithful servant” class, but they are less reprehensible because of their lack of knowledge. The clergy are more reprehensible than the political element because they claim to be servants of God and they should know better than to fight against any person who is serving the Lord. But the most reprehensible of all is the ‘‘evil servant” class, because of having undertaken to be the servant of God and Christ and then openly repudiating the Lord and turning to the Devil. They become the chief part of the ‘ ‘ man of sin ..., the son of perdition”, and it is by their course of action that they identify themselves as to whether they are the servants of the Devil or not. ‘‘Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?”—Rom. 6:16.
NOT SHAKEN
32	These are the “last days”, and therefore perilous times. This every one of God’s faithful children now well knows. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) The unseen enemies are very active and use the visible instruments, particularly the religionists, in every possible way to make war upon the people of God. One who is supposed to be a servant of God, and who suddenly turns about and begins a vicious assault upon those who do serve the Lord and his kingdom, causes a surprise to those who are not fully fortified in the Lord. But none of the Lord’s people, however need be disturbed or trouble themselves concerning the course of those wicked ones. No man can succeed in doing any injury to the truth, nor can he shake anyone who is really fully devoted to God and his kingdom. The truth is eternal and shall firmly stand for ever, and all who are really of the truth will stand by the Lord and hear and obey his voice. God’s Word is true, and if we have full confidence in God we know that all things shall work together for good to those who love God and who are called according to his purpose. (Rom. 8:28; 2 Cor. 13:8) Will not the circulation of wicked reports against God’s organization and those who are his servants shake some of the Lord’s people? If they can be shaken, yes; but those who really love God cannot be shaken. The Lord could prevent the activity of the instruments of the Devil and the circulation of evil reports, if that were for the best. But the present is the time when all things that can be shaken will be shaken, so that the approved ones may clearly
appear. (Heb. 12:27) Addressing the faithful remnant concerning the second coming of Christ, and the gathering of the faithful ones to the temple, and the appearing of the “man of sin”, the inspired apostle says: “Be not . . . shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word.” (2 Thess. 2:2) Regardless of what the wicked may do, they cannot separate from God and Christ those who truly love and serve him and his kingdom.—Rom. 8: 36-39.
33	We know that we are in the war and that the enemy is desperately striving to destroy all who are on the Lord’s side. We are not at all ignorant of the devices of the Devil, provided we have studied the Lord’s Word. From every side we see the enemy’s forces advancing against us and working every possible scheme against the people of God, but this should not disturb those who love the Lord. To be forewarned is to be forearmed. When we know we have a fight and expect the assault of an enemy, our trust and full confidence should be in the Lord, and we should not permit ourselves to be disturbed by enemies: ‘ ‘ Fret not thyself because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity.” (Ps. 37:1) Do not permit yourself to become bitter or have hatred and ill will or desire to do bodily injury to any of the workers of iniquity. The Lord will take care of them in his own due time and good way. Let those who love the Lord trust in him, knowing that he. will bring about the result according to his will. “Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him: fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thyself in any wise to do evil. For evil doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth. The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. The Lord shall laugh at him; for he seeth that his day is coming. For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the righteous.” (Ps. 37 :7-9,12,13,17) “Fret not thyself because of evil men, neither be thou envious at the wicked; for there shall be no reward to the evil man; the candle of the wicked shall be put out. My son, fear thou the Lord and the king; and meddle not with them that are given to change.” —Prov. 24:19-21.
FORTRESS
34	Go'l’s children know that they have no power within themselves to withstand the assault of the enemies, but they know also that they have a strong fortress that cannot be shaken and by abiding therein they shall be safe. It was for their comfort and benefit that this was written, to wit: “The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies. ’ ’—Ps. 18: 2, 3.
June 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER,
171
33	Suppose the name and reputation of all God’s children should be trampled in the mire and they be made to appear in the eyes of others as wicked lawbreakers and as corrupt. The enemy can do that, but that amounts to nothing in the sight of the Lord. The reputation of God’s people amongst men is of no importance. Their standing with the Lord Jehovah and Christ Jesus is all-important. Jesus made himself of no reputation. What others think about us need not disturb us in the least. Every servant must stand or fall to his own master. If we are faithfully trusting and serving God, he will make us to stand: “Who art thou that judgcst another man’s servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden up ; for God is able to make him stand.”—Rom. 14:4.
36	Are all of God’s people the objects of assault by the Devil and his demons and his other instruments? Yes, to be sure; because such are the ones that make war upon the anointed of the Lord. How, then, are we to find protection and be assured that we are safe ? Jehovah answers that question: “The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them.” (Ps. 34:7) Those who fear God will stand firmly on his side, and all such will receive the protection which God has provided. Those of the “evil servant” do not fear God; otherwise they would not assault those whom they know God has given a place in his service. One who fears the Lord God fears to disobey his commandments, but that person does not fear any creature nor any of the Devil’s crowd. To his servants Jehovah says: “Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. ’ ’—Isa. 8:13.
37	Everj’thing that is against God and his kingdom we should avoid, and what God hates we should hate, because it is against God and against his kingdom. Any person who attempts to cause division in the ranks of God’s organization, whether that person claims to be in the truth or not, because he is a disturber he should be avoided. There is no time nor reason to engage such a one in controversy. (Rom. 16:17,18) We do not need to engage in argument with the enemies of God and waste time on them. We know from an abundance of evidence that the Lord Jesus is present at the temple of God, and it is useless to argue with those who dispute that truth. The ones outside of the temple cannot understand it. The revelation and unfolding of the prophecies given to God’s people in the last five years has furnished an abundance of proof that the Lord is present at the temple, and all those who are of the temple show forth his praises and find no time to indulge in vicious assaults upon others. (Ps. 29:9) Let the “evil servant” class follow their chosen course, and let those who love the Lord get on with his work in doing what the Lord has commanded to be done. The wicked spirits or demons, including Satan and Gog (Ezek. 38:1-16), will employ every possible means to bring about the
destruction of God’s faithful servant, but if we fear the Lord and are diligent to obey him, we are safe. If we observe others doing despite to the commandments of God and attempting to work injury upon God's people and his kingdom, shall we not be angry against such? We may properly be righteously indignant against all unrighteousness, but it is not the prerogative of ours to apply the rule of retaliation against evildoers. Says the scripture: “Be ye angry, and sin not.” (Eph. 4:26) A hatred and malice toward the evildoers, and a desire to do them bodily injury, would be sin, but to hate die wrong and let the wrongdoers take their own course is a different thing entirely. Vengeance belongs to the Lord, he will repay, and it is not the business of any Christian to mete out punishment to another; and the one who does so is certain to fall under the influence of the Devil and his demons. Remember that Jehovah has said: “Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. ’ ’ (Heb. 10:30; Deut. 32: 35, 36) The one who loves the Lord will not permit anger, hatred, or ill will toward another to have a place in his heart, because by so doing he opens the door and leaves it open and invites the adversaries of God, the demons, to come in and take possession. Instead of being disturbed in mind and permitting ourselves to become incensed at others, we must keep in mind the admonition given to God’s people: ‘ ‘ Let us watch and be sober. But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation.” (1 Thess. 5:6,8) Now we are in a war when we are commanded to rise up against the enemy: ‘ ‘ Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.” (1 Pet. 1:13) “But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto praj’er.” (1 Pet. 4:7) “Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour.” (1 Pet. 5:8) Knowing that we are surrounded everywhere by enemies, and therefore all in grat danger, God’s devoted people should trust him implicitly and obey his commandments. If we fear God we will obey his commandments, and to such God gives his sure word that they shall be shielded and protected. Those who are of the temple of God and abide there and obey his commandments are certain to abide in safety. “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge, and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust; his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the Most High, thy habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall
172
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.”—Ps. 91:1-4,9-11.
THE FIGHT
88	Since God commands his faithful witnesses to ‘rise against her in war’, does not that mean that we must fight? Yes, to be sure, that is the meaning. Our part in the fight, however, must be strictly in accord with the rules and commandments of the Lord, and not according to the rules of the wicked one. The enemies attempt to kill and destroy creatures, and particularly those who serve God, and they carry on their fight by the use of carnal or deadly weapons. That is-not the course to be taken by the Christian. The true Christian would not do bodily injury to any man. The Christian adheres fully to the rules of the Lord and is always in favor of freedom of speech, that everyone who has a say should be permitted to say so, but let the Lord be the Judge and let those who have the ear' to hear the truth, hear. The weapon of warfare which Christians are commanded to use, and the only weapon the Christian properly uses, is the Word of God, ‘‘the sword of the spirit.” (Eph. 6:17) Not only is that a weapon of defense, but now it is positively a weapon of offense with which the Christian makes the assault. The Christian is commanded to arise against her, that is, the Devil’s organization, and use his weapon, the Word of God, with telling effect against the enemy and to do so fearlessly and boldly. (1 John 4:17,18) Jehovah’s witnesses have no desire to do injury to any person because he is a Catholic or is connected with the Catholic organization. The desire of Jehovah’s witnesses, in obedience to God’s commandment, is to do good to all persons and to use their best endeavors to help them to see and understand the truth. It seems quite probable that the greater number of those who will form the ‘ ‘ great multitude” (Rev. 7 : 9-17) are within the Catholic organization or under the Catholic organization. Many of the Catholic population are sincere and desire to know the Lord, but have had no opportunity. That organization, ruled by the Hierarchy, however, is entrenched in a stronghold which the Devil has provided, and by attacking that stronghold with the ‘‘sword of the spirit” the stronghold is greatly weakened. Says the Word of God concerning those who are servants of God and his kingdom: ‘‘For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh ; (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.” —2 Cor. 10: 3-5.
89	It is the Word of God, the sword of the spirit, which is now being wielded with telling effect against the stronghold of the Roman Catholic organization,
and that religious system is terribly shaken. That stronghold is entrenched lies behind which the workers of iniquity hide, and it is the Word of God that sweeps away that hiding place of lies and opens the doorway for honest persons to see how they may take their stand on the side of God and find a place of sure habitation. What is the purpose of Jehovah’s witnesses’ having a part in this fight? It is to declare the name and purpose of the Almighty God, that the people may be warned to flee from the wicked organization of the Devil before God exercises his great power against the wicked workers. For this reason the faithful witnesses of Jehovah engage in this warfare with real joy, because their work, if faithfully done, results in good to those who love righteousness and results to the honor and vindication of Jehovah’s holy name.
40	Jehovah graciously permits his anointed witnesses and their companions to locate and properly identify the enemies. Now, by his grace, they clearly see that the Devil is the arch enemy; that his chief operative agent in wickedness is Gog, and that with him is a host of wicked spirits who rebelled in the beginning, and all of which abide in a place called Magog (Ezek. 38:1-16; 39:1-6); that for centuries that wicked crowd have preyed upon the human race and ruled the peoples of earth with a cruel hand and scorned everything that is good; that for centuries the Devil has employed religion and religious practitioners to deceive the people and to turn them away from God; that God lies not interfered until his due time to interfere; that now is the due time for God to interfere, and he is doing so; that he has enthroned his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, and sent him forth to rule and to destroy the wicked, and that before the execution of the wicked takes place God commands that his name shall be declared throughout all the earth, and this must be done by his witnesses. Jehovah has selected out from the world a people for his name (Acts 15:14), and these constitute his witnesses to declare his name; and he sends them forth under the command of the Lord Jesus, and their part in the warfare is to wield his Word, the sword of the spirit, and to keep on doing it until the work is done. Knowing that the enemy is desperately fighting, no one who is on the Lord’s side, truly and sincerely, will be disturbed, regardless of what comes to pass. The Devil brings into action all his invisible forces, particularly the wicked and rebellious angels, to make war on the witnesses of Jehovah, and then uses his visible instruments, many of whom are insane, to attempt to bring about the destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses. (Rev. 12:17) Ti e wicked spirits invade the mind of those who are proud, covetous, ambitious, and who fail to control themselves, and who permit ill will or hatred and malice to abide in them, and, thus invading their minds, seize such creatures and use them as instruments to make war upon the servants of the Most High. Religious leaders,
June 1, 1937
fffie WATCHTOWER,
173
and particularly the “evil servant” class, constitute the “man of sin , the son of perdition”, that arrogantly assumes a high position and claims that they are mighty ones; and all of those wicked ones fight against God and against his servants. The time has come, therefore, when God commands his faithful ones to boldly go forward and to ‘arise against her to battle’, and all his invisible forces are likewise arrayed in battle against the enemy. All the faithful now will arise and use the sword of the spirit in making a vigorous assault upon the enemy’s stronghold, which stronghold is religion. By proclaiming the truth they expose to the people the hypocrisy and duplicity that has been practiced upon them by the Devil and his religious agents, and which enables the people to gain freedom in Christ. The assault now being made upon the enemy is shaking the enemy’s stronghold, and soon the Lord will completely demolish that stronghold by and through Christ Jesus. The great battle of Armageddon will bring about the destruction of wickedness and the honor of God’s holy name.
ARMOR
41	This is not a sham battle, but is a real fight; and the children of God now on earth engaging in this war must have on the warrior’s armor. It must be an armor furnished by the Lord. The apostle uses the armor of an earthly warrior as a symbol of the armor which the Lord has prepared for those that love and serve him. Seeing that we are engaged in this warfare, the admonition is given to God’s children, to wit: “Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand.” (Eph. 6:13) Having taken our stand on the side of God and his kingdom, now let us stand firm and quit ourselves like men fully matured in Christ Jesus. In order that those who have taken their stand on the side of the Lord may remain firm and maintain their integrity and engage successfully in this fight, performing the part assigned to them, the apostle tells them what they must do: “Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness.” (Eph. 6:14) The girt around the loins symbolically says: ‘I am a servant of the Almighty God and Christ Jesus, and my girt of servitude is that of the truth.’ In the breast is situate the heart, and the breastplate of righteousness means the proper keeping or shielding of the heart. Therefore the admonition is, “Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life.” (Prov. 4:23) Those who stand firm now must see to it that they are unselfish, that their motive is pure toward God and toward man; otherwise they cannot stand.
42	God’s warriors, that is to say, his witnesses now on the earth engaged in this warfare, were foreshadowed by Gideon’s army. These soldiers of the Lord must be on their feet and on the march; therefore
the admonition: “And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace.” (Eph. 6:15) Peace must now be the condition among God’s'people. If there is strife, faultfinding, backbiting or fighting in the company, that is evidence that the demons are exercising influence over some of the company, and those who are causing the strife are going to lose out unless they quickly amend their course of action. This is the time of unity in Christ, when all must stand firmly united together. (Eph. 4:13) They must all present a solid, united front, fighting shoulder to shoulder, against the enemy and for the common cause of righteousness. (Phil. 1: 27, 28) Let everyone who is of the temple see to it that he abides entirely in peace with his brethren; otherwise he will not remain in the temple. Those who do not dwell in peace are certain to be cast out. Now is the time when the words of God’s prophet apply specifically to those who, by his grace, have been brought into the temple or house of the Lord, to wit: “I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, 0 Jerusalem. Jerusalem [God’s organization] is builded as a city that is compact together. ’ ’—Ps. 122:1-3.
43	It is the time of judgment, when the great antitypical David is on the throne of judgment and when those of the temple class or the house of the Lord are admonished to “pray for the peace of Jerusalem [God’s organization]: they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.” (Ps. 122: 6-9) It is the love of Christ that holds them together and enables them to march forward in one solid mass against the enemy.
44	The fiery darts of the enemy are striking from every direction; and to prevent them from piercing the armor of Jehovah’s witnesses these faithful ones must have a shield, and that shield is faith: “Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.” —Eph. 6:16.
45	The importance of this part of the armor is emphasized. To have faith, one must fully believe in and trust Jehovah God and his Word and follow and obey God’s commandments, as Jesus does. To have faith, one must have a knowledge of God’s Word, and an understanding mind, and then confidently rely upon his Word and refuse to be disturbed or turned aside by any teaching or theory of man. Having engaged in the fight under the command and banner of the Lord, these must remain true, firm and faithful unto death. The faithful know that, regardless of what the enemy may do against them, no harm can come to those who abide in the Lord and remain faithfully and joyfully in his service to the last. Against such the darts of the wicked are harmless, because they
174
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
cannot pierce the breastplate of righteousness, that is, a pure and unselfish heart.
46	In order to have faith and abide in faith and faithful, one must have a knowledge and an understanding of the Word and of his relationship to the Lord; therefore the admonition: “And take the helmet of salvation.” Salvation depends upon one’s understanding and relying upon the Lord and not upon any object or thing. The helmet symbolically represents the head or mind, which must feed upon the Word of God. Some foolishly conclude that they learned the truth years ago and do not need to study the Word of God in these days; and such are almost certain to fail. God reveals his truth in his own due time, as his people need it. He is now unfolding his prophecies, that his people on earth may have greater comfort and strengthened hope. (Rom. 15:4) Such revealed truths must be carefully studied, that we may have an intellectual conception of the same, and which enables us to have a proper understanding, that is, of our proper relationship to God and to his King. The Watch Tower, by the Lord’s grace, publishes the truth, and all the publications thereof should be studied in connection with the Word of God, because it is the Bible, the Word of God, which proves whether or not we are pursuing the right course. Theories of men are of no value, but, on the contrary, such theories make the Word of God of none effect. God’s people not only must avoid religion and all teachings based upon the tradition of men, but must fight against it now and proclaim the truth, that others may have an opportunity to learn the truth and flee to the Most High and his King. God provides the Watch Tower publications for those who love him, and these, together with the Bible, upon which such publications are based, point out the right way for the followers of Christ to go. By this means the Lord enables us to now identify and locate our enemies, that we may be prepared to meet them in successful combat.
47	The only weapon that God’s faithful representatives on earth are commanded to use, and must use, is “the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God”. How can one properly use that weapon unless he familiarizes himself first with the weapon ? He must study the Word of God and then be diligent to obey what it says. That Word contains the commandments of Jehovah and the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Prophet, which now must be obeyed by those who are in his house and in his organization.—Acts 3: 23.
48	The Lord then again emphasizes the necessity of complete unity in harmonious action by giving this further declaration, to wit: “Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints.”—Eph. 6:18.
40 His people must pray for unity and peace amongst themselves. They are specifically admonished to pray for prosperity, and as the fight grows with intensity
they pray: ‘ ‘ Save now, I beseech thee, 0 Lord: 0 Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.” (Ps. 118:25) This means prosperity or advancement of the kingdom, and all must be in unity in order to look well to the kingdom interests. His faithful ones must and will avoid all covetousness, ill will and harsh criticism. They will give every one of the saints credit for doing his best and will pray that God’s people or sons may be made to do his will. Thus praying, God’s people can never fight each other, but always fight harmoniously together against the enemies of God and thus maintain their integrity toward the Most High. The fight is on. The victory is certain for God’s great Field Marshal, Christ Jesus, and those who are with him in this fight who are called, and chosen, and who continue faithful to the end, shall share with him in his victory and in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
If 1. By whom and to whom is the command given, “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her to war”? War against whom? When does this command apply?
T 2. Why is it important that those of the temple be able to identify the enemies of God?
K 3,4. Who is the arch enemy of God, and why? What judgment awaits that wicked one, and why? Why has that judgment not yet been executed?
K 5. Explain how others of the heavenly hosts incurred God’s judgment against them. What will be the outcome of their turning aside from the path of righteousness?
If 6-8. Why did Jehovah send the flood? What was accomplished therein? Apply 2 Peter 2: 3. What light concerning the wicked spirit creatures is seen at Jude 6, Luke 4: 33, 34, and Matthew 8: 29?
1[ 9,10. Point out the oiigin and purpose of religion, and the outcome of the practice thereof. Identify the ‘seed of the woman’. What constitutes ‘the seed of the Sei pent’? Explain (a) Jesus’ referring to Satan as “the prince of this world”, (b) The apostle’s statement at 2 Corinthians 4: 4. What light hereon is seen at Daniel 10: 13? Account for the present marked activity of the earthly division of Satan’s organization against those on earth who serve God and his kingdom.
1[ 11. Point out the fitness of the term “that old serpent”, as applied to Satan.
If 12. Show that “the fear of man bringeth a snare”.
If 13-17. What is witchcraft? Point out some staking examples of the operation of the wicked spiiits.
If 18,19. What evidence is there that the Devil and his associated wicked spirits are now particularly active in exercising power over men and nations?
If 20, 21. Account for the spirit of malice, covetousness, envy and murder now so manifest, especially on the part of religionists, and particularly against those who serve Jehovah God. What, in relation to these, is the proper attitude and course for God’s people?
If 22-24. With scriptures and facts, clearly identify the ‘ ‘ evil sonant”. Account for the existence of such a class. Show that their present state is “worse than the first”. How is the ‘ ‘ evil servant ’ ’ related to ‘ ‘ the man of sin ... , the son of perdition”? What is the portion appointed to that class ?
U 25. Show that Judas Iscariot was a fitting example and type of the ‘ ‘ evil servant ’ ’.
T 26-28. With scriptures, explain why some fall away after having started on the way of serving God. Point out the futility and evil of covetousness.
U 29, 30. What is the statement made by Jude by which others are enabled to identify the class used by Satan to war against God’s people? In this connection, what is the proper conduct toward those of the “evil servant” class? Why?
June 1, 3937
WATCHTOWER.
175
f 31. In point of their being reprehensible, compare the classes now manifest as enemies of God and his people.
f 32. Show that the admonition recorded at 2 Timothy 3: 1-5 and at 2 Thessalonians 2: 2 was provided especially for the people of God now on the earth. Will any of the Lord’s people be shaken by evil repoits? and why?
5 33. How do the scriptures at Psalm 37: 1, 7-9,12,13,17 and at Proverbs 24: 19-21 serve their purpose now?
34, 35. What provision has God made to enable his children to withstand the assaults of the enemies? But what if they should be brought into disrepute as lawbreakers and as corrupt?
U 36. Who have the assurance of protection and safety? Why?
U 37. How shall we know whom and what to avoid? With scriptures, point out the proper attitude and conduct for God’s people toward those who seek to hinder them in their
service to God or to injure them, and why such course is proper.
K 38. What means and methods are employed by the enemies in carrying on their fight? What is the proper procedure for God’s faithful people in this war? Why?
39. Why are Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions having a part in this fight? and what is the evidence that their weapon has been effective?
If 40. Account for the present situation which calls for the war now on. Describe the line-up on each side. What are the points of attack, and the means and methods employed, on each side?
H 41-47. What is the purpose of the armor mentioned in Ephesians 6: 13? With scriptures, explain how the instruction at verse 14 is to be followed. Verse 15. Verse 16. Verse 17.
If 48, 49. Explain and apply Ephesians 6: 18. What will be the outcome for those engaged in this war?
LETTERS
IMPLICIT CONFIDENCE IN JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The enclosed resolution is self-explanatory. To pass it on to you, in harmony with the wishes of the Toronto company, is a real joy and pleasure, especially so at this time, when the enemy is seeking to come in like a flood.
The scripture says, “The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib. ’ ’ It was through the Watch Tower publications I received a knowledge of the truth concerning the fundamental doctrines, and this despite the fact I had read the Bible from cover to cover several times. It is through the publications of the Society I have been privileged to have an understanding of the prophecies and to rightly divide the Word of truth. It is through the Watch Tower I have received other precious things far too numerous to mention. Sticking closely to the Lord’s channel I am but using the same intelligence as the ox or ass. I know where I am fed.
Praying the Lord’s sustaining grace may guide and keep you, and with much Christian love, I am
Your brother and colaborer in Zion,
Robert McNaul.
resolution
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Almost a year has now passed since (under the Lord’s direction) as president of the Society you removed from office one W. F. Salter, to whom we had long looked for leadership in the service, but who had become unfaithful to his charge.
At that time some could not quite clearly see the reason for such action. We had, however, implicit confidence in Jehovah and that the steps there taken were under his direction.
Subsequent events not only have fully justified this faith and confidence in Jehovah, and yourself as the one used in this connection, but also have made clearly to appear why this action was necessary.
Because of the fact that the Lord's people are being, from this source, now subjected to a barrage of literature calculated to undermine and overthrow their faith, we, the Toronto company of Jehovah’s witnesses, at a joyous assembly on this the eighteenth day of April, nineteen Hundred and thirty-seven, unanimously adopt the following resolution, to wit:
1.	That we fully endorse the action of our president, Brother Rutherford, in thus removing from office one who so manifestly had, by his course of action, said, “The table of the Lord is contemptible,’’ and who had “snuffed’’ at what is spread on that table, by ‘offering polluted bread upon the altar’.
2.	That, as a means for our protection, we will meet this latest move of the enemy with
(a)	Increased activity and interest in the Lord’s service, especially in the new ‘strange work’ just beginning and also the studies in The Watchtower and other publications of the Society.
(b)	That we will destroy without reading any such literature received through the mail or otherwise.
(c)	That we will turn a deaf ear to any, either among us or outside, who manifests a desire to debate or argue respecting this course of action.
3.	That we acknowledge as the visible organization of Jehovah on earth the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, and recognize the Society as the channel or instrument through which Jehovah and Christ Jesus give instruction and meat in due season to the household of faith.
4.	Further, that we pledge our faith in and loyalty to the Society and its servants, Brother Rutherford at Brooklyn, and also the branch servant, Brother Chapman at Toronto; that we are pleased and thankful for his appointment in charge of the Lord’s work in our midst. We wish to say that, the company following your instructions, working under the unit arrangement, and because of the zeal manifested by the bianch servant, Brother Chapman, never before has the intei est in and on behalf of the Lord’s work been so keenly aroused nor has there ever been such a manifestation of activity as now. We pledge our co-operation to the fullest extent with him in the work, and, together with you, pray that the Lord will smite His enemy to the dust and shine forth in Kingdom glory.
5.	That we onco more express our united determination to do the will of Jehovah as expressed through his executive officer, Christ Jesus. That, in obedience to God’s commandments, having heard the call, “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle,” we will carry forth the fruits of the kingdom to our brethren, the great multitude, who must be led and fed by Christ Jesus before Armageddon and may be preserved at Armageddon in vindication of Jehovah’s name.
6.	That our great desire is to have you visit us at Toronto, and herewith extend to you a most cordial invitation to make this visit when your multitudinous duties will so permit.
Furthei, that a copy of this resolution be sent to Brother Rutherford by the servant of companies.
With much Christian love and best wishes, we are
Your brethren and co-laborers in His service, Toronto company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
P.S. Seldom, if ever, was such an expression of unity and loyalty to the Society as the Lord's channel and yourself as president as that expressed by about twelve brethren speaking on this resolution, most of these having been in the truth and associated with the organization for over twenty years, and some over thirty years.
RICH BLESSINGS JEHOVAH HAS BESTOWED
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The eastern North Carolina division of Jehoxuh’s publishers in assembly at Raleigh, N.C., November 7 and 8, voted to extend to you an expression of loxc and deep appreciation of your bold and fearless stand for Jehovah, and of our determination, by his grace, to stand shoulder to shoulder with you and all of Jehovah’s organization for the vindication of his name.
We wish to express our thankfulness for the many rich blessings Jehovah has bestowed upon Ins people; for the unfolding of his prophecies; for the knowledge and understanding thereof; and for the privilege of bearing testimony concerning the same.
May the joy of the Lord be our strength as we lift high the banner of his kingdom, ever keeping in mind God’s command to his people now: “Let not thine hand be slack.”
176
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
PHONOGRAPH EFFECTIVE: DESTROYS PREJUDICE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Jehovah is to be praised! The Bay cities convention is a matter of history now, but, ah! the memory thereof will never be forgotten in the age to come. As the prophet Malachi said, “Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another; and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.” No doubt the many words of comfort and encouragement spoken by Jehovah’s honored servant and the joy augmented and blessings received by His witnesses are i ecorded in the book of remembrance.
Not a complaint nor murmur was to be heard among the conventioners. They came together for one purpose—to exalt the name of Jehovah. After hearing the Friday night lecture on the Memorial and also the one on Saturday afternoon, many of the conventioners expressed their great satisfaction and joy in understanding their relationship to Jehovah’s organization.
Saturday night several brethren from Los Angeles gave some fine points regarding the use of the phonograph—what it is all about, how it is a gift from the Lord to be used with thankfulness to Jehovah for such an effective instrument in destroying prejudice, with whom it should be used, and, after interest is aroused in the minds of the people of good will, how to help them into God’s organization. Several hundred of the publishers indicated that they have phonographs and are using them, and more than five hundred brethren expressed their desire to obtain phonographs in the immediate future. They are beginning to realize the fact that the use of the phonograph is a very effective integral part of the witness work and they showed much enthusiasm regarding it and proved themselves to be very much sound-minded. Many good points were made regarding the use of phonogiaphs in house-to-house, store-to-store, office-to-office, and also in back calls. Additionally, that when a phonogiaph is not in use it should bo placed conveniently in the front room ready for action. When a caller comes to the door, the witness opens tie door and says, “Come in. I am going to play a five-minute lecture entitled ‘ . . . ’, and will be pleased to have you listen to it.” Then introduce the books. Thus even those who ar<> not able to go from house to house in the field service can have a share in the phonograph work.
The witnesses of Jehovah are fully realizing the fact that we are at war with a very formidable enemy; that these are not the civilian days of yore, but vve are living in the days of Jehovah’s martial power, and that the fight is on and veiy shortly Jehovah will crush the enemy to the dust at Armageddon. However, just before the destruction, the Lord has given us several mighty instruments of destruction, such as the books and booklets, particularly the book Riches and the booklets Uncovered and Protection, and with these, by the Lord's grace, we can put up a mighty fight against the appaiently invulnerable fortresses of the enemy; and under the withering barrage of fire of Jehovah's militant forces the refuge of lies even now is disintegrating and crumbling, and shortly will pass into oblivion.
On Sunday afternoon at the public lecture there were more than six thousand listeners who gave very close attention and manifested their keen appreciation of the points made, by repeated applause. Of course, we cannot estimate the number of those in the unseen audience who heard the lecture over the radio stations on the Pacific coast from the Mexican intei-national line up to Canada. While the “Armageddon” lecture was being delivered in the Oakland Municipal Auditorium, a brother was rebroadcasting it on the auditorium grounds to about four hundred and fifty listeneis. The brethren of the companies of San Francisco and Oakland used almost eveiy avenue of publicity in order to adveitise the public lecture. One of the most unique methods of advertising was the “sandwich parade”, participated in by moie than five hundred bieth-ren. There was a small dog in the parade carrying a sign on its back announcing the public lecture on “Armageddon”. If all the dumb dogs of “Chiistendom” cannot know and appreciate the day of their visitation, the Loid can use a poodle dog as he used a jackass in the days of Balaam.
I sincerely and with deep gratitude thank Jehovah, our God, for opening the heavenly portals and pounng out at tins convention such blessings, the inemoiy of which will remain with us through the countless ages of eternity to the praise of Jeho
vah’s name. May Jehovah, our Father, continue to richly bless you end use you bountifully in this work of greatest importance, the vindication of vchovali's holy v.oid and name. I thank you much for permitting me to be at this convention. The brethren heard the lecture with absolute clarity, to their great joy and satisfaction.
With much love and best wishes, I am
Your brother and fellow servant by Jehovah’s grace,
S. H. Toutjian.
PHONOGRAPH DOING A WONDERFUL WORK
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At the close of this special period of testimony to the name and purposes of Jehovah and his Faithful Warrior, Christ Jesus, X feel called upon to express my deep appreciation of the privilege of serving him day and night in his temple.
Words seem inadequate to describe the joy and thankfulness in my heart in acknowledging the loving-kindness of our God. Surely if we prove Jehovah he does pour out upon us boundless blessings, such as we are not able to retain.
While meditating on the unity in the Lord’s organization and realizing how profitable are the instructions and admonitions as they proceed through the proper channel, it occurred to me that many times certain questions arise in our minds and, before we ask, an article appears in The Watchtower, the Informant, or The Golden Age, giving a direct answer to our questions. Surely this is one of the proofs we have that Jehovah and Christ Jesus are our teachers as is stated in Isaiah 30: 20.
I take this occasion to thank you, Brother Rutherford, and all of the Bethel family for their loving co-operation in assisting the pioneers. Another cause for rejoicing is the letter in the April 1 Watchtower regarding the activities of our brethren in Germany. After reading of the ternble persecutions in that country, it greatly strengthens us to know how the Lord sustains his people.
And now a word about the local conditions. We are finding many sincere persons who are seeking the truth, especially of the Catholic population, and the phonograph is doing a wonderful work in presenting the message clearly.
The convention in Newark aroused much inteiest and left a lasting impression upon the minds of the people; even those who did not attend the lecture are asking many questions about the work of Jehovah’s witnesses. While witnessing in the business section we have had many interesting experiences. One young man, after subscribing for The Golden Age, said he would like to be one of Jehovah's witnesses but he didn’t think he was good enough.	,
May Jehovah bless and keep yon as you continue to lift high the banner of truth.
Yours in the service of Jehovah,
Ruth Foster.
SATAN HAS LOST OUT
My dear Brother Rutherford:
In reply to your kind letter of counsel which reached me at Memorial time, I have followed your advice, have gone to the brethren and have acknowledged my wrongful ideas regarding the survivors of Armageddon, and have received their hearty forgiveness; and I believe the Lord has fully forgiven me and reinstated nie again in his favor.
I appreciate that the Lord’s chastening hand has been laid heavily upon me, as evident in my experiences; and your reference to Psalm 141: 5 is to the point in my case.
I am rejoicing in the fountain of mercy that Jehovah has uncovered in the three phonograph records on “Armageddon Survivors”, and am also rejoicing that Satan has lost out in this attempt to turn me aside from the Lord’s favor.
I have served for the past ten years as an auxiliary, and my earnest desire is to abide in Jehovah’s organization and to humble myself as wax under the mighty hand of God.
With love and appreciation to you, dear brother, for assisting me in the right way, I am
1	Your brother and fellow witness,
Fred McGregor, Pennsylvania.
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street * Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
■ THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
CONVENTIONS
The Watchtower joyfully announces the following contentions for Jehovah’s witnesses and companions: Pans, Fiance, August 21-23 inclusive, which will serve for Great Britain and Continental Europe; Columbus, Ohio, September 15-20 inclusive, which will serve the United States, Canada, and others who may be able to attend.
The president of the Society expects to be present at both conventions. Make your arrangements for vacations during those periods. Let all of his people ask Jehovah to make these conventions a great witness to the honor of Uis name.
More information in later issues of The Watchtower.
ITS MISSION
TITS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s Witnesses and all people
of good will. It ananges systematic Bible study for its readeis and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadeasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and south Africa.
Ameucan remittances should be made by Postal or Express Mo: ,v Older or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African i.ri Australasian remittances should be made dnect to the lespectna branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those rie ■-tioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by Intel national Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..............34	Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian...........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5. Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 1 Beresford Road, Strathlield, N. S. W., Austral.a South African.........Boston House, Cape Town, South Af.ica
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poveity or adversity are unable to pay the snb-cription pine may have The Watchtowei free upon wiitten uppluntion to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so 11-qucstina it. We are clad to thus aid the needy, but the wiitt-i application once each year is required by the postal legulatiom.
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of addie-s, when icquested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (cairyinc notice ot exmrition) wi.l be sent with the journal one month before the subsenption expnes. Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N Y, under the Act of March S, 1S79.
NEW PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-wei\ht phonograph, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and eovcied with brown cloth and having rounded cornels. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces. With the three phonograph discs which can bo earned in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound H strong, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out f 10111 our factory, the phonograph is timed propeily, at 78 r.p.m , and should be checked from time to time. This model, including three discs, is offered on a contubution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittance should accompany ordcis. Also sjiecify the particular discs wanted.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES AND SOUND CARS
The Society constructs and assembles portable tran'-eription machines at our own factory at 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. \. These machines are spring-wound, and operated from a t> i <>lt wet-cell battery. Every machine is furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. This machine can be offered at $100, complete, to brethren in the United States.
The sound car equipment includes the above and, additionally, a power amplifier and a horn with mountings for the top of your car. The entire sound car equipment with microphone attachment can be had for $175. Write to the Society for details.
ADVERTISING WATCH TOWER PROGRAMS
Witnessing parties and all individuals engaging 111 the field sen ice should mention the radio st»tion in their vicinity winch carries the Watch Tower programs. This magnifies to the people called upon the message which Jehovah’s witnesses introdme, and often results in interest in the pi inted message on the part of the ladio listener. This is one of the chief purposes of sending out the message over the radio, to encourage tho people to read the literature. In this behalf the Society supplies radio foldeis, and all workers should make constant use of them in house to house culling, leaving one of them, if nothing else.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
Vol. LV1II	Jvsk 15, 3937	No. 12
OPPOSING GOD
“The way of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord.”—Prov. 15: 9.
PAUT 1
JEHOVAH’S adversary the Devil has employed and continues to employ every possible means in opposition to God. One of the most subtle means employed by the adversary, and which has accomplished the greatest injury to the people, is that of religion. Had the people been informed that religion is of the Devil, no doubt there would have been a far less number of religionists in the earth. The time has now come for them to be informed. God’s great opponent or adversary is the Devil, and it now clearly appears that the Devil for centuries has been using religion to oppose God and to injure humankind. For the benefit of the people of good will toward God, and who therefore sincerely desire peace, contentment, happiness and life, it now appears to be imperative that the wickedness of religion should be brought clearly before the minds of the people, that they may have full opportunity to safeguard themselves. The publication of the truth of and concerning religion will bring and is bringing upon Jehovah’s witnesses a great amount of persecution, because the adversary well knows that when the people have a clear understanding of what religion in fact is, the Devil’s opportunity to deceive the people will be far less than ever before. It also seems quite necessary for Jehovah’s witnesses to fully inform themselves of and concerning the origin, the practice, and the effects upon the people, of religion, that they may be more fully equipped to proclaim the great name of Jehovah God throughout the land and to render aid to those who desire to serve God and Christ. For this reason The Watchtower here again emphasizes that which is in opposition to God and which is wicked and an abomination unto the Lord.
2	The Almighty God brought the first world to an end by the great deluge, which destroyed all flesh upon the earth, including the offspring of the union of the “sons of God” with the “daughters of men”. The only survivors were those in the ark. “And spared not the old world, but saved Noah, the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly.” (2 Pet. 2:5) Those who
were destroyed were wicked and an abomination in the sight of Jehovah God. There were left on earth Noah and his three sons and four other persons of Noah’s family. The “sons of God” that married human wives were imprisoned by Satan, and the wicked angels that joined Satan originally in his rebellion were remanded to a degraded condition and habitation. The Devil had not been deprived of his power, and the reason will be seen as the progress is made in this study. Another world came into existence immediately following the flood, and that world persists to this day; and most persons believe that it will continue for ever, but in this they err. The world consists of heaven and earth, the heaven being that part which is invisible to human eyes, and the earth that part of 1 lie world which is visible to human eyes. Angels were not included in the judgment executed at the time of the flood, but the then existing relationship between the visible and invisible was destroyed by the flood. It is written that “by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth [the heavens] standing out of the water and [the earth] in the water: whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished ’ ’.—2 Pet. 3: 5, 6.
3	The world that is now, that is to say, the invisible and the visible, will that abide for ever? The scripture answers that question in these words: “But the heavens and the earth which arc now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.” (2 Pet. 3:7) The world now in existence is designated by the Lord as “this present evil world” (Gal. 1:4), and such is the one that he has decreed shall be destroyed ;.nd pass away. “Fire” is a symbol of complete de-Siruction, which will befall the present world. Satan the Devil is the prince or invisible ruler in control of the present wicked world, which shall pass away.
2	Cor. 4:4) With its passing away there shall appear a new world, and concerning which the Scriptures say: “We, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwclleth righteousness.” (2 Pet. 3:13) Following the flood
ISO
fflie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the population of the earth consisted of Noah and his three sons, Shorn, Ham and Japheth, and the other members of Noah’s household. “And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.” (Gen. 9:1) “Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah: Shorn, Ham, and Japheth; and unto them were sons born after the flood.” (Gen. 10:1) The human race then began to multiply.
SANCTITY OF LIFE
4	Immediately after Noah left the ark Jehovah God made known his covenant concerning the sanctity of life. (Gen. 9:9-11) A covenant is a solemn and unbreakable declaration of God’s purpose. God would have all creation to know that life is a gift from him and that no one can properly take or destroy life without the permission of God. The beasts of the field and the fowls of the air God has provided for man that he may use them for food as he may require. (Gen. 9: 2-4) If any man, contrary to the law of God, kills another man, the killer is guilty of murder and must suffer death. (Gen. 9: G) Also the wanton and needless slaying of animals is a violation of God’s everlasting covenant. (Gen. 9:5) If a man kills boasts for his necessary food, such is lawful; but if he kills them merely to satisfy a selfish desire to slay or to gratify his desire for sport, that is a violation of the everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of life.
5	The covenant having been announced, the Devil saw an opportunity to further reproach the name of God by causing man to violate that everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of life. This violation began to be manifested particularly in Nimrod. The man Nimrod was a descendant of Noah’s son Ham. “Nimrod . . . began to be a mighty [man] in the earth.” The word translated “mighty” in this text (Gen. 10:8) is the same word translated “mighty” relating to the offspring of the marriage of the spirit creatures with the daughters of men. (Gen. G:4) “lie was a mighty hunter before the Lord: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord.” (Gen. 10:9) Nimrod was ambitious, warlike and bloodthirsty, and reveled in wicked dec Is, and was undoubtedly induced to do so by reason of the influence of the Devil and his associate demons. Nimrod hunted and killed wild beasts merely to satisfy his wicked desires, and he armed and trained young men to follow him in the killing business, and in the eyes of the people Nimrod became one greatly admiicd and worshiped because of his prowess. No doubt the Devil put that into the minds of the people, that they would show their devotion to a creature rather than to the Creator. It is written of Nimrod, that he was “a mighty hunter before [that is, superior to or greater than] ” the Almighty God. The honor, plaudits and adoration bestowed upon Nimrod was worship, and there began the practice of religion following the flood.
8	Eeligion is a form of worship bestowed by creatures upon another, the one worshiped being regarded by such creatures as superior to themselves and worthy of adoration and worship. The Devil had gained control of the mind of Cush, the father of Nimrod, and had used Cush, the son of Ham, as a wrong leader in turning the increasing population away from Jehovah God. Nimrod, his son, together with others, was trained to violate God’s everlasting covenant and to establish creature worship, and this was for the purpose of diverting the minds of creatures away from the Almighty God. By this means Satan and his associate devils defied the Almighty God and reproached his name, and thereby set up the practice of religion in the earth. Let this be remembered and kept in mind henceforth: Religion has ever been the chief instrument employed by the Devil to reproach the name of Almighty God and turn the people away from the Most High.
7	Politics is the means and art of organizing and governing the people and to conduct and control organizations of men. Religion, having been organi-ized and put into operation to turn the people away from God and to the worship of creatures, was quickly followed by politics, that is, an organization amongst men to control and rule the people. Nimrod, the religionist, took the lead in politics, he being made the ruler or king. “And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel.” (Gen. 10:10) Nimrod and his religious and political associates built cities, into which the people were gathercd, and that was the beginning of trade or commerce, trafficking amongst each other. From that day to this, religion, politics and commerce have been operated jointly by the Devil and his assistants for the purpose of controlling and ruling the nations of the earth and keeping them away from a knowledge and service of Almighty God.
8	Further carrying out his wicked scheme to turn the people away from God and to cause them to worship creatures, the Devil and his wicked angels injected into the minds of men that their salvation depended upon the acts and power of themselves and other creatures. “And they said, Go to, let us build us a city, and a tower whose top may reach unto heaven ; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.”—Gen. 11: 4.
0 By religion the Devil moved the people who were dwelling in the land of Shinar to build the tower of Babel, which means “the gate to God”; therefore a religion of the Devil was at that point brought forward to defy the Almighty God. Doubtless because of that organized movement in setting up a religion God interfered and brought about a confusion of the language of the people, and hence the Hebrew word for Babel means confusion. From the very beginning God expressed his indignation against religion, showing that it is an abomination in his sight because formulated, brought into existence and practiced by
June 15, 1937
Gfc WATCHTOWER
181
the Devil. Nothing has brought about so much confusion among the people as the many kinds of religions that are practiced among them. From and after the flood until now religion has been the chief means of confusing, deceiving and misleading the people and has resulted in turning them away from the knowledge of and worship of the true and almighty God. This of itself is proof conclusive that religion is the product of the Devil, employed specifically to deceive the people and to turn them away from Jehovah, Religion causes the people to be very superstitious and to yield to the influence of their religious leaders, and that opens clearly the way for politicians to gain control of and rule the people, and for the use of commerce or traffic by which the people are robbed of their just rights and earnings.
10	Babel and Babylon mean the same thing. Babylon is the name of the Devil’s organization, which combines three elements, religion, polities and commerce, to control the peoples of the earth. Religion is employed for selfish gain to the Devil’s crowd, and therefore God said to the Devil: “By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, 0 covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic; therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee; and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee.”—Ezck. 28:16,18.
11	Satan’s ambitious and covetous desire to get gain for himself induced him to rebel against the Almighty God, and thereafter he has employed religion, polities and commerce to further feed his insatiable and covetous desire. In harmony with this it is written: “For the love of money is the root of all evil • which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.” —1 Timothy 6:10.
12	“Money,” as here used, means anything by which gain is measured. The evil is not in the circulating medium which is called “money”, but the wrong results from loving or desiring that which enables one to reap selfish gain. Many men who have at first had faith in Jehovah God, and who began to serve him, have been led to covetousness, and that unsatisfied desire for gain has brought about their complete downfall. Such was the course of Satan and has ever been that of those who serve him. Religion is used for that purpose, that is, that the Devil might gain the devotion of creatures to anything, particularly to himself, and thereby turn them away from God.
13	Following the organization of Babylon other organized nations came into existence, to wit: Egypt, Assyria, Persia, Greece, Rome, and others. All of such great world powers and all subdivisions thereof, or
nations which have formed and do form any part thereof, have had and practiced and do have and practice religion. Babylon is the mother of all religions, and the Devil is the-father thereof. All religions properly take the name of Babylon. The Devil is the great enemy or adversary of God, and his religion therefore is an enemy of the Almighty God. The Devil is man's worst enemy, and his religion is likewise a deadly enemy to man. The Devil’s organization is symbolized by an unchaste or impure woman, which is called Babylon. Therefore all religions are of Babylon, and particularly the leading religion known in the lands called “Christendom”. All the nations, kindreds and peoples on the earth since the flood have had and practiced, and do continue to have and practice, some form of religion, and each and every one has been made so to do by the wily influence of that wicked one, the Devil, and his associate wicked spirits. It is therefore written in the Bible of and concerning Babylon that ‘she has made all the nations drunk with the wine of her fornication’. (Rev. 14: 8) “And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.” (Rev. 17:5) A11 of which shows that religion is the instrument of the Devil employed to oppose, to defy, to mock and to reproach the Almighty God and to deceive men and turn them away from the true Almighty God, whose name is Jehovah. (For further consideration see the book Ptophccy, chapter six.)
14	All religious organizations on the earth are formed and carried on by men who are subjected to wrongful influence and ruled by the great enemy Satan the Devil; and this is true whether any of them know it or not, because the Bible so states. What is here written or said is not an assault upon men. There would be no reason or excuse for that, and no good could be accomplished by holding up men to ridicule. The purpose is to set the facts plainly before the people that all sincere ones may see who constitute their real enemies. There are two great organizations in existence, to wit: the organization of the Almighty God, which is wholly righteous, pure and true; and the organization of the Devil, the mimic god, which is unholy, wicked and entirely false. The people of earth are subjected to one or the other of these two organizations. The Devil and his wicked angels and other supporters at all times fight against God to defame his name and to turn the people away from God and into destruction. That wicked organization is attempting to destroy everyone who is on the side of Jehovah God and who therefore tries to do right. The Lord Jesus Christ and his true followers are entirely on the side of Jehovah God, even as the prophets of old were on the side of and served Jehovah God. The faithful servant of the Lord God, speaking by inspiration and authority from the Most High, points out that there is a great warfare waged by those who arc on the side
182
(Hie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the Devil against those who are devoted to Jehovah God, and employs these words, to wit: “For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against power’s, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.” (Eph. 6:12) It is therefore seen that Satan and his wicked associates, that joined him in the rebellion originally, constitute the powers, principalities and invisible rulers of this wicked world which operate in darkness as the enemies of man. Those in the organization of the Almighty God make war upon that devilish rule and power, and therefore must tell the truth concerning religion, which makes war upon it because religion is the chief instrument by which the people are deceived. In that warfare, however, the faithful servants of God do not use weapons to injure any human creatures in their bodies. The ‘weapons of their warfare’ are just one, and that one is the “sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God”. (Eph. 6:13,17) To those who are on the side of Jehovah, and who are serving him in this warfare, Jehovah says: ‘Ye are my witnesses to tell the people about my name and kingdom and purpose.’ (Isa. 43:10,12) Such witnesses of God are men, walking in the flesh, but using only the weapons of the truth with which Jehovah has armed them. “For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds).”—2 Cor. 10:3,4.
15	Let it be clearly understood, therefore, that the true servants of the Almighty God and followers of Christ Jesus have no fight to wage against any human creature, be that person Jew, Gentile, Catholic, Protestant or infidel. They have no disposition to do injury to any man, but to tell the truth for the good of those who want to know the right way. Men of all nations have fallen under the wily influence and power of Satan and his wicked angelic associates, but such men are the objects of compassion. It is the privilege and duty of Jehovah’s witnesses to tell them the truth as God has commanded, in order that those who are among them and who are of good will toward God may find the only place of security and safety from their enemies. The truth of God’s Word is therefore a warning given that those of good will may heed the warning and flee to the place of safety.
JEHOVAH GOD’S WITNESSES
18	Abel, Enoch and Noah were faithful and true to Jehovah and maintained their integrity toward God. They were witnesses to the name of the Almiirhty. It was 350 years after the flood dried up that Noah died (Genesis 9:28,29), and during that time the descendants of Noah increased rapidly. Almost all the people had by that time fallen under the influence and control of Satan and the other devils. Two years after the death of Noah Abraham was born. Abraham
was then residing in the land of Ur of the Chaldees. He loved and served the Almighty God. When he was 75 years old, at the command of Almighty God he moved into Canaan: “Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house, unto a land that I will shew thee; and I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing: and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. So Abram departed, as the Lord had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.”— Gen. 12:1-4.
17	He went there to be a witness for Jehovah. Since the rebellion at Eden God has had some faithful witnesses on the earth, although very few in number, compared to earth’s population. God began to make known that no man would have his blessing unless that man had faith in God and obeyed his commandments, and so He began to preach or proclaim the gospel unto Abraham. “And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.”— Gal. 3: 8, 9.
18	Abraham was a preacher of the truth, and hence a witness for Jehovah God. In due time there was born to Abraham and his wife Sarah a son named Isaac. With Abraham and Isaac God began to reveal by means of prophetic pictures his purpose to send to the earth his own beloved Son, Jesus, who is the real heir of promise and he who would prove to be the faithful and true witness of Jehovah, and who would be offered up as a sacrifice to provide the price of redemption for man, to the end that those who would have faith in God and Christ Jesus might escape the wiles of the Devil and find everlasting life. (Gen. 22:1-18) God has developed and carried out his purpose according to his sovereign will, and his purpose is certain to be accomplished even as he has declared it. (Isa. 46:11) It will be observed from this point forward that at every stage of man’s history religion has been used to oppose God, and particularly to deceive mankind.
18	The nation of Egypt was, in the days of Abraham, a powerful nation. That nation practiced the Devil religion the same as did the peoples of Babylon. Eg\ pt was a great, commercial and military nation and was ruled by a king the title of whom was Pharaoh, meaning “Great House”.
10	Jacob was a grandson of Abraham, a true servant of God, one of the faithful patriarchs; and under the command and direction of the Almighty God he moved with his descendants into Egypt and resided
June 15, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER
183
there for some years. God changed the name of Jacob to Israel, and thereafter the descendants of Jacob were known as Israelites or Hebrews. (Gen. 32:28; 40:15) The Egyptians, who practiced the Devil religion, in time, under the rule of a harsh Pharaoh, made the Hebrews their slaves and greatly oppressed them. (Ex. 1:11-14) Pharaoh, the ruler and official representative of the Devil on earth, ordered all the male children of the Hebrews to be killed. Moses was born, and his parents hid him, and the babe was found by the daughter of Pharaoh and was reared in the royal house.—Ex. 2: 6-10; Heb. 11: 23-28; Acts 7 : 22.
21	Because of his zeal for Jehovah and his people, Moses, when he grew to manhood’s estate, was compelled to flee from Egypt in order to remain faithful to God, and he went and dwelt in the land of Midian. While in that land God selected Moses and sent him into Egypt as the deliverer of his people. The Hebrews had refused to yield to the Devil religion practiced in Egypt, and held to the promise made to their father Abraham, and therefore the Egyptians, under the direction of the Devil and his angels, continued to increase the burden and oppression upon the Israelites. Their burdens grew in severity, and God heard their cries, and he sent Moses down to Egypt to act as their leader and deliverer from the hand of the oppressor. It was while in Midian, and when Moses was selected, that God revealed himself to Moses as the “I AM”, that is, the self-existing One, not the one who was or will be, but the One who is, I AM, without beginning and without end. He revealed himself to Moses by his name JEHOVAH, which means his purpose toward those who love and serve him. (Ex. 6: 3) When Moses appeared before Pharaoh he told him that Jehovah God had commanded that Pharaoh should let the Hebrews leave Egypt, and Pharaoh replied: ‘‘Who is [Jehovah], that I should obey his voice?” (Ex. 5:2) This is cited as a further proof that Pharaoh was the official representative of the Devil and the enemy of Jehovah God. Then followed the afflictions upon Egypt, which God sent in the way of plagues, that the Egyptians might be fully warned of his power and his purpose; and time and again, because of these plagues, Pharaoh agreed to let the people go, but refused when the time came for them to go. Then God sent the last plague, that is, the plague of the slaying of the firstborn of Egypt. When the firstborn died, then Pharaoh permitted the Israelites to leave Egypt. Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt and by God's grace took them dry-shod over the Bed sea, and when Pharaoh’s army attempted to follow and to destroy the Hebrews they were drowned in the sea. (Ex. 14:21-31) Thus Jehovah God there made a prophetic picture foretelling his purpose in his own due time to completely overthrow the Devil and all of his forces. These historical truths arc here recited in order that we may get a proper view of the operation of the enemy against the people.
THE BIBLE
22	How may it be known for a certainty that what is recited in the foregoing is true and wholly trustworthy? The answer is, because those facts are recorded in the Bible, which is the Word of God, and which is the truth. (John 17:17) Did the people who lived on the earth prior to the time of Moses have the Bible? No; because Moses himself wrote the first five books of the Bible at the dictation of Jehovah God. Prior to that time God had communicated with his faithful men on earth by and through his angels. (Gen. 18:1-33; 19:1,15) God spoke to Moses and gave him instruction what he should do when he went into Egypt. God made a covenant with the Hebrews just before they left Egypt, and he used Moses as spokesman and mediator for that purpose. When the Hebrews or Israelites reached Mount Sinai after leaving Egypt, God there confirmed his covenant with them, giving to them his fundamental law. (Ex. 19:1-20) lie also delivered to them through Moses his divers statutes. God commanded Moses what to write, and he wrote as he was commanded, and thus came into existence the first five books of the Bible.
23	The record of Jehovah shows that God created man in his own image and likeness and that he made the earth for the habitation of man (Isa. 45:12, 18) and that he instructed the first man what he should do in order to maintain his integrity and proper standing before the Lord. The Devil rebelled, together with a huidc of wicked angels, which crowd of wicked ones assaulted mankind to turn them away from God and to destroy them. It is only reasonable that God would give to the obedient men who had withstood the Devil his own word, that they might be guided in the right way. This he did by his angels or messengers for a time, and then in his own due time he caused his faithful servants to make and record his message to mankind, which is called the Bible, and which God has preserved since for the benefit of those who desire to know what is right. Moses was wholly devoted to the Lord God, and God ehose him to write the books of the Bible that first appear. Thereafter other faithful servants of the Lord wrote portions of the Bible as God commanded them and dictated to them. One of those faithful servants wrote: ‘‘The spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.” (2 Sam. 23:2) Further testimony upon this point is: ‘Holy men of God [men devoted to God] spake as they were moved by the holy spirit.’ (2 Pct. 1:21) (For a more detailed consideration of how we got and have the Bible, see Creation, chapter 5.)
23	Some men say: ‘‘I do not believe there is an Almighty God. and hence do not believe the Bible.” Such men cannot see and understand the truth and arc wholly ignorant of man’s relationship to the Creator. The Devil has made men mentally blind, and this he has done lest the truth should shine into their minds. (2 Cor. 4:4) A sane and reasonable man, by merely
184
Tfle WATCH TOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
looking about him and observing the things that exist, must know that there is a great Creator, who made all things that arc visible, and that great Creator is revealed as the Almighty God. One who does not believe God could never understand the truth, but must remain in darkness. It is written: “But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.’’ (Heb. 11:6) Tne man who says there is no Creator is a fool. (Ps. 14:1) If a man puts himself in the fool class, that shows he is completely under the control of the Devil, who is his worst enemy. God does not force man to believe the truth. He puts the truth before man and permits man to exercise his own desire and to accept it or not. God is light, and he it is who ‘covers himself with light’. (Ps. 104:2) His light of truth is not given to those who serve the Devil; and that is shown by the fact that the wicked angels are restrained in darkness. “Light is sown for the righteous.’’ (Ps. 97:11) The man who delights himself in the law of God and strives to walk righteously is a man who walks in the light and is blessed.—Ps. 1:1, 2.
2:' The Bible was not written for fools, nor is this publication for the benefit of fools. The Bible was written and given to man for his aid and guidance, that such man of good will and purpose might be fuiiy advised as to the right way to go and that he might stay on the side of God and refuse to serve the Devil. “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.” (2 Tim. 3:16,17) This publication attempts to put the Bible in a simple way before the people who want to know the truth. It is not expected it will be appreciated or used by others. The Scriptures contain the Word of God, and the same is true and is the proper guide for the man who wants to know and to do what is right. “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Thy word is true from the beginning; and every one of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever. I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil. I hate and abhor lying; but thy law do I love.”—Ps. 119:105,160,162,163.
26	Jesus, the perfect One, testified concerning God’s Word as written in the Bible, and said: “Thy word is truth.” (John 17:17) Let no man conclude, however, that the mere possession of the Bible or an occasional reading over texts thereof is sufficient to enable him to be wise. Many persons say, “I have the Bible and know what it teaches”; and yet thev are entirely ignorant of what it contains, and of the meaning thereof. The Bible is the greatest storehouse of knowledge and wisdom. A man who desires to know the truth must study the Bible, and thus study to show himself approved of God, and not be ashamed to acknowledge to all that all good things proceed from the Almighty
God. (2 Tim. 2:15) A meek person is one who has an honest desire to learn; and if such a man applies himself in God’s appointed way he is certain to learn, as it is written: “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.”—Ps. 25: 9,10.
27	Many religious clergymen deny the Bible. And why? Because they are not men of God, but are on the Devil’s side. All higher critics arc in this class. Such men are wise in their own conceits and desire to shine in the eyes of other men and have the honor and praise which properly belongs to the Almighty God, and thus show themselves in the Devil’s company. They possess worldly wisdom, as it is written: “For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men ; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.”—1 Cor. 1:19,20,25.
28	The opinion of a man is of no value whatsoever if that opinion expressed is contrary to the Word of God. If you follow the teachings of men you are certain to remain in darkness. All men are by nature imperfect, and men grow in knowledge and wisdom only when they seek to know and to do the will of God; and for that reason the man who denies the Bible as the inspired Word of God is a foolish person, whether that man be a clergyman or a hodcarrier. To trust in the opinion of man is folly, and leads to certain destruction. “Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.” (Ps. 146:3) But to learn of and trust in and follow God’s direction leads to life and happiness. “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.” (Prov. 3:5,6) “And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” (John 17:3) If a man desires to know the truth, then he must prove all things by the Word of God, which is true, and must hold fast that which is in harmony with the Word of God. All things else are on the side of man’s enemy.—1 Thess. 5:21.
20	The Devil is the prince of darkness, and he puts forth his best endeavors to keep the people in ignorance of the truth and therefore to hold them in darkness. Why do religious leaders, the clergymen, try to keep the people from studying and understanding the Bible? Why have they instructed the people of their congregations to refuse to read anything that explains the Bible? Why do they tell the people to destroy books that present only the Bible view? The answer is, because they are the agents of and representatives of the Devil, whether they are aware of that fact or not, because he who is not for the Lord is against him.
June 15, 1937
Tfe WATCHTOWER.
185
(Matt. 12:30) For selfish reasons they desire to keep the people in ignorance so that the clergy may hold the people in subjection to themselves, receive the honor and plaudits of the people, and also the financial support that comes by reason of the influence they have over the people.
WHY THE DEVIL LIVES
80	In that long period of time from Eden to Mount Sinai, when the Israelites gathered there at God’s command, the Devil and his angels opposed God, and oppressed and afflicted all men who had tried to do right and serve God, and the Devil had succeeded in turning most of the human race away from God. Even Mises and Aaron found themselves in a jam because of the influence exercised over the people by Satan and his angels. The Devil had inflicted great punishment upon the Israelites when in Egypt, and now God had delivered them and they stood at the foot of Mount Sinai to receive the law from God’s hand, that they might be shielded from the Devil’s attack. While Moses was in the mountain receiving the law at the hands of God, the Devil overreached the Israelites and caused them to turn to idolatry or religious worship. Many have asked, and still ask, Why did not God kill the Devil then or before that time and spare men from his oppressive hand and his wicked deception! The Devil and his wicked angels continue to operate even to this very day, filling the earth with violence, and the people with dread. Why does the just and loving God permit the Devil to remain alive and carry on his wickedness?
81	The answer is given in brief at this point, and then the proof will follow, to wit: Because the Devil declared his ability to turn all men away from God, and he challenged God to put a man on the earth who would remain true and faithful to Jehovah when put to the test by the Devil. That challenge put at issue the righteous name and word of the Almighty God. The effect of the challenge was to declare that Jehovah God is not supreme, he is not all-powerful. God could have killed the Devil immediately. But suppose he had killed him and his wicked angels at the time of the rebellion or at the time of the flood, and before the Devil had been given a chance to oppress the Israelites, what would have been the result? It could have been easily said then that the Devil had not been given the opportunity to prove who is supreme. The question of supremacy would not have been settled in the minds of other creatures. If one creature could defeat God, then the foundation for faith and obedience in God would be for ever shaken. The Lord God would give the Devil a full opportunity to prove his challenge before settling the question for ever. Pharaoh was the Devil’s representative in Egypt and had defied Jehovah by raising the question: “Who is [Jehovah], that I should obey his voice ? ’ ’ The Devil himself had openly defied Jehovah God. Then God caused Moses
to write down in His sacred Book the reason why Jehovah God permitted the Devil and his angels to carry on their wickedness and why He has not yet destroyed them, and that declaration, which is an answer to the foregoing question, is this: “But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.” (Ex.'9:16, Leeser) The declaration applied to the Devil specifically and to his then representative on the earth, Pharaoh, the ruler of the chief world power.
88	Stated in common phrase, the Almighty God declared he would permit Satan and his associated devils to have all the rope possible and a free hand to put forth their very strenuous efforts against Him; that in his own due time he would show his adversaries his supreme power by destroying them and all their supporters and their works of wickedness; that before destroying them he would cause his own name and his supremacy to be declared throughout the earth, to the end that the enemies might have full warning and notice of their coming destruction, and that the people of good will toward God might be warned and flee from Satan, and take their stand on the side of Jehovah God, and find protection and security. That question at issue must be fully and completely determined for ever in favor of Jehovah God in order that his name and word be vindicated. Such is the reason why God permitted the wicked ones to continue in the earth, and he gives his sure word that in due time he will completely destroy all of them. Now the time has come for his name to be declared throughout all the earth, and for that reason these great truths are now being brought to the attention of the people, by the Lord’s grace.
88	But why has God permitted the Devil to oppress and afflict those persons on earth who have agreed to serve him? Why has he not safeguarded these faithful ones from all assaults of the Devil ? The answer is that if God should do so, then the Devil would not have a free hand in his effort to prove his wicked challenge; and, furthermore, those who have agreed to serve God could prove their integrity and faithfulness to God only by resisting the assaults of the Devil, and under all conditions of persecution continuing to maintain their integrity toward God. For that reason God has repeatedly stated to those who serve him his promise to preserve them and give them everlasting life and that he will destroy all the wicked: ‘ ‘ The Lord preserveth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy. ” (Ps. 145: 20) *‘Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.”— Rev. 2:10, A.R.V.
JOB AN ENSAMPLE
84	The Scriptures specifically name some men who were faithful and true to Jehovah and who withstood the Devil. These men named include Abel, Enoch,
186
*3Tie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Noah, Abraham, Job and Moses. God used faithful men in times of old as cnsamples or types of greater things to come to pass. Among those who were so used was Job. The place of habitation of the Devil and his angels was and is, according to the Scriptures, in “the land of Magog”. (Ezck. 38:2) In the days of Job Satan had not been barred from heaven, but had the privilege of appearing from time to time before the Almighty God. It appears that from time to time the faithful sons of God presented themselves before Jehovah: “Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the Lord.”—Job 2:1.
35	To be sure, Jehovah knew from whence Satan came, but he held communication with Satan manifestly for the purpose of making a picture foretelling how faithful men arc tried and tested by the Devil: “And the Lord said unto Satan, From whence comcst thou? And Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fcarcth God, and escheweth evil? and still he hoi doth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause. And Satan answered the Lord, and said, Skin for skin; yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life. So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils, from the sole of his foot unto his crown.”—Job 2:2-7.
36	Doubtless Satan taunted Jehovah by calling his attention to the fact that only a few men since the time of the flood had stood by Jehovah, that most of them had gone with the Devil, and if the Devil had a ehancc he could make them all forsake God. That was a defiant challenge to Jehovah God, and he accepted the challenge. Job was rich in earthly goods and surrounded by a happy family and enjoyed good health, peace and quietness. The Devil declared that if those things were taken away from him he would curse God to his face. In answer to that challenge Jehovah said: “Behold, he is in thy hand,” that is, ‘you are at liberty to make him curse me if you can.’ Thereafter Satan the Devil afflicted Job with a loathcsome disease, from which he suffered so.terribly that his own wife said to him: “Dost thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die.” (Job 2: 9) But Job stood firm amidst all this test and maintained his integrity toward God. Then the Devil further afflicted Job by causing certain pious-faced religionists to torment him. and through it all Job maintained his integrity, remained firm and true to the Most High. That which is recorded concerning the experiences of Job is an cnsainplc of
those who endure suffering for righteousness’ sake and who in the face of all manner of persecution and punishment maintain their integrity toward God. Just why God would permit the Devil to proceed with a free hand in opposition to him and in persecution of those vho serve God was not revealed at the time to anyone, not even to the angels. That God had a fixed time in which to make known the reason is ceitain, however, and exactly on time God will bring the entire issue to a climax to his own glory. What followed shows that he has permitted the Devil to tempt men for centuries, and particularly through the operation of religion, using it as an instrument to carry out his wicked challenge. The day of reckoning is at hand, when the issue must be settled, and therefore it is God’s due time to make known the reason to all those who arc diligent to have a proper understanding.
ISRAEL ORGANIZED
3T	The descendants of Jacob, now called Israel, were organized into a nation and put under the leadership of Moses. It was after the Israelites had been miraculously delivered from Egypt, and while they were encamped at the base of Mount Sinai, that God gave to that people his fundamental law and his statutes. Ten is a symbolic number denoting completeness, and what is generally called “the ten commandments” really means all or the complete statement of God's fundamental law to man. His “statutes” specifically define man’s duty to be performed in harmony with the fundamental law. The nation of Israel was in direct contrast to all other nations and peoples because Israel was the people chosen by the Lord God for himself, and by and through which people he would and did make prophetic pictures foreshadowing greater things to come to pass in the future. (1 Cor. 10:11) Note here how God gave to that people the fundamental law, which fundamental law applies to all people who undertake to do the will of God: “In the thh-d month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai. For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped before the mount. And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel: Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto myself. Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people; for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel. And Moses came, and called for the elders of the people, and laid before their faces all these words which the Lord commanded
June 15, 1937
£Hle WATCHTOWER.
187
him. And all the people answered together,, and said, All that the Lord hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the words of the people unto the Lord.”— Ex. 19:1-8.
38 Jehovah God communicated to Moses his law, which was written upon tables of stone: “And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.” (Ex. 31:18) The unlimited power of the Almighty God enables him to write upon stone as well as upon the sand. Every person who believes that the Almighty God exists, and that he is the rewarder of them that serve him, can really sec how God made provision for the Bible to be written and kept securely through all the centuries. No one has ever been able to destroy the Bible, although repeated attempts have been made to do so. It is certain that the Devil has made every possible effort to destroy the Bible, and in modern times particularly he has used religionists, who are called “higher critics”, to discredit the Bible and cause the people to refuse to believe it.
REASON FOR THE LAW
88 If every creature were perfect and obedient to Jehovah God there would be no need for a written law prescribing what is right and commanding the people to refrain from what is wrong. Perfect creatures are moved by unselfishness to do that which is right. The human race was imperfect from the time of the expulsion of Adam from Eden, and by the time the Israelites were delivered from Egypt mankind was much depraved because of his fall and the continued influence exercised upon man by Satan. Laws are necessary for imperfect men to have as a sure guide, that they may go the right way. The laws are made for just such, as it is written: “Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the -lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers.” —1 Tim. 1: 9.
40 Love, which is the perfect expression of unselfishness, is the complete fulfillment of the law, therefore making the enforcement of law unnecessary. (Rom. 13:10) The very essence of the law is written in the heart of every creature that is in full harmony with God and delights to do his will. At the time the Israelites were assembled at Mount Sinai the Devil had almost all of the people on earth in his service, and therefore all were in the way of destruction. The Israelites God would safeguard from that destructive influence. The law which God gave to the Israelites was not for God’s benefit, but entirely for the benefit of man. If a man walks with the Devil he is certain to die, but if he maintains his integrity toward God he will live. Therefore God gave his law through Moses to the Israelites and which applies to all who want to
do right, and the first in order and first in importance of his commandments or fundamental law is this, to wit: “And God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments. ’ ’—Ex. 20:1-6.
11 The law of God never changes, because God never changes. (Mal. 3:6) His law points out the way to everlasting life. No creature will ever be given life everlasting who willfully, that is, intentionally, violates God’s law. If a man chooses another for his god, Jehovah will not grant to that man life. For a man to violate the fundamental law of God means that that man puts himself on the side of the Devil and therefore leads him to destruction. For the benefit of man, then, God provided in his law that man should have no other god before him, because God alone is the source of life. Religion has been and is the most effective means to induce the violation of God’s law.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
If 1. Why is it now so important that Jehovah’s witnesses fully infoi m themselves concerning the origin, practice and effects of religion, and that the wickedness of religion be brought clearly before the minds of the people? Account, then, for the persecution of those who publish these truths.
If 2. What was the purpose of the flood? The outcome thereof? Explain 2 Poter 3: 5, 6.
If 3. Explain whether ‘the world that is now’ will abide for ever, and why.
If 4. What is a covenant? For what did Jehovah provide in his covenant concerning the sanctity of life?
If 5, 6. Describe how the Devil brought about the violation of the everlasting covenant, and established the practice of religion, after the flood.
IF 7. How and why have religion, politics and commerce come to be so closely related?
If 8, 9. Account for the building of the tower of Babel. Point out the fitness of the name Babel.
If 10-12. Identify Babylon. Show that “the love of money’’ has been “the root of all evil’’.
If 13. How do tlie facts prove that Babylon ‘has made all the nations drunk with the wine of her foinication’?
IF 14,15. Describe the two great organizations now in existence, and the weapons and methods employed by each in the warfare now in progress.
If 16-18. What docs the divine record show as to faithful witnesses for Jehovah up to the time of Abraham? How did Jehovah deal with Abraham? What was the purpose therein?
If 19-21. Briefly (a) describe Egypt as a nation in the days of Abraham, (b) Account for the Israelites’ being in Egypt in the davs of Pharaoh, and for the oppression and affliction they experienced there, (c) Descnbe the deliverance of the Israelites from the hand of their oppressor, (d) Point out the prophetic significance of the things here mentioned, and the purposo of the record thereof.
U 22. How may we know that what is recited in the foregoing is true and wholly trustworthy?
188
«3Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y-.
t 23. Briefly tell how we got and have the Bible.
H 24. Explain why some persons do, not believe there is an Almighty Goa, and hence do not believe the Bible.
U 25. According to the psalmist, the apostle, and Jesus, what is the origin and purpose of the Scriptures, the Bible! How has Jehovah provided that all who want to know and to do what is right may now understand his will and purposes!
K 26. To whom, and on what condition, is an understanding of God’s Word made available!
K 27. With scriptures, explain, why many clergymen deny the Bible.
f 28. Why is it not safe to follow the teachings of men! How, then, may one know the truth!
K 29. Why do religious leaders try to keep the people from studying and understanding the Bible!
f 30. Account for the continued opposition and persecution experienced by all men, from Eden until now, who have triad to serve God.
if 31, 32. Explain why God permits the Devil to remain alive and carry on his wickedness. Why are these great- truths now being brought to the attention of the people!
H 33. Why has God permitted the Devil to oppress and afflict
those on earth who have agreed to serve him, and not safeguarded these faithful ones from all assaults of the Devil! f 34<G. Why do the Scriptures specifically name some of the
men who were faithfid and true to Jehovah and withstood the Devil, and give record concerning them! Relate the experiences of Job, according to the divine record, as providing instruction and example for those who would maintain their integrity toward God. Why has God provided for an understanding thereof at the present time!
T 37. What was the law given by Jehovah to the Israelites at Sinai! What is meant by the expression “the ten commandments”! Distinguish between God’s fundamental law and his “statutes”. Relate how God gave the Israelites the fundamental law. Why did he give his law to the nation of Israel only, and especially deal with that nation!
T 38. Account (a) for the repeated attempts to destroy the Bible, and lor the efforts to discredit it. (b) For its being preserved through all the centuries.
H 39-41. With scriptures, explain the reason for the law. What is the “first and great commandment” of the law, and why! In the light of this commandment, and of facts of record and of present affairs, what can now be clearly seen to have been the origin and purpose of religion and the practice thereof!
VIS
JEHOVAH GOD is.the everlasting King, and therefore the Ruler without end. “ [Jehovah] is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King: at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.” (Jer. 10:.10) He is the Eternal God of order and therefore has had an organization for ever, which, for want of a better term, we call his universal organization. From his Word he makes it clear that his purpose is to have an organization “cut out without hands” (or taken) from his organization universal, and then made the capital over his entire organization. (Dan. 2:34) That capital organization is otherwise designated in his Word the ‘reigning’ or ‘royal’ house.
Satan, the opposer of Jehovah, has builded his own house or organization and made himself the head thereof, and which organization is-desperately wicked. -It consists of both invisible and visible parts, hence called ‘heaven and earth’. Satan and his wicked angels constitute the invisible part, while the nations of the earth ruled by wicked men constitute the visible part of his organization. Against Satan’s entire organization Jehovah will express his wrath, and no part of that wicked organization shall be able to abide the Almighty’s wrath, as stated by his prophet Jeremiah. Jehovah did not hinder Satan in the building of his wicked organization, but for many centuries he has permitted Satan and his organization to remain in existence, and until God’s due time to make manifest-his own supreme power and to make for himself an everlasting name.—Ex. 9:16, Leeser.
In Jehovah’s due time Satan’s folly will be made to appear to all creation. Soon Jehovah will use his mighty “Stone” that he has ‘cut out of his mountain (universal organization) without hands’ to break in pieces Satan’s organization and to drive it away as chaff is driven before the wind. (Dan. 2:45) That
ION
mighty Stone of Jehovah is the Chief Corner Stone of Zion, to wit, Christ Jesus. Jehovah having permitted Satan to persecute to the limit his mighty “Stone”, then God exalted him and gave him a name above every name and has commanded that all creation shall bow-before him.—Phil. 2: 9-11.
Jehovah builds his royal house for his own habitation, or meeting place between himself and his obedient creatures. The members of that royal house are limited in number, and every one must be an overeomer. Christ Jesus, the Head of that royal house, overcame the enemy, and every member thereof must do likewise. ‘ ‘ In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer: I have overcome the world.” (John 16: 33) “Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God; and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God; and I will write upon him my new name. ’ ’—Rev. 3:12.
The enemy and his organization will make a -last and desperate stand against -the organization of Jehovah, and will fail. “These shall war against the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they also shall overcome that are with him, called and chosen and faithful.” (Rev. 17:14, R.V.) It is to be expected that this, the most important part of God’s great organization, would be given much attention in his Word; and so it is. Long ago Jehovah caused many pictures and types concerning it to be made, and all these things were written down for the aid and comfort of the remnant now on the earth.
In making the pictures pointing to his royal house the nation of Israel was used by Jehovah, and he also used Nebuchadnezzar as an instrument to destroy that typical nation because of its falling away from the
June 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
189
covenant with God and joinin" the forces of the enemy. It was in the year 617 B.C. that God permitted Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, to carry away many Jews into captivity, and among them was his prophet Ezekiel. Five years thereafter, to wit, in 612 B.C., Jehovah gave Ezekiel a vision of His own great organization and caused him to begin a prophecy concerning the same. Six years later, or, to wit, 606 B.C., Jerusalem was broken up and the temple which Solomon had built was burned. Thereafter, to wit, in the year 592 B.C., Ezekiel was given a vision and caused to write down the prophecy concerning the true temple or royal house of Jehovah. The prophet Ezekiel was then about fifty years of age and in captivity with other Jews in Babylon. It was about fifty-six years later, or, to wit, 536 B.C., that the work of rebuilding the temple was begun by Zerubbabel. That work was delayed for sixteen years, and finally v,as completed about 515 B.C. Approximately seventy-seven years elapsed from the date of Ezekiel’s vision and prophecy concerning the temple until the building of the temple at Jerusalem by Zerubbabel was completed, and which temple was later destroyed. The prophecy of Ezekiel concerning the temple therefore deals with that which is of far greater importance than any building ever erected by human power.
The fortieth chapter of Ezekiel’s prophecy begins with those words: “In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day the hand of the Lord was upon me, and brought me thither.’’ Only one prophecy was delivered by Ezekiel after the prophecy dealing with the royal house. That later prophecy is recorded in Ezekiel 29 : 17 and was. in the twentyseventh year of the captivity, and which later prophecy disclosed what Jehovah, by his great Executive Officer, will.do to Egypt, which pictures Satan’s organization.
Jehovah had caused his prophet Malachi to foretell a work to be done by his Messenger, Christ Jesus, and which is called ‘preparing the way before the Lord’, and that then straightway that Messenger, Christ Jesus, would come to his temple. (Mal. 3:1) Now it appears from the Scriptures, and supported by the facts as set forth in chapter eleven of Vindication, Book Three, that Christ Jesus, the Messenger of Jehovah, came to his temple in the year 1918 but that the true followers of Christ Jesus on earth did not discern that fact until the year 1922. It was then and thereafter that the true people of God learned that Christ Jesus had come to his temple for the purpose of judgment and to do a purifying work which would cleanse and purify Jehovah’s sanctuary class. This cleansing work must be done, and the truth of and concerning the Lord’s coming be made clear to them, before the true sons of Levi could olTer an offering of righteousness before the Lord. (Mal. 3:2,3) It therefore appears that the cleansing work of the “sons of Levi”
class was not done until 1922. Hence that year 1922 was the earliest possible date that the class whom Ezekiel foreshadowed could begin to perceive the fulfillment of Ezekiel’s vision of the temple. Although an effort had been made in 1917 to give an explanation of the temple that Ezekiel saw, it was then impossible for any creature on earth to understand it.
The vision was given to Ezekiel in the beginning of the year, which was the month of Nisan, the beginning of the year according to God’s commandment. (Ex. 12:2) Mark that it was on the tenth day of the month, the very day for the selecting of the paschal lamb. (Ex. 12:3) This was the same day of the year on which Jesus rode into Jerusalem and was offered as King to the Jews, the which was the laying of THE STONE in miniature, which Stone, the King, was rejected by the Israelites. (Matt. 21: 42) It was also the very day of the year when Jesus went into the temple at Jerusalem and cleared out the mercantile clement and said to them that used the house of the Lord for personal gain: “Take these things hence; make not my Father’s house an house of merchandise.” (John 2:16) “And [he] said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.”—Matt. 21:13.
Jerusalem foreshadowed “Christendom”, which was smitten because of the “war in heaven”, which began in 1914. It was fourteen years after the beginning of that war, to wit, 1928, when Jehovah gave his covenant people on earth the first understanding of the meaning of his organization, as pictured in the first chapter of Ezekiel’s prophecy, and which truth was first declared at the Detroit convention of Jehovah’s witnesses in 1928. (See The Watchtower, 1928, page 263.) The war, by which “Christendom” was smitten, ended about 1918, and fourteen years thereafter, to wit, in 1932, God permitted the publication of the meaning of Ezekiel’s vision concerning the temple. The facts show that it was fourteen years after the destruction of Jerusalem before Ezekiel got his temple vision about which he prophesied. God’s people, whom Ezekiel foreshadowed, therefore could not expect to get a full understanding until God’s due time, and they could not expect to get an understanding of all of his truth at one time. When that understanding is given to them they know that it comes from the Lord, and not from man. Ezekiel did not choose his particular day to prophesy. He was in the hand of the Lord, who arranged the matter and who put his spirit upon Ezekiel. Likewise the remnant do not choose the time to understand God’s Word and to proclaim it. “This is the day which the Lord hath made.” (Ps. 118:24) This is the day chosen by the Lord in which “young men . . . see visions” and discern the fulfillment of this grand vision which was given to Ezekiel. The power of the Lord is upon his “faithful servant” class, and for this reason they are permitted to understand.
Jehovah used Ezekiel to declare the prophecy which
190
WATC HT0WER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
is now in course of fulfillment in the last days. What Ezekiel saw was only a vision, and hence was not a type, but a prophecy; therefore we need not look here for type and antitype, but look for a prophecy and the fulfillment thereof. “In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and set me [down] upon a very high mountain, by which was as [ (R-V.) whereon was as it were] the frame of a city on the south.’’ (Ezek. 40:2) At that time Ezekiel was in captivity, and the land of Israel was desolate, and it continued so until the end of the seventy-year period. What Ezekiel saw was “the land that is brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many people’’. (Ezek. 38: 8) The vision had by Ezekiel shows him ‘set down in the land ’; and this was a prophecy that in God’s due time his devoted people would be restored from Babylon (Satan’s organization) and brought into Zion (God’s organization) as a delivered people, and that they would thereafter worship and serve God as a separate and peculiar people.
Ezekiel states that he beheld himself set down upon a very high mountain. That was symbolic of Mount Zion, “the mountain of the Lord’s house’’ (Isa. 2:2,3), that is to say, God’s organization. It is the place where the hundred and forty-four thousand take up their position with Christ Jesus. (Rev. 14:1) It was like the vision had by John, who from the top of a “great and high mountain’’ witnessed the descending of the great and holy Jerusalem. (Rev. 21: 9,10) Upon the top of this mountain is God's temple or royal house built. “This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain, the whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.' ’—Ezek. 43:12.
In vision Ezekiel beheld the temple as in “the holy portion of the land” on the north, and the city was “on the south”. (Ezek. 45:1-6; 48:15-30) The name of the city is Jchovah-Shammah. Both the city and the temple are situated upon the mountain. The vision shows that it could not refer to a literal mountain in Palestine, and therefore that the prophecy would not be literally fulfilled in the land of Palestine. The Scriptures do not warrant the conclusion that the literal temple, of which Ezekiel had a vision, will ever be built in the land of Palestine. The vision, being a prophecy, foretells the greater temple and city built by divine power.
Ezekiel describes his position as ‘on a very high mountain’ where the hand of Jehovah had brought him. During the World War Jehovah preserved his faithful ones from the violence of Satan’s organization, and afterwards these were brought into his organization and given much to do. That was a partial vindication of his name and was foreshadowed by the bringing of Ezekiel to the very high mountain in the vision which he had. God’s promise is to bring the remnant through the battle at Armageddon and to preserve them, which will be a further vindication of his name.
From his vantage point on the mountain Ezekiel beholds a man. “And he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate [of the temple].” (Ezek. 40: 3) The man had the appearance of copper (mistranslated in the text “brass”). Copper is one of the noble metals mentioned in the Scriptures. The appearance of this man as of copper would indicate that he was not a mere human creature, but was one of God’s heavenly deputies sent to perform some important duty. If the creature that Ezekiel saw had been a mere human it would not have been necessary to say that he had the appearance of copper. The metallic appearance is designed to show superiority to human creatures. In the vision that John was given on the isle of Patmos he describes Jesus Christ as a man; “and his feet like unto fine brass [copper], as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters. ’ ’—Rev. 1:15.
The man whom Ezekiel saw had a “line of flax” in his hand, and also “a measuring reed”. Flax (that is, linen) denotes righteousness and symbolically says that the man was there to measure in righteousness. He was equipped to measure volume or depth, and perpendicularity and straightness, as well as height and length. The man was standing at the gate with the measuring equipment; which symbolically says that ‘judgment is about to begin at the house of God’.
John, whom the angel of the Lord caused to write down The Revelation, corresponds to Ezekiel, and he wrote: “And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein.” (Rev. 11:1) The Lord had caused the apostle to write: “Judgment must begin at the house of God.” (1 Pet. 4:17) It is also written: “Judgment also will I lay to the line.” (Isa. 28:17) The flax line and the reed symbolize the revealed purposes of Jehovah, that is to say, the more accurate understanding of them whereby God’s covenant people may measure themselves individually. They do not measure themselves by themselves, but the measuring must be done according to the standard of the Lord, and these measuring instruments are in the hand of the heavensent Messenger. “For we dare not make ourselves of the number, or compare ourselves with some that commend themselves: but they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise.”—2 Cor. 10:12.
The man whom Ezekiel saw was standing at the entrance of Jehovah’s building. His position there would be an invitation to Ezekiel to approach and to enter the temple, which, to be sure, must be done according to the divine rules. The class whom Ezekiel foreshadowed must be brought into the holy structure of God in his due time.
LETTERS
PHONOGRAPH WORK
Dear Brethren:
Experience bears out the effectiveness of the phonograph in the witness work. Also, it demonstrates that much needs to be done in working out a smoother introduction of the phonograph to gain admittance to more of the homes called upon.
Unable to place literature to amount to anything with the poverty-stricken people of a little fishing settlement, the phonograph used in the open, yards and on the street, attracted a good crowd who got some of the message in that manner.
In making a delivery of an -Italian book to a man who did not speak or undeistand English, his English-speaking family were gathered from all pints of the house by running the phonograph lectures. These other persons would not have been reached on that visit without the phonograph message.
One Sunday over five hours were well spent in two low-class rooming houses of fifteen rooms each. Though many of the rooms were not occupied at the time, the phonograph was used eleven times, twenty-seven persons listening, and in addition to the literature placed that day by aid of the phonograph, several phonograph meetings were arranged for back-call, and several books and a Bible delivered. The phonograph was introduced by means of the radio slip, the questions gaining the interest of the people; and the slip also explains the “special service” of the lectures in their homes. The testimony card was used, generally following the lecture in introducing the literature. It is quite certain that these people would not all have been reached without the phonograph. The placements of literature were not unusually large, but what was done was primarily because of the phonograph; and what is more impoitant, the kingdom message was placed before these people clearly. They had not been reached before, though that territory is “gone over” very frequently. Many of them are hard and tough and would not come to the door and read a card.
Another instance: A man asked for the publisher to return later with Riches, as he had ‘ ‘ no money ’ ’ at the first call. When the deliveiy was made he still could not “buy anything”, but a record was run for him and Ins wife, a Bible discussion was started, with several recoids used, and he not only took Riches, but ordered a Bible and Prepaiation for later delivery. Another man said, “Before you start that record, let me tell you I have no money and cannot take a thing.” Dunng the running of “Kingdom” he said, “Docs that book tell about what he is saying?” And after the little lecture was done he took Riches, making the contribution.
Any number of instances can be mentioned. It seems, however, that even more important than the results manifested in placements of literature and people accepting the truth, is the fact that the phonograph is such an effective instrument in placing the kingdom message before the people in a way they can understand it; which, after all, is our job.
PHONOGRAPH THE MOST EFFECTIVE WEAPON
Dear Brethren:
Received in good condition the eighteen (18) dises, for which 1 thank Jehovah; for the phonograph is proving for one who is deaf a wonderful aid to witnessing. On Thursday (3-11-37) the Queens unit loaned the disc (No. 101-102) to mo. The following day I went into a shoe store. Lady there informed me that she had read the Riches book. I offered to play a recoid. She consented, and I ran “Value of Knowledge”. She listened very attentively and then turned the record over for me to run “Riches”. As a result of this I placed the full set of fifteen (15) bound books. In placing the set, though, I took a pair of shoes for the set. A few weeks ago I met a colored lady on a Sunday; I ran two records. I found she had five books. A week later I delivered four more bound books, and then ran four records. Tonight I delivered the balance of the set (seven bound books). She now lias all sixteen books. I ran the new recoids on my third trip there, and she enjoyed every one she has heard. Thinks they are fine. I seo now (after all the wonderful experiences 1 am having) that I made a big mistake in not witnessing with the phonograph sooner. A number of the big placements I have made of late (and some of the smaller placements also) I never would have made had it not been for the phonograph. The phonograph is certainly proving the most
effective weapon ag-.inst Satan and his organization. One reason why 1 had hesi.ated to use the phonograph was my deafness; thought too many would be asking me if I was really deaf, ete. But, instead, I have very little questioning along that line; Jehovah has taken care of that. Another thing I am thankful for is the testimony cards in so many different languages.. I always carry all the different cards, and as I meet one of a foreign language I question him and then hand him that card in Ins own language. Result of this has been speedier placements and a better understanding. Now I am never without the phonograph or all testimony cards in all languages. This makes it more effective to 'preach to all nations'.
Yours rejoicing in kingdom service,
II.	L. Huck, Pioneer.
PLEASED TO HEAR BY THE PHONOGRAPH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We all were very much pleased when informed that you had consented to come to Oakland for the convention and for us; and glad to see you again. 1 hope that you are well in health, also rested from the joyful sen ice that you gave each day of the convention for our bcnci t.
Annageddon seems to be nearer each day. Everything in the world is out of the normal condition that we have depended upon, especially in our own land, of course.
Today a sister and I found three homes where they were all well pleased to hear ‘‘ The Great Multitude ’ ’ by the phonograph. One lady said she believed the Bible the same way, about the great multitude.
We need you, Brother Rutheiford, because you are strong in faith; and there is great trouble upon the people. God has graciously promised to piotect all who are faithfully keeping His commandments, and obedient in the service for the people, that they may have life according to Jehovah God’s will.
1	must thank you for so much consolation in reading from your pen, and for your kindness many times much appreciated, when there seemed no helper near. I must tell you also that the Prophecy book has been a joyful study to me, because written, it seems, by inspiration, and because so true; like the Sciiptures, full of gentle dignity inward.
When I found in the Jehovah book, Subject Index, “Covenant for the Kingdom,” I knew that at last I could find just how Jehovah is dealing with us, if we are to bo of the kingdom class. Of course there are some who arc perfect in love for Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. They arc, according to the Scriptures, those who love the brethren, as you know perfectly, found written in many books and The Watchtower.
A J.w. in kingdom service,
Ruth E. Patterson.
BLESSINGS OF JEHOVAH THROUGH THE PHONOGRAPH
My dear Brother Rutherford:
I just can’t help taking a few minutes of your time to relate to you one of the many marvelous experiences with the new provision which the Lord has provided to us: the phonograph.
A lady called upon me at the place where I was working and asked me, “Are you the gentleman that preaches the gospel with a phonograph?” I presume that she had heard of the progress of this startling news through the phonograph.
Arrangements were made to have the phonograph at her home, and having heard a record, she stated, “I received more information from this record, which is only four minutes and a half, than from my husband, who has been a minister for many years.”
Furthermore, she invited me to have a meeting in their church. She also stated that she would give an early notice to the congregation so all would be there to attend this ‘good meeting’.
My experiences, by the Lord’s grace, are so numerous that I cannot write of them all. Not only do the people of good will receive blessings from Jehovah through the phonograph, but it alsc gives me strength, courage and power to help press the battle to the gate. As I see, this is the best method to ‘bruise the head of the serpent’.
Here are some of the results of my latest meetings: In two back calls there was placed a total sum of thirty-five books and
192
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
several booklets, together with a new subscription for The Golden Age. On another occasion, when I played the record entitled “Jehovah’s Organization’’ and “Satan’s Organization’’, I easily placed the three books Vindication and the book ditches.
Some of the newly interested have carried the Protection booklet to the place of their employment and have called it to the attention of their fellow workers. In quite a few cases thev have arranged among themselves a phonograph meeting anil have called me at some special time when they could gather as many to attend as possible.
I wish every faithful brother on earth would carry in his hands from house to house this marvelous instrument.
lilay the Lord bless you continually to the end.
Your fellow servant in the kingdom of Jehovah,
Nick Laves, Pennsylvania.
LORD’S BLESSING ON USE OF SOUND CAR
My dear Brother Rutherford:
I cannot refrain from telling you about the manifest blessing the Lord is giving us with the use of our sound equipment. As you know, we are now able to make our onn vernacular records. I applied to the police for permission to use the sound car in some of the city streets of the native sections of Bombay, Permission was granted, but a C.I.D. official was sent to see what wo were up to. This morning was the second of the senes of meetings, and when the advertised time was up this C.I.D. official came up to me and asked if I minded staying a little over the time, as the people wanted to hear another lecture in Concani. lie also assisted us in suggesting fresh pitches for future meetings.
We gave lectures in Hindi, Marathi, Concani and English and hnd an audience estimated at at least 500 people dunng two hours’ work. Thiee native brethren worked the surrounding houses and placed a substantial amount of literature. Having the lectures in the Indian vernaculars is proving a wonderful help in giving the witness. We are greatly encouraged.
With love and best wishes, I remain
Your brother and ceivant in the Lord,
F. E. Skinner, Indi.:.
GREATEST PRIVILEGE TO SERVE CREATOR
Dear Brother Rutherford:
This is to express my sincere appreciation for all your beautiful and wonderful books, including the Watchtower and Gold/ n Age magazines, and I am sure you will accept it. To be in the Tiuth is a blessing in itself, and it is a creature’s greatest pnv-ilege to serve his or her Creator. I have not read all the books; buc the on’s I have read I’ve thoioughly enjoyed, particularly Riches, which I am reading now. Your books arc straight to tho point, and exclude all sly ‘ ‘ twists ’ ’ and confusion; and besides, they are based exclusively on the Holy Bible, the invaluable Word of God.
I feel very sad to know how Jehovah’s witnesses suffer innocently, and I am sure these persecutors, paiticularly the Hierarchy-, shall pay bitterly-, with her filends Satan, Hitler, Mussolini and the company of “clever” politicians. In India the Kingdom vvoik is poor; but I am suie we could put up a remarkable record if only we had a few more witnesses, particularly those who know the vernacular. I know sufficient Hindustani, as the “lingua franca” of India is called; and I will do my best, I promise, to the effect of proclaiming the Truth or Kingdom message to the ignorant people here.
I am eighteen years old, and thank God I’ve found the Truth when young.
Yours, for ever, faithfully in Jehovah and Christ,
L. K. Scott, India.
WORK OF THE KINGDOM
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We desire to take this opportunity to express our appreciation of your services in behalf of your brethren; to expiess our thankfulness for the spiritual food supplied by The Watchtower and other publications and to express our sincere desire to carry on in our lespective districts in the work of the kingdom.
As we carry out instructions to “rise against her in battle” we pray the Lord’s blessing upon you as you continue to supply instructions and encouragement to your brethren.
With Christian love, we are
Your brethren in assembly at
Vancouver, British Columbia.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
A. II. MACMILLAN
T. E. BANKS
Birmingham, Ala.	....July 1,2 	“	3	Monticello, Ga		...July	17
Tuscaloosa, Ala. .		Greenwood, b. C. .		“	18
Pennington, Ala. ..		“	4, 5	(Zopes, S. C		.... “	20
Montgomery, Ala.		“	7	(’luulestovvn, S. C. . Sav annali, Ga	 Midville, Ga			“	21
Auburn, Ala 			“	8, 9			“	22, 23
(’amp Hill, Ala			“	10			“	24, 25
Five Points, Ala. .		“ 11	Uvalda, Ga			“	27
Atlanta. Ga			“ 13,14	Taylors Creek, Ga.	. . ■	28
Athens, Ga			“	15	Brunswick. Ga			29
Greshainville, Ga.		“	16	Jacksonville, Fla.	...."	30, 31
	R. H.	BARBER		
Binghamton, N. Y.	....July 11	Wilkes-Barre, Pa,	.. July	20, 21
On< oiita. N. V			“	12	Williamsport, Pa. .	... “	22
Binghamton, N. Y.	.... “	13	Elmira, N \		.	23
Cooks Falls, N. Y.		“	14	Ithaca, N. Y			'■	21
Great Bond, Pa			“	16	Ludlow wile, N.Y. .		2.»
Scranton, Pa			“	18	Cortland, N. Y	 Syracuse, N. Y		...."	26
Pittston, I’a			“	19		..Aug.	1
				
	J. C.	BOOTH		
Marfa, Tex		....July	7 	“	8	Colorado, Tex		...July	21
Fori Davis, Tex. ..		Snyder, Tex		u	22
\\ ink, Tex			“	9	Aspermont, Tex. ..		••	23
Midland, Tex			“ 10,11	Rochester, Tex	 Lamesa, Tex			"	21
Big Spring, Tex. ...		“	13		.. . ••	25. 26
San Angelo, Tex. .		“ 14,15	Carlsbad, N. Mex. .	.. ”	2S
Mertzon, Tex			"	16	Tatum, N. Mex. ...	..."	29
Robert Lee, Tex. ..		“	17	Levelland. Tex	 Loienzo, Tex		.... “	30
Sweetwater, Tex. ..		“ 18,19				31
	M. L.	HERR		
Elizabethtown, Ky Louisville, Ky		..July 2,3	Lovall, Ky		. Job ...	20
		“	4-7	Smithboro, Ky			21
Frankfort, Ky		.. .. “	9	McRoberts, Ky			“	22
I’m Ik, Ky			“	10	Dunham, Ky	 Richardson, Kj. ...		”	23
J/4*xlngton, Ky. .	. “ 11,12		...."	21
Kings Mountain, I.	y. “ 14,15	Manba, Ky		...."	25
Iliilaink, Ky			"	16	Craney, Ky		... . ••	27
Public, Ky			“	17	Carter, Ky	 Ashland. Ky			'•	28
Cubage, Ky				“	18			"	29,30
Guthrie, Okla........July
Pei kins, Okln........"
Stillwater, Okla......“
Drumright. Okla.......“
Pawnee. Okla ..........“
Ponca City, Okla.......“
Shidler, Okla..........“
Wheeling, W. Va......June 2(1,	27
Steubenville, Ohio .....“	29,	30
Fast Liverpool,	Ohio	July	1,2
Lisbon, Ohio ..........."	3, 4
Youngstown, Ohio .......“	5,6
Niles, Ohio ............“	8, 9
Warren, Ohio ...........“	10,11
Jefferson, Ohio .....July 13, 14
Ashtabula. Ohio ........“	15, 16
Geneva, Ohio ...........“	17
Cleve'nnd. Ohio ........“	18-25
Lorem, Ohio ............“	27, 28
Aki on, Ohio ...........“	29,30
Alliance, Ohio ....July 31, Aug. 1
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Bradenton, Fla ......July	2,3
St. Petersbuig, Fla. ... “	4,5
Tampa, Fla.............“	7, 8
Lakeland. Fla..........“	9,10
Gainesville. Fla.......“	11
Wellborn, Fla..........“	13
Tallahassee. Fla.......“	14
Havana, Fla............“	15
-Marianna, Fla.........“	16
Mascom, Fla............“	17
Ponce de Leon, Fla. July IS De Funmk Sp'gs, Fla. “	20
Pensacola, Fla.........“	21
Silverhill, Ala.........“	22, 23
Mobile. Ala.............“	24, 25
Jay, Fla................“	27
Flomaton, Ala..........“	28
Andalusia, Ala........." 29,30
Opp, Ala..........July 31, Aug. 1
Geneva, Ala...........Aug.	3
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Twin Falls, Idaho ...July 3-5
Ogden, Utah ..........“	7,8
Salt Lake City, Utah.."	9,10
Kingman, Anz...........“	12,13
Prescott, Aiiz.........“	14.15
Phoenix, Anz...........“	17-19
Globe, Ariz ...........July	20, 21
Tucson, Ariz............."	22, 23
Yuma, Ariz. .............“	25,26
Porterville, Calif......“	28,29
Tulare, Calif........... “	30. 31
Fresno, Calif......-...Aug.	1, 2
A. S. WRIGHT
3-5
7, 8
9, 10
11, 12
14
15, 16
17
Tulsa, Okla......
Nowata, Okla. .. Peggs, Okla......
Muskogee, Okla. Stillwell, Okla. Heavener, Okla
Summerlield, Ok
.....July 18-21
......“	23
......“ 24, 25
......“ 27-29
.. . . "	30
July 31, Aug. 1
la. ..Aug. 3
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Eutherfobd President____W. E. Van Ambuboh Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in. glory, clothed, with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was.1 sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men 'are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the ■rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful ■ followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foueion, 11.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and south Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made, to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian ...... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia South African ........Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of. address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1S19.
“MOUNT PERAZIM”
The next testimony period, named “Mount Perazim”, will occupy the dates August 7 to 15 inclusive. This falls due right in the midst of the special summer campaign; henee there will be no change in the special offers of literature to be exhibited during this testimony period, only that the kingdom publishers will arrange their affairs to devote as much time as possible during said period to place these special offers with the people. See the announcement elsewhere under “Summer Campaign’’, and also consult forthcoming issues of the Informant for fuller information.
SUMMER CAMPAIGN
The Lord’s storehouse is large and bursting with abundance. Appropriately a large and most attractive offer will feature the summer activities and efforts of Jehovah’s publishers. Such will consist of six bound books, on a contribution of $1.00, or, better still, six bound books together with seven booklets, on a $1.25 contribution. The Informant will go into more detail regarding this campaign and the Society’s provision therefor. Let the publishers order now the extra literature needed in addition to what stocks they now have on hand for this campaign, which begins July 1 and continues to September 12 inclusive.
PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and covered with brown cloth and having rounded corners. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces. With the three phonograph discs which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounees. The. volume of sound is strong, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonograph is timed properly, at 78 r.pjn., and should be checked from time to time. This model, including three discs, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittance should accompany orders. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
CONVENTIONS
The Watchtower joyfully announces the following conventions for Jehovah’s witnesses and companions: Paris, France, August 21-23 inclusive, which will serve for Great Britain and Continental Europe; Columbus, Ohio, September 15 20 inclusive, which will serve the United States, Canada, and others, who may be able to attend.
The president of the Society expects to be present at both conventions. Make your arrangements for vacations during those periods. Let all of his people ask Jehovah to make these conventions a great witness to the honor of His name.
More information in later issues of The Watchtower.
tfe WO TOWER.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
Vol. LVHI	July 1, 1937	No. 13
OPPOSING GOD
“The way of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord.”—Prov. 15: 9.
PART 2
JEHOVAH is always consistent, just and right. God’s law is a safeguard to man; bui, consistent with his law and with his purpose to permit man to be put to a test and to maintain his integrity, God must permit man the freedom of exercising his choice either to fully trust and obey God or to take a contrary course and follow the Devil. This is particularly emphasized in what took place at Mount Sinai at the time of the inauguration of the law covenant. The people of Israel stood there waiting for Moses to return from the mountain with a message from God. They should have fully appreciated the fact that they had been greatly oppressed in Egypt, and that God had delivered them from their oppressors and that he therefore was their true Friend and Helper. While they waited for Moses to return from the mountain with instructions from the Almighty God they should have remained quiet and trusted wholly in the Lord. But the Devil saw to it that they had a temptation placed before them, and he used religion to cause the Israelites to show their lack of faith in God. Consistent with his purpose and course, Jehovah permitted them to be subjected to that test by the Devil. The Israelites fell under the temptation put upon them by the Devil, but God heard the cry of his faithful ones and extended his mercy toward Israel, and gave them further opportunity to prove their integrity toward him.
2	Within a short time after the giving of the law to Israel, and while Moses was in the mountain, the Israelites in violation of God’s law made a golden calf as an image for worship, and in punishment for their sin God caused 3,000 of the Israelites to be killed in one day. ‘And God plagued the people, because they made the golden calf.’ (Ex. 32: 28-35) The worshiping of the Israelites before the golden calf was the practice of religion, and they were therefore yielding to the influence of the Devil. For God to permit the people, whom he had set aside for himself, to indulge in religion, which is of the Devil, would, to be sure, mean that he would permit them to align themselves with his enemy the Devil. The making of an image of anything
in heaven, such as an image of the Lord himself, and bowing down or worshiping before that image, is a violation of God’s fundamental law. To safeguard them from the Devil men are commanded to worship the Lord God and refrain from worshiping before images. The use of any kind of image in connection with worshiping the Lord is a sin. God gave his law to the people, therefore, to safeguard them from the influence and power of the Devil, who, operating chiefly through religion, endeavors to turn all people away from Almighty God. It is written in the Scriptures that Jehovah God gave his word of promise to Abraham that He would raise up a seed and in that seed the opportunity for blessing should come to all the peoples of the earth. Abraham pictured God himself, and his son or natural seed, Isaac, pictured Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God. God’s law looked forward to the coming of that promised seed, Christ Jesus, the Redeemer of mankind, and he gave the law because of sin, to safeguard his chosen people, the Israelites, that they might be in a proper condition to receive his promised seed Jesus when he did come,
3	The situation was this: Adam had sinned, and by inheritance all mankind came under the effect of that sin and condemnation, and in due time all men must perish by reason thereof, unless saved by and through God’s provision for them: “Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: Therefore, as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.” (Roni. 5:12,18) “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.”—Rom. 6:23.
4	Jehovah God is the Giver of life, and his provision is to give life through his beloved Son, Christ Jesus. God’s gift of life is to those who have and exercise faith in God and in Christ Jesus, the promised Seed, and who therefore faithfully resist the Devil. God had selected the Israelites from amongst all the peoples of earth and would now give them an opportunity to
195
196
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. ¥.
maintain their integrity toward him by showing their faith in him and obedience to his law, and in order to safeguard them he put his law about them as a hedge or fence to keep them from serving the Devil. With the coming of Christ Jesus those who had then maintained their integrity toward God by obeying his law to the best of their ability, and who had and exercised faith in Christ Jesus, would be in line to be saved and receive the gift of life. Therefore it is written that the transgression of God’s law is sin. “Whosoever eommit-teth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is the transgression of the law.” (1 John 3:4) It is further written : “It [that is, the law] was added because of transgressions, till the seed [Christ] should come to whom the promise was made; . . . Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us [God’s chosen people] unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.” (Gal. 3:19, 24) Thus it clearly appears from the testimony that God commanded the Israelites to serve him as the only God and that it was solely for their benefit, that they might be safeguarded from the assaults of the enemy, Satan the Devil.
8	The Israelites were about to begin a forty years’ journey through the wilderness land. They would come in contact with other nations and peoples, that practiced the Devil religion. They must be safeguarded from that Devil religion and must remain faithful and true to the Almighty God and thereby maintain their integrity toward him. All who thus did would be permitted to enter the land of promise, and the violators of that law would die and not be permitted in the land of promise. The Israelites, under the Lord’s direction, would thereafter be making living pictures of God’s purpose toward all who would faithfully serve him, and hence the experiences through which Israel passed foreshadowed greater things to come at the end of the world. Moses then led the Israelites on that long journey, during which time he wrote the five books of the Bible, which God dictated to him, that is, the books from Genesis to Deuteronomy inclusive; and thereafter other servants of God wrote down the things that came to pass upon the Israelites and which God caused them to write, not merely as historical facts, but to foreshadow or foretell far greater things to come to pass thereafter.—1 Cor. 10:11; Ileb. 10:1.
“BESETTING SIN”
8	Behold now an army of more than 600,000 men, from twenty years of age upward, besides women and children, marching through the desert on their way to the land of promise, taking with them their food and their animals, a people (and their beasts of burden) which God had separated from other peoples of earth. They were marching in obedience to God’s commandment. How many of those men would maintain their integrity toward God and reach the land of promise? What was the great sin that beset them so easily, and that was about them from the very time they began
their journey? The answer clearly shown by all their experiences, and by what is recorded in the Scriptures, is this: Religion and formalism, invented by the Devil, and which the people were induced to practice to turn them away from the Almighty God. Religion has ever been the Devil’s chief instrument by which he has beguiled the people and blinded them to the truth. Religion was the besetting sin of Israel, which sin has been the besetting sin of those who have professed to follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus. Long years after that journey in the wilderness began the apostle Paul, of the Hebrew stock, wrote the epistle to the Hebrews, and therein he lists a number of faithful men, from Abel to John the Baptist, who had maintained their integrity toward God, and wherein he shows that it was their shunning religion and their unswerving devotion and faithfulness to the commandments of Almighty God that had gained for them God’s approval. Then it is written as an admonition to all those who have agreed to do the will of God and to follow in Jesus’ footsteps that they should have in mind these faithful witnesses who went before and should follow a similar course. “Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.”—Ileb. 12:1.
T Man’s besetting sin, from the time of Eden till now, has been and is religion. It has been the means by which Satan has deceived man, and he has kept it around man and turned him away from God. It was the instrument that the Devil used to cause the Israelites to fall away from God. It is so easy to fall under the seductive influence of religion and thereby to violate God’s law, and the Devil has seen to it that religion has ever been kept before man to cause him to fall. The making of images, of beads, crosses, and other things of that kind, and using them in what is supposed to be worship of God, is a direct violation of God’s law and shows that those who thus practice are unwittingly falling to the Devil. The saluting of flags or men or other like objects, or bowing down to them, is attributing protection and salvation to creatures or things, and that is a religious formalism and in open violation of God’s law. No creature can divide his affections or devotion between God and anything. Jehovah God is his only protector and is the Lifegiver, and He is therefore a “jealous God”, or zealous for righteousness, and will not permit his name or his Word to be sullied by any part of the Devil’s operations or schemes, and therefore He will not give life to those who indulge in things invented and used by the Devil to defame Jehovah’s name. The law of God which provides that men shall have no other god before Him and shall make no image of anything in heaven or in earth and bow down to it, is solely for the purpose of safeguarding man from the Devil’s wickedness, “the sin which doth so easily beset” all creatures.
July 1, 1937
fffie WATCH TOWER.
197
•Referring again to the apostle’s words, “Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, ’ ’ which words are addressed to God’s covenant people, it is clearly to be seen that no person can faithfully and truly serve God and permit anything to divide his affections between God and any creature of creation; that he cannot practice religion and at the same time serve God faithfully; that he must lay aside these weights, and do as the apostle Paul did and said: “This one thing I do’’ (Phil. 3:13), and that is, to follow in the footsteps of Jesus and obey God’s commandments. Religion is dearly in opposition to the commandments of Almighty God.
•God’s law is plain, and stubbornness on the part of anyone in obeying that law is idolatry. (1 Sam. 15: 23) Every religious practice under the sun means that the practitioners are indulging in idolatry. The use of images in worshiping is idolatry, and all idolatry is abominable in the sight of God. As God permitted Job to be subjected to great trials, so he permitted the Devil to tempt the Israelites, and to tempt his covenant people since, that they might prove their choice between God and the Devil. Knowing that the Israelites would come in contact with those who practiced the Devil religion, God therefore gave them this specific commandment: “Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I am the Lord your God.” (Lev. 19:4) “Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow down unto it: for I am the Lord your God. And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images, and cast your carcases upon the earcases of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.” (Lev. 26:1, 30) “All the gods of the people are idols.” (1 Chron. 16: 26) Religion, therefore, dearly appears to be one of man’s great enemies, which the chief enemy, the Devil, has invented to lead men into destruction.
10	What followed after the giving of the law shows the great necessity for that law. The record of the Israelites during their journey is replete with instances of turning to idols or Devil religion. Coining in contact with the Moabites they found that people practicing a religion called “Baal-peor”, and many of the Israelites indulged in that religion in violation of God’s law and thus exposed themselves to God’s wrath, and many of them were destroyed: “And they [the Moabites] called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods. And Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel. And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel. And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men that were joined unto Baal-peor.”—Num. 25:2-5.
“Time and again the Israelites violated God’s law by turning to Devil religion, and the result was that only a very few of those who left Egypt lived to see the land of promise. When Moses was delivering to the Israelites his last exhortation, he said to them, as commanded by the Lord God: “(For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came through the nations which ye passed by; and ye have seen their abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among them:) lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the Lord our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there should be among you a root that bcarcth gall and wormwood; and it come to pass, when he hcarcth the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. Even all nations shall say, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this land? what mcaneth the heat of this great anger? Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt: for they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given unto them: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the eurses that arc written in this book.”—Deut. 29:16-20, 2-1-27.
12	God, ha\ing accepted Satan’s challenge, was permitting him to put men to the test and was safeguarding them by his law so that the eovenant people of God had the privilege of exercising their will or choice to serve God and live, or serve the Devil and die. This is God’s fixed and unchangeable rule.
13	When the Israelites, led by the faithful Joshua, readied the land of promise, they served God for a time. They were God’s chosen people, and were made the objects and were the objects of continual assaults by the subtle enemy. Yielding to those temptations, the Israelites time and again fell away to the Devil religion. During that period of time there were some men who led the Israelites faithfully to serve God, while others took exactly the opposite course. It was during the reign of King Ahab and his wife Jezebel that almost all the people were turned away to Devil religion. God sent his faithful prophet Elijah to deliver his message of warning and to tell Ahab that his practice of religion was causing the Israelites all the trouble that they were experiencing: “And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troublcth Israel? And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou and
198
fffie WATCHT0WEFL
Brooklyn, N. Y.
thy father’s house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim [the Devil religion].”—1 Ki. 18:17,18.
14	God raised up Jehu, a faithful servant and who slew Ahab and his household because of the idolatrous practice of religion in which they indulged. “So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jczrccl, and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he left him none remaining.” (2 Ki. 10:11) All the practitioners of Baalism, the Devil religion, in Israel were slain by Jehu, and he brought forth the images out of the house of Baal and burned them, and “thus Jehu destroyed Baal [worship] out of Israel”. (2 Ki. 10:25-28) These instances here are cited as further proof that religion is directly in opposition to God’s commandments, is devilish, and is therefore one of man’s great enemies, and an abomination.
BACKSLIDERS
15	Time and again the Israelites acknowledged their wrong and asked for forgiveness, and the Lord forgave them. Straightway they would go again and indulge in the Devil religion and fall under that wicked influence. The Lord therefore called them “backsliding Israel”. (Jer. 3:6-14) God had put his name on the Israelites as his own people and was giving them every opportunity to prove their integrity before him, that they might have part in proving Satan a liar and that they might remain faithful to God and have his favor; and for his name’s sake, therefore, he was safeguarding Israel, forgiving them and restoring them from time to time, giving them further opportunity to prove their integrity; therefore it is written concerning Israel: ‘ ‘ Notwithstanding the children rebelled against me: they walked not in my statutes, neither kept my judgments to do them, which if a man do, he shall even live in them; they polluted my sabbaths: then I said, I would pour out my fury Upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness. Nevertheless I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be polluted in the sight of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them forth.” (Ezekiel 20:21,22) The nation as a whole was unfaithful to God, but there were always a few Israelites that remained faithful and true to Jehovah, maintaining their integrity toward him.
10	Then God sent his faithful men, his prophets, who repeatedly prophesied before the Israelites concerning the coming of the Messiah, God’s anointed One, that is, Christ, the Seed of promise according to the promise which God had made to Abraham. (Gen. 22:17,18) He warned the Israelites through his prophets that if they continued their unfaithfulness to him in the practice of Devil religion he would destroy them, and in harmony with his warning he did destroy them because of their unfaithfulness. Exactly at God’s fixed time he sent Jesus, his beloved Son, whom he sent to deliver his message of truth. The priests of the Israel
ites were obligated, by God’s commandment, to teach the people concerning his law and the prophecies which referred to the coming of the great Messiah, the promised Seed; therefore they should have known about the coming of Jesus, and the priests in particular should have been ready to receive him. When Jesus was born, not one of the priests or clergymen or other practitioners of religion was permitted to be witness to the fact, and manifestly that was because they were practicing the Devil religion. God chose as his witnesses to the birth of Jesus the meek herders of sheep. God caused his angels from heaven to announce the birth of Jesus and to speak to the shepherds these words: “And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you: Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and [ZfotA.] on earth peace, among men of good-will.” (Luke 2:9-14) By that time almost all the people of Israel had turned to religion; but there were a few who were faithful to God’s commandments.
DEVIL AND HIS AGENTS
17	Had the priests, Pharisees and scribes, otherwise known as the clergymen of Israel, been faithfully devoted to doing the will of God and obeying his commandments, they would have known that Jesus would begin his, ministry when thirty years of age and they would have instructed the people to be ready to receive him and to obey his commandments. When Jesus reached the age of thirty years and began his ministry, not a single one of the clergy class received him end hailed him as the Son of God. The reason why they did not was, because they were religionists and were looking for favor to themselves from amongst men (John 5:44), aud they were the instruments of the Devil practicing his religion. Those Jewish clergymen or religionists were full of guile and fraud and deceit. A few honest and faithful Israelites were looking for Christ the Messiah, and it was from among such that Jesus chose his disciples, concerning one of whom Jesus said: “Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!” (John 1:47) This was conclusive proof that all the religious leaders, the clergymen, were full of guile and deceit.
18	Jesus was baptized in the Jordan river and was anointed of Jehovah, and John, standing by, beheld the manifestation of God’s power upon Jesus and his approval of him. “And, lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.” (Matt. 3:17) No Pharisee or other clergy
July 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
199
man was there to witness that great event. No doubt the Devil looked on from some point, but, of course, was invisible to men. Immediately after his anointing of the holy spirit Jesus was assaulted by the Devil, who made a subtle and vicious attack to bring about th destruction of Jesus. The Devil demanded that Jesus perform a miracle by making bread from stone, to which Jesus replied that man’s existence does not depend upon material bread alone but does depend upon his obedience to God’s Word. The Devil then dared Jesus to show his superiority by jumping from a high pinnacle into the valley, to which Jesus replied: “It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.” The Devil, being the invisible ruler of the world, mockingly and sarcastically offered to turn the world over to Jesus if Jesus would bow down and worship the Devil, to which Jesus replied: “Get thee behind me, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” (Matt. 4:1-10; Luke 4:1-13) This is further and conclusive proof that the Devil is the enemy of God, that he is a fraud, a deceiver and a liar, that he is the inventor of religion, and that those who worship any creature or thing, and fail to worship the Lord God, are the enemy of God, and the agent or ally of the Devil, whether they know it or not. There was not one clergyman of the Jews that accepted Jesus and stood by him; which shows that all such were agents of the Devil.
19	Thereafter Jesus began his work of preaching to the people, and introduced his discourse with these words: “The kingdom of heaven is at hand.” Did any of the clergymen accept that as true? Not one. The priests, Pharisees and other religious leaders were hypocrites and loved the plaudits and approval of men, and sought the worship of the people, even as their father the Devil had done. A great multitude of the people went with Jesus into the mountain, where he delivered to them that famous “Sermon on the Mount”. From the record it does not appear that a single clergyman was there to hear that great sermon. The common people listened with eagerness to learn, and amongst other things Jesus said to them: “And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut-thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father, which secth in secret, shall reward thee openly. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do; for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.” (Matt. 6:5-8) Then Jesus gave to the people a model prayer, which is generally known as “the Lord’s prayer”.—Matt. 6: 9-13.
20	In the foregoing text it was the priests or clergymen who practiced religion to whom Jesus referred as hypocrites making a great show of their pious faces
in the streets that they might be seen of men. Compare the conduct of those Jewish clergymen with the clergymen and religious leaders of this present day. Often you have observed a priest or other clergyman or religious practitioner going about the streets with a prayer book in his hand, pretending to read it, or sitting in the parks doing the same thing. Daily those clergymen walk through the streets wearing peculiar garments that they may attract the attention of men. They stand in the church buildings, as the Jewish clergymen stood in their synagogues, and strike a sanctimonious attitude, and utter senseless speech in a language that few, if any, of those present can understand ; and that they do that they may attract attention of men to themselves. Thus Jesus shows that tho practitioners of religion among the Jews find their counterpart in the practitioners of religion now on earth in “Christendom”.
21	The man Jesus was the great and true witness of Jehovah God, whom God sent to the earth to tell his message of truth for his name’s sake. If the priests and clergymen of that day had been honest and on the side of Almighty God they would have gladly heard the words of Jesus and followed his instructions, but instead they refused to believe him and opposed him in every possible manner, and this they did because they were the agents of the Devil and therefore the enemies of God. It is written concerning the sincere Jews of the common people, who listened to the preaching of Jesus, that “the common people heard him gladly”. (Mark 12:37) Did the clergymen believe the words of Jesus? They did not, but, on the contrary, they did everything they could to induce the people not to believe. When a sincere man reported to those clergymen the wonderful words that Jesus had uttered and things he had done, they replied: “Are ye also deceived? Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?” (John 7:47,48) Instead of supporting Jesus the clergy of his time’ used every possible means in opposition to him to prevent the people from hearing his words of wisdom and life. Exactly the same condition exists today with the religious leaders of “Christendom”.
OPPOSERS OF TRUTH
22	Whht advantage is there in now considering the clergy who were on the earth when Jesus was here, and why should this be done at all? Th,e purpose is to show that those men were practitioners of religion, claiming to represent God, but in fact were on the side of the Devil and were the enemies of God; and that in the present time those who oppose Christ Jesus and his kingdom arc the enemies of God and of man; that religionists arc always opponents of the truth; which shows that religion proceeds from the Devil and is employed to deceive the people; and what was true when Jesus was on earth is still true, to wit, that religion is against God and his kingdom. By his proph
200
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ets of old God had foretold that the religious leaders of Israel would turn the people away from God, and now Jesus, the greatest of all prophets, told those religious teachers to their face that they were hypocrites and the Devil’s representatives. What Jesus said to those men applies with even stronger force to those of the present time who practice religion for gain and who oppose those who proclaim God’s Word of truth concerning Christ and his kingdom.
28	The religious leaders among the Jews claimed to be the seed of Abraham according to the promise and that they were the sons of God. Jesus had told them that God had sent him to the earth to bear witness to the truth, and that the message he was delivering was not his own, but that he was speaking the words which God had commanded him to speak; and in the face of these statements the clergy or religionists tried to kill Jesus, and Jesus reminded them of this fact. Mark here the words of Jesus, addressed to those opposing religionists: “I know that ye are Abraham’s seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your father. They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Jesus said unto them, If ye were Abraham’s children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication; we have one Father, even God. Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech ? even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it. And because I lell you the truth, ye believe me not. Which of you eon-vinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth God’s words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.”—John 8:37-47.
24	And did they show themselves to be sons of the Devil, as Jesus had told them? The facts conclusively show that they did. They practiced religion, based upon the traditions of men, ignored the commandments of God, and thus made the Word of God of none effect, and therefore they were the enemies of God and enemies of the people. Mark here the words of Jesus, which conclusively show the difference between religion and obeying the commandments of God: “Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, . . . saying, Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? . . . But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment
of God by your tradition? . . . Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. Ye hypocrites! well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips: but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”—Matt. 15:1-9.
23	Those clergymen and preachers were practitioners of “the Jews’ religion” and were the instruments of the Devil. Saul afterwards testified to the same effect, as will appear at Galatians 1:13,14. The Devil got those Jewish clergymen on his side because they were proud and sought the favor of men and taught The doctrines which men had invented and taught and they ignored and disregarded the commandment of God. From the day of Nimrod onward the Devil has employed religion to turn men away from God in furtherance of the Devil’s wicked challenge to Jehovah. The Devil works upon the vanity of men and induces them to adopt and practice formalism by which it is claimed that they worship God, but which in truth and in fact is an abomination in the sight of God.
26	God, through his holy prophets, had announced his purpose to set up a kingdom which should rule the world in righteousness to the honor of God’s name and for the good of all righteous creatures. He foretold that he would send his beloved Son, the Messiah, to rule and bless the people. Then came Jesus in due time, declaring to the people that he had come as the representative of Jehovah God and for the gathering of men unto himself who would faithfully serve Jehovah God and be witnesses to His name. Were there any religionists amongst those Jews who joined with Jesus in proclaiming the kingdom and inviting the people to put themselves under Jehovah’s King? Not one; but, on the contrary, they tried to keep the people out of the kingdom; concerning which Jesus said: “But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.” (Matt. 23:13) At this present time who among the religious leaders are telling the people of God’s kingdom under Christ as the only hope for the world ? Not a single one. On the contrary, they tell the people to give no heed to those persons who come to them preaching the message of God’s kingdom. They cite human inventions and human agencies as the means of relief and salvation 1’or the people.
2T The religious Pharisees, who opposed Jesus, weie great sticklers for formalism, that they might appear in the eyes of men as being very clean and righteous and wonderful men. They were following the traditions of their fathers who had murdered the faithful prophets of God, and so now they would seek to kill Jesus, the greatest of all prophets. Therefore Jesus said to them: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
July 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER-
201
hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous, and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell?” (Matt. 23: 27-33) Here is the clear declaration of Jesus that religionists are the agents of the Devil, whether they are aware of that fact or not.
MURDERERS
28	All liars and murderers are religionists. Whenever a murderer is about to be executed he has some religious practitioner to say some senseless words over him, which is supposed to save him, but which does no good. The Devil was the orginator of religion, and the Devil is the father of lies and a “murderer from the beginning” and ever thereafter. (John 8:44) From Nimrod down to the present hour the breakers of God’s everlasting covenant, who have opposed God and murdered human creatures, have been and are religionists, practicing some form of religion. It was religionists that murdered the holy prophets of God, whom he had sent to declare his truth, and those religionists murdered them because they represented God and followed the truth. (Matt. 23:30-32) When Jesus, the great Prophet and Heir of the Almighty God, came to earth the Devil put it into the minds of the religionists to kill him, and therefore they said concerning Jesus: “This is the heir: come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance.” (Matt. 21:38) It was not the common people, but the religionists, that opposed Jesus and that sought his lifeblood, and this they did because he told the truth.
29	The man Jesus was the only righteous perfect man ever on the earth. He was holy, harmless, undefiled and without sin. (Heb. 7:26; 1 Pet. 1:19) lie went about doing good to the people and never did a wrongful or harmful thing to anyone. He was repeatedly charged with crime, and on every occasion it was the religionists who falsely accused him. It was the religionists who entered into a conspiracy to have Jesus put to death, because they feared that the people who followed him would all abandon the clergymen and those religionists would be left withoiit any means of support; and in proof of this it is written: “The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.” (John 12:19) “Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and said, What do
we ? for this man doeth many miracles. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him: and the Romans shall come and take away both our place [our jobs] and nation.”—John 11:47,48.
30	The high priest then expressed himself in these words: “Ye know nothing at all, ... it is expedient for us, that one man should die . . . he prophesied that Jesus should die . . . Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to death.” (John 11:49-53) This was a conspiracy to commit deliberate murder, and that conspiracy was carried into effect by the commission of the overt act.
31	The clergymen caused Jesus to be wrongfully charged with the high crime of treason. It was not the common people or the political element that demanded his death, but it was the religionists, who cried out: “Crucify him,” and, “His blood be on us.” (Matt. 27:12-26) When Christ Jesus was nailed to the tree and was pouring out his lifeblood, the clergy mocked him: “Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and ciders, said, ... He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God.” (Matt. 27 : 41-43) The same spirit moves modern-day clergymen to speak against those who proclaim the message of God’s kingdom. The clergymen or religionists did not see that the body of Jesus had a decent burial, but it was a rich lawyer of honorable estate who had not consented to the action of the priests that begged for the body of Jesus that he might give it a decent burial. (Matt. 27:57) It was the chief priests and Pharisees, the religious leaders, that tried to prevent the resurrection of Jesus, and that bribed soldiers with large sums of money to say falsely that his disciples had stolen the body while they slept. (Matt. 28:11-13) Can any honest person for one moment doubt the guilt of those religionists and that they, the leaders of religion, scribes and Pharisees, clergymen, acted as the agents and representatives of the Devil ? As progress is made in this study keep in mind that it was the religionists that murdered Jesus, and then compare therewith the facts which show that the murderers in modern times are leaders in religious practice.
PURPOSE OF HIS COMING
32	The man Jesus was the Son of God. Before he became a man he was known as the Logos, the active agent of Jehovah God in the creation of all things. (Col. 1:16) By the supreme power of Jehovah God, Jesus, the Logos, ‘was made flesh [a human creature] and dwelt among men.' (John 1:14) Jehovah God sent him to earth as his special representative, and the message which he delivered was the message from the Almighty God. (John 7:16) The Devil, the inventor of lies, the deceiver and murderer, for centuries had slandered the name of Jehovah God, mocked him and defied him and challenged him to put on earth any man who would remain true to God when the Devil
202
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
put him to the test. After giving the Devil four thousand years to carry on unhindered his wicked work Jehovah God sent his beloved Son Jesus to earth to prove the Devil a liar and to be the vindicator of Jehovah’s name. In carrying out the will of God it was of first importance that Jesus proclaim the truth ; therefore when asked concerning his mission on earth, he replied: “I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” (John 18:37) It follows, therefore, that every person who refuses to hear the message of Jesus is not of the truth, but that he is under the control of the arch liar and enemy, the Devil.
REDEMPTION
83	The primary reason and purpose of Jesus’ coming to earth was to bear witness to the truth of and concerning Jehovah God and his kingdom and to vindicate Jehovah’s holy name. Incidental thereto, and as a secondary reason, he came to redeem man from the condemnation resulting from Adam’s sin. Because of the willful violation of God's law Adam was sentenced to death and after that all his children were born. The condemned Adam was imperfect because under sentence of death, and could not produce a perfect child, and the result has ever been that all men have been born in sin and conceived in lawleis-ness. ‘‘Behold. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.” (Ps. 51: 5) ‘‘Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.” (Rom. 5:12) Abel, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham were faithful to God, but, being born as imperfect men and therefore without right to everlasting life by reason of Adam’s sin, they could not get everlasting life unless provision for the redemption was first made. Man must be ransomed from death by the sacrifice of the perfect human life, because it was the perfect human life which God’s law required Adam to give up as a penalty for sin. All men being descendants of Adam, there was no man who could present a perfect sacrifice unto God in the place and stead of Adam. God made the necessary provision.
34	It is the male of the human species that furnishes the life germ, by God’s provision. How, then, could a perfect man be provided, and who could become a ransom price for or deliverer of mankind? Jehovah the Almighty God caused Mary to conceive while yet a virgin. (Matt. 1:18) She conceived in her womb by virtue of the power of the holy spirit of God exercised upon her. Seeing that God made man and woman out of the elements of the earth, there would be no difficulty whatsoever in God’s causing a child to be conceived in the womb of Mary; which he did. The man-child Jesus was born, and was pure, holy, undefiled and entirely separate from sinners, having none of the contaminated life germ descending from Adam.
(Hcb. 7:26) Jesus therefore is always designated in the Scriptures as ‘‘the Son of man”, which is ‘‘the Son of God”. When the man Jesus reached the age of thirty years he was qualified, under the terms of God’s law, to become a priest unto God. It was then that Christ Jesus consecrated himself fully to do the will of God, and his immersion in the waters of the Jordan river was an outward evidence to others that he had made the covenant to be obedient to the will of God. It was then that his words apply: “Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, 0 my God; yea, thy law is within my heart.” (Ps. 40:7,8; Matt. 3:15-17) The one who would redeem mankind must offer himself voluntarily as a sacrifice; and that being the will of God, Jesus voluntarily and gladly complied with God's will and thus offered himself by presenting himself wholly unto the Lord God. The lifeblood of the perfect man Jesus could and did furnish the ransom or redemptive price for sinful man. The life is in the blood. (Lev. 17:11,14) The voluntary sacrifice of the perfect human life of Jesus provided the redemptive price, his lifeblood being poured out in sacrificial death. ‘Without the shedding of blood there is no remission of sin.’ (Heb. 9:22) The lifeblood of the perfect man Jesus God could accept, and did accept, as the ransom price and sin offering for sinful man. (For detailed consideration of the redemption of man sec book Reconciliation.)
35	The perfect man, Christ Jesus, was subjected to all manner of assaults and persecutions inflicted upon him by the Devil and the Devil’s religious representatives on the earth, and through all of such assaults and persecutions Jesus maintained his integrity toward God, never for one moment deviating from the path of loyalty and faithfulness to God. Thereby Jesus proved Satan a liar, and this in vindication of Jehovah’s name and word. After he had given testimony concerning the name of Jehovah and the kingdom, which covered a period of three and one-half years, he was then charged with the capital crime of treason, was given a mock trial, convicted without legal evidence, and crucified by being nailed to a tree, thus being put to death as a sinner accursed of God; and thus he would appear in the eyes of all others. (Dent. 21:23) God permitted his enemies to put Jesus lo death, knowing that Jesus would remain faithful even unto death, proving his integrity to God, and that God would raise him up out of death. Jesus thus met all the requirements and fully showed his qualification to become the vindicator of God’s name. Because of his faithfulness God raised up Jesus out of death and gave to him life and immortality, not as a man, but life divine, an endless and indestructible life, and exalted Jesus to the very highest place in all the universe next to Jehovah. (Phil. 2:5-11) God committed to Christ Jesus, the immortal One, all power in heaven and in earth. (Matt. 28:18) Therefore Je;,u.s said:
July 1, 1937
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
203
"I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.” (Rev. 1:18) Christ Jesus therefore becomes clothed with all power and authority to act for Jehovah in all things as his chief executive officer.
38	When with his disciples, Jesus instructed them that all creatures that will receive everlasting life and the blessings of Almighty God must willingly and faithfully serve God. Then of himself he said: “And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant: even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.” (Matt. 20: 27, 28) This shows that the man Jesus understood that it was the will of his Father Jehovah not only that he tell the truth and become the Vindicator of his Father but that as a man he must die to provide the ransom or redemptive price “for many” of the human race. For how many of the human race: all or only a part? Not for all, because the redemptive price results beneficially only to those who believe on and obey God and Christ Jesus. Therefore he gave his life as a ransom for as many of the human race as take their stand on the side of God and Christ and maintain their integrity toward God when put to the test. It is written: “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Rom. 6:23) Here the matter is squarely put to every man, to wit: If you prefer to continue on the side of the Devil and against God the result will be complete destruction; but if you take your stand on the side of God and Christ, showing full faith in the redemptive price and proving your integrity toward God, you will receive at God’s hands, through Christ Jesus, the gift of life everlasting. In further corroboration of this, it is written: “The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.” (John 3:35,36) Otherwise stated, all men came under condemnation by reason of sin, and God’s wrath against sin is death ; if one believes on the Lord Jesus Christ God removes that condemnation from him; but if man prefers to remain on the side of the Devil and continue in sin, then God’s wrath or condemnation abides on him and is not removed. Thus it is seen that God’s intelligent creatures are made free agents to choose life or death after having received a knowledge of God’s provision for them.
37	The provision God has made to give life to men is prompted entirely by unselfishness or love on the part of God; as it is written: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.” (John 3:16,17) It necessarily follows, then, that those who do not believe “perish”,
which means to be completely annihilated. God has no pleasure even in the death of the wicked, and certainly he could have no pleasure in inflicting torture upon anyone. The doctrine of eternal torment in hell is another one of Satan’s vicious lies, which lies are taught to the people only by religionists, and the purpose of this Devil lie is to turn people away from God and force them into the Devil’s organization, that is, the “religious” organizations. “Hell” means the condition of death, not a place of torture. When a man prefers to continue in wickedness God mercifully puts him to sleep in death, and that man never again awakens. “God is love,” and he could not be guilty of a fiendish act such as eternal torture. The Lord causes to be brought to the attention of the people the truth, and then each one has the opportunity to believe or not to believe, as he may choose.
38	While instructing those who listened to and believed him, Jesus said: “lam come that they [who believe] might have life, and that they [who prove faithful unto death] might have it more abundantly.” (John 10:10) In order for anyone to believe, he must learn of God’s provision for man through Christ Jesus. Therefore it is written: “For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed'! and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach, except they be sent ? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!”—Rom. 10:13-15.
38	Further exercising his loving-kindness, God has provided that the attention of the people should be brought to the truth of and concerning himself and his provision to give them life. He causes his Word to be proclaimed that the people may hear. The enemy Satan seeks to destroy all mankind, but the Almighty God graciously informs man that all those who will get on God’s side, believe upon and serve the Lord Jesus Christ and Jehovah and prove faithful, shall live.
40	After the flood Satan induced men to practice religion in mockery of God and all the nations adopted and practiced the Devil religion. Jehovah God then chose the people of Israel, formed them into a nation, and gave them his commandments and instructed them how they could obey God and live. Thus the matter was clearly put before mankind. Man could choose to stay in the Devil’s crowd or could serve Jehovah God faithfully and truly. Soon thereafter the Devil invaded the camp of Israel and induced that people to adopt formalism, which formalism in an outward way appeared to give honor to God but which in fact was against God. The Israelites soon began to use images in connection with their formalistic worship, and that was in direct violation of God’s law. Continuing m this way, the nation went fully over to the Devil; oniy
^©WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
204
a few of the individual Israelites remained true to God. Men began the practice of formalism, which constituted “the Jews’ religion”, and that formalism and those man-made doctrines were handed down from parents to children; which is called “tradition”. When Jesus came to earth the Jews were practicing religion, based upon such tradition, and which religion and tradition made void the commandments of God; and Jesus so told them.
“ Jesus taught the people fully and sincerely to obey the commandments of God, and thus Jesus established true Christianity. There is no such thing in existence as “the Christian religion”, because all religion proceeds from God’s enemy, the Devil. “Christian religion” is a misnomer, fraudulent and deceptive. “Christianity” means the full and complete obedience of man to God’s commandments, even as Christ Jesus taught and obeyed God’s commandments. Therefore a person is a Christian only when he is a true follower of Christ Jesus, which means that he must be diligent in obeying God’s commandments and follow them and not the teachings of man. Religion is a great enemy, always working injury to mankind, and this without regard to whether man is sincere or otherwise. Religion is entirely out of place in the church of God. The enemy has at all times attempted to corrupt the “church of God”. He has used wicked angels and men to accomplish that purpose. All on God’s side must resist the enemies in order to maintain their integrity toward God.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
K 1-4. What was Jehovah’s purpose in giving to man His law, and in permitting man to be put to a test of integrity? Describe the idolatry of the Israelites at Sinai. Account for their failure to meet the test to which they were subjected. How were they punished therefor? and why were they spared as a people? With scriptures, explain why God gave to that people his law and specially dealt with them.
H 5,6. Did the Israelites benefit by Jehovah's having given them his law and his particular direction in their affairs? W’hy? With what result to them? What is the great significance thereof to God’s people now?
K 7, 8. Point out how and why religion has done so great injury to man.
K 9,10. Why did God specifically command the Israelites concerning idols and images or allegiance to any creature or thing?
If 11,12. Did the Israelites that left Egypt reach the land of promise? Why?
1f 13,14. Show that religion was the chief snare used by the Devil to entrap God’s chosen people even after they reached the land of promise.
If 15,16. Explain the Lord’s referring to the Israelites as “backsliding Israel”. Account for his continued dealing with them ‘notwithstanding their rebellion’, and for his repeatedly warning them through his prophets. W’hy, at the coming of Jesus, were the people and even the priests not ready to receive him? How, and to whom was the announcement made of Jesus' birth? and why to these? What was the witness there given?
1f 17. Just why did Jesus disregard the clergy class when choosing his disciples?
If 18. Explain (a) the absence of the clergy from Jesus’ baptism in the Jordan, (b) How and for what purpose the Devil assaulted Jesus immediately thereafter.
If 19. How did the clergy and the common people regard Jesus and his message? Why?
If 20, 21. Compare the conduct of those Jewish clergymen with that of the clergymen of the present time. Account for their attitude and conduct.
1f 22. Why should we now, or at all, consider the clergy who were on earth when Jesus was here?
If 23,24. Compare the claims of the Jewish eleigy with the facts declared by Jesus concerning them. How had they come into such condition?
If 25. Why has the Devil so easily succeeded in using the clergy as his chief instruments?
If 26,27. Compare the religionists of Jesus’ day with those of the present time in point of the declaration recorded (a) at Matthew 23: 13. (b) At Matthew 23: 27-33. What do those declarations show?
If 28-31. How are lying and murder related to religion? How is this shown in the leeord concerning God’s prophets of old? Whom did the Devil use to persecute Jesus? Describe their procedure then, and since, as clearly proving the origin and purpose of religion.
If 32. Who was Jesus when on earth, and why was he hcie?
IT 33-35. Point out (a) the primary reason and purpose of Jesus’ coming to earth, (b) The secondary leason and puipose. How was each of these purposes accomplished?
If 36. With related scriptuies, explain 1 Timothy 2: 6 and Matthew 20: 28 as being in entire harmony.
If 37-39. Show that God’s provision to give life to man was prompted entirely by love. As shown in the apostle’s words at Romans 10: 13-15, and in the provision God has made for the piescnt time, what is the purpose, and the importance, ot the message now proclaimed by God’s witnesses?
T 40,41. Explain whether the practice of leligion, and the ignorance of God’s Word and puipose, among the Jews when Jesus came to earth, and among professed people of God today, can be chai god to lack of instruction aud of opportunity.
INSPECTION, PREPARATION, WAR
JEHOVAH is now preparing those who love him for the most stupendous event in the history of man. For more than six thousand years conditions have appeared to be entirely adverse to those who have tried to do right. Now there is revealed to those who have taken their stand on Jehovah’s side the great truth that there is rapidly approaching a time of unprecedented prosperity and blessings for the human race. Those who are diligent to grasp the truths that are placed before them are lifted far above the present sad conditions of this world and see the incontrovertible proof that the time of deliverance is at hand.
In all the ages past a subtle foe has beset men, heaped upon them injustice and oppression, led them into pitfalls, filled their days with perplexity and distress, and in the end brought them in sorrow to the grave. That same enemy, Satan, has employed every conceivable means to defame the name of the great Creator Jehovah and to turn man away from Him. That enemy long ago formed an organization made up of false and fraudulent religion, planted superstitious fear in the heart of man, and has drawn multitudes into his religious net. He has created a great commercial system and used it to rob the people of the fruits of
July 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
205
their honest toil, and to corrupt the political element to compel the people to remain in subjection. The climax of this wicked organization has been reached in the seventh world power, which is otherwise designated as “Christendom”, and which world power has fraudulently and falsely assumed the name of The Christ of God and has brought upon Jehovah’s holy name the greatest amount of ignominy and shame. The end of such defamation and wickedness must come, and now it rejoices the hearts of honest men to see that the climax is at hand when there will be a complete change for the good.
Jehovah declares his purpose to vindicate his holy name at Armageddon; hence it is designated in his Word “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”. The organization of Jehovah, symbolized by Mount Zion, is the place of the assembly of his troops; hence that place is called “Armageddon”. It is there that he will “go forth and fight” for his own. (Zech. 14:3) The militant host of Jehovah will be led by Christ Jesus, who is now King of kings exercising his royal authority. (Rev. 17:14; 19:11-16) To be sure, Jehovah docs not need to prepare himself for the great battle, but it is necessary to prepare some parts of his organization and to send them forth to make known that he is God,- and that his purpose is to destroy the enemy that has defamed his name and brought suffering and death upon his creatures. The administration of the affairs of the world must pass completely from the control of Satan and into the hand of Christ Jesus, who is earth’s rightful Ruler. For centuries Satan has been “the prince of this world”, and now he refuses to abdicate; hence his power and organization are to be completely destroyed. Jehovah is long-suffering and forbearing. (Ex. 34:6) He has given the enemy every opportunity to make good his challenge and boast to turn all mankind against God. But the time must come for Jehovah to act, and when his wrath is expressed it will be so emphatic that all will know that he is the Almighty God. Before executing his judgment against the enemy fair warning and complete notice is given, and such is a part of his preparation.
In the centuries of long ago Jehovah, by his holy spirit, moved honest men to write down that which he purposed to bring to pass in future days, and now the prophecies then written are being fulfilled. Among those honest and God-fearing men who wrote prophecy was Zechariah, the grandson of Iddo the prophet. It was about the year 520 B.C. when Zechariah was given his first vision by Jehovah and when he began to write prophecy. More than 2,400 years thereafter that prophetic vision began to have fulfillment. At that time the World War, which began in 1914, had come to a conclusion, and the ruling powers of the world were bringing forth various schemes of reconstruction. The rulers of “Christendom” had received the evidence that Satan’s world had come to an end and that
the time was at hand for the beginning of the kingdom of God under Christ Jesus. Instead of heeding this evidence the seventh world power set up a substitute for God’s kingdom, which is an abomination and is detestable in Jehovah’s eyes.
Zechariah’s vision came to him from the Lord and in the nighttime. In vision he beheld a company of men riding on horseback. The leader of that company rode a red horse, and those who followed after him rode red, bay and white horses. That was a heavenly vision foreshadowing things to come to pass in future days upon the earth. That company of heavenly cavalry halted their horses upon the side of the Mount of Olives, in the shadow of a grove of myrtle trees. From this vantage point the chief horseman made a careful survey of the city of Jerusalem, while the other horsemen of his company rode up and down in the land gathering information and returned and reported that information to their chief. The information gained by his own inspection, and that reported to him by his aides, filled the chief with righteous indignation. In the vision Jerusalem appeared to be trodden down, and there was utter indifference on the part of the Jews to put it in proper shape. The chief horseman immediately began to prepare his forces for a great war, which foreshadows the greatest war that is ever to come to the nations of the earth. A period of years passes while the chief horseman continues the work of preparation, and in that time only a small number of men on earth give any heed to what is being done. The preparatory work is not done in silence, but openly and aboveboard, the chief even serving notice upon his adversary and calling upon him to prepare for the great battle, and then he tells the enemy exactly what will be the result of that fight. In vision the prophet sees both Jehovah’s and the enemy’s mighty armies drawn up in battle array and marks the people taking their position in the respective militant forces. The crucial hour arrives, and the two mighty armies are hurled against each other, resulting in a complete victory for the leader who stood in the shade of the myrtle trees on his red war mount.
The vision discloses the chief and his assistants making an inspection of Jerusalem. That city symbolically stood for God’s covenant people in the present-day “Christendom”, which particularly means the Anglo-American empire system, and which people are in an implied covenant to do God’s will. The inspection also includes all who have made a covenant to do the will of God; and that which follows involves all classes of people in the world.
The facts now fully known disclose that the work of preparation, in fulfillment of the prophetic vision, began in 1918 and has progressed over the period of nineteen years, and now the hour draws near for the terrible clash of the armed forces. Zechariah the prophet foreshadowed a small company of persons who arc wholly devoted to God and who arc now on the
206
tffie WATCH TOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
earth, and to which company of faithful ones Jehovah God has given an understanding of the prophetic vision. At the same time Jehovah has laid upon this company of witnesses taken out for his name the obligation and great privilege of informing other persons on earth as to the vision and its meaning. These are commanded to serve notice upon the rulers of the world to inform them of what is about to come to pass in fulfillment of the prophetic vision, and also to give information to all persons of good will that they may find a way of escape in that time of great slaughter that is shortly to take place.
The entire prophecy of Zechariah which is now being unfolded thrills the heart of everyone who has an honest desire to see a righteous government established in the earth. While this prophecy and its fulfillment involve all creatures now on the earth who are in an implied or direct covenant with Jehovah God, only a small number understand it and appreciate it. The clergy of “Christendom” and the principal ones of their flocks, the opposers of the proclamation of the message of God’s vengeance and of his kingdom, and the “evil servant” class, the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition” (2 Thess. 2:3), not only fail to understand the prophecy and its interpretation from the Lord but treat it with contempt and ridicule. On the other hand, those who are wholly devoted to Jehovah, and who are therefore his chosen witnesses, and those who are of good will and who go to make up the Jona-dab elass, the “great multitude”, are seeing and greatly appreciating the prophecy and its meaning. —2 Ki. 10:15-23 ; Rev. 7: 9-14.
It was in A.D. 1914 that the Prince of Peace stood up and cast Satan out of heaven. (Dan. 12:1; Rev. 12:1-9) It was in 1918 that this mighty Prince came to the temple of Jehovah for judgment, and from that time dates the preparation. “He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face.” (Nah. 2:1) That prophetic statement means that the mighty Field Marshal of Jehovah is now present and preparing for the great battle. To his anointed remnant on earth Jehovah now says: “Keep [securely] the fortress, watch the way, make thy loins strong, . . . For Jehovah restoreth the excellency of Jacob [his anointed; meaning his faithful remnant on the earth].” (Nah. 2:1,2, A.R.F.) God’s people have been brought into unity, and now they “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness”, and that continually; and thus these are pie-pared to perform their part. The fact that Jehovah foretold by his prophet concerning the coming of the battle of Armageddon and that he would prepare for it is proof that the battle will be fought; and the further fact that he has now opened these prophecies to the understanding of his anointed is evidence that the time of the battle is near; hence the prophecy is of profound interest to the anointed.
Concerning his militant organization and its preparation “in that day” Jehovah’s prophet says: “The
shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in scarlet; the chariots flash with steel in the day of his preparation, and the cypress spears are brandished.” (Nah. 2:3, A.R.V.) God’s organization is fired with zeal for the vindication of his great name, and hence that organization flashes as fiery steel. Furthermore, Jehovah says: “I have commanded my consecrated ones, yea, I have called my mighty men for mine anger, even my proudly exulting ones.” (Isa. 13: 3, A.R.V.) Then Jehovah addresses the enemy and tells him to prepare and warns him of what will be the result. “Draw thee water for the siege; strengthen thy fortresses; go into the clay, and tread the mortar; make strong the brickkiln. There shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off; it shall devour thee like the canker-worm: make thyself many as the canker-worm; make thyself many as the locust. Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven : the canker-worm ravageth, and fleeth away. Thy princes are as the locusts, and thy marshals as the swarms of grasshoppers, which encamp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not known where they are.” —Nah. 3:14-17,
The Lord further gives assurance that this battle will be the final end. “What do ye devise against Jehovah ? he will make a full end; affliction shall not rise up the second time.”—Nah. 1: 9, A.R.V.
The enemy knows that his time is short, and hence he prepares with haste for battle. (Rev. 12:12) Continuing his policy of fraud and deceit, diplomacy, boasting and flattery, Satan pulls his commercial, political, military forces and strong-arm squad together, and then by the mouth of his sanctimonious clergymen tells the people that this unholy alliance is the means for the salvation of the world. Satan uses the various elements of his wicked organization to draw the people of all nations, and particularly those of “Christendom”, away from God and into his own wicked camp. The Anglo-American empire system, which chiefly is “Christendom”, Satan makes his chief spokesman on earth, and therefore in the Scriptures this system is called the “false prophet”; and by this beastly organization Satan speaks to and deceives the people. “And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.”—Rev. 16:13,14,16; see Light, Book Two, page 42.
Thus Satan prepares for the great battle, and at the same time he takes a careful inventory of the faithful followers of Christ Jesus. Against these he forms a conspiracy the purpose of which is to cut off
July 1, 1937
SFfie WATCHTOWER.
207
these faithful witnesses of God and to destroy them. (Pss. 2: 3,4; 83: 2-5) That conspiracy is formed, and the overt acts are committed against God’s anointed within the realms of “Christendom”, and this is further proof that “Christendom” is Satan’s instrument. His reason for attempting the destruction of these faithful ones of God is that they might not maintain their integrity toward God, and might thereby fail to be made part of His holy nation; and because these
are the ones whom Jehovah uses to give notice to the world of his purpose to destroy the enemy organization. Jehovah causes his prophet to speak concerning his witnesses in these words: “Proclaim ye this among the nations; prepare war; stir up the mighty men; let all the men of war draw near, let them come up. Let the nations bestir themselves, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to judge all the nations round about.”—Joel 3:9,12, A.R.V.
LETTERS
PHONOGRAPH EXPERIENCES.
Dear Brethren-:
Our' loving Father Jehovah God has provided at this time the phonograph, as one of the best means of preaching his kingdom message and to make known his great name and that of bis King. It is very effective in overcoming prejudice, and assists us in placing many books and booklets with these with whom it would have been impossible to leave any Hteratnre;
I wish to express my thanks and deep appreciation to the Lord for this another provision of his loving kindness" and for the privilege of using it to the glory of his name. I also like to thank Brother Rutherford for his arrangement making it possible for every member of the Bethel family to have one.
Since obtaining this phonograph, from December 3 to December 29, it alone has placed 7 Riches, 21 booklets, with 15 ob-tamers, 74 attendance, and I have played it 14 hours. I have had many interesting experiences with the phonograph during this month [December] and would like to relate just a few of them briefly, showing its effectiveness.
While witnessing I came across two ladies who told me that they were Roman Catholics, that I was wasting my time with them. I tried to explain the purpose' of my calling on them, when suddenly they remarked that the only doctrine of the Catholic religion they did not believe was that about bell, saying that we have plenty of hell here on earth. I saw my- opportunity then to use the phonograph. So I told them that there are millions of honest Catholics throughout the earth who realty want to know the truth about where the dead are, and that we are glad to assist them in getting the correct information free through the means of the phonograph. Without waiting for an answer I got busy, placed the phonograph on a near-by table, and put on the lecture “Where Are the Dead?,’’ They listened very attentively, and at the end thereof they exclaimed': “That sure is the truth, and so different from what the-Catholic priests tell ual ” I suggested that they could learn more of the truth from the Bible, with the help of the Riches book. Each of them took a Riches book and three booklets.
I called on another lady that I had met a year ago without success. This time, through one of her family, I started to play the phonograph, and began with the record “Where Are the Dead?’’ At the close of the lecture she manifested real interest. Then three more of her grown-up children came in to listen. The mother began to ask some intelligent questions; and it happened that I had with me three records which answered all her questions. For that I was glad. Then she asked: ‘ ‘ In case people ask of me why there is bo much wickedness on earth, and why the Lord has not stopped it, what shall I answer?’' So, to her delight and satisfaction, the lecture, ‘ ‘ Wickedness: Why Permitted, ’ ’ answered her last question. She being poor, and not having the contribution for Riehes, I told her she could have it anyway. But she asked the boys to search their pockets for a quarter. But they found nothing. They tried again, and one of the boys had a quarter, which I accepted.
Another Catholic lady, very poor indeed, heard the phonograph and said that it was most interesting and that she delighted to hear the truth. She was very much pleased, too, that I left Riches with her. She will save a few pennies daily; and when I go baek she will have the 25 cents contribution for me.
Your brother in Jehovah’s service,
J. Correnti, Bethel.
RESOLUTION
Dear Brother Rutherford;
We received from the Canadian branch, Toronto, this afternoon, information leading to the disffellowshiping of Walter F. Salter by the Toronto company. At the regmar weekly service meeting of the Winnipeg [Canada] company of Jehovah’s witnesses, held this date, the motion of disfellowshiping Walter F. Salter by the Toronto company was also concurred in by the company here. The following resolution was also moved, seconded, and passed unanimously:
(1)	Seeing that the Lord’s people are being subjected to a barrage of literature calculated to undermine and overthrow the faitli of some, the Winnipeg company of Jehovah ’s witnesses hereby recommend to all of the Lord’s people, here and elsewhere, the following course as a means of protection and safety:
(2)	Increased activity and interest in the Lord’s work, especially in the ‘strange work’ in the field service now beginning, as also the studies in The Watchtower and other publications of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society.
(3)	The destruction, without reading, of any such literature received through the mail or otherwise.
(4)	The turning of a deaf ear to anyone among us manifesting a desire to debate or argue respecting this course of action.
We take this opportunity to tell you that we are unitedly behind you as the one Jehovah has raised up to carry forward the Kingdom witness, as directed by Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s mighty King and Vindicator.
We are in full harmony with the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and the teachings which Jehovah is so bountifully providing us, through his visible channel, the columns of The Watchtower.
We assure you of our Christian love and our desire is that the Lord will continue to guide and direct you to the end that his purposes might be carried out.
The above motion was unanimously adopted at a regular meeting of the company.
CLOSER TOGETHER IN THE GREAT BATTLE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The Cleveland [Ohio] company of Jehovah’s witnesses and our Jonadab companions, in service assembly this evening, voted unanimously to take this means of telling you we are thankful to our heavenly Father that the recent outburst of poison from the adversary and his emissaries has had the effect of drawing us closer together, and is spurring us to greater zeal and effort in co-operating with you in the great battle of today against the Devil and his harlot wife.
Please be assured of our warmest love for you as you continue to press the battle to the gate, calmly ignoring the vicious snarling, snapping and gnashing of those who are inspired by their father, the Devil.
May Jehovah, our. God, continue to direct your thoughts so that you, in turn, may be used to assist us in real understanding as so wonderfully explained in the May 15 Watchtower,
208
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
OBVIOUSLY THE LORD’S ARRANGEMENT
Dear Brother Rutherford:
On a suggestion representing the unanimous opinion of the company, we find joy in putting into words our loyalty to God’s organization and expressing the unity presently existing in the company.
After more than a year of disagreement and some strife that has divided us and hampered our work, under the Lord’s guidance the advent of the new Canadian servant and the reorganization effected by him have been the means used by the Lord to open to us a new era of united kingdom service.
The organization of the Eastern Division has given us opportunity for useful and helpful fellowship with near-by companies with such prosperity resting upon our mutual efforts that it is obviously the Lord’s arrangement.
Coming at the same time as our company reorganization, and making its blessings all the more pronounced, is the opening up of the ‘great multitude’ work heie, on a substantial scale. The phonograph is the instrument for calling thepi. It has provided a common giound on which we can get acquainted, develop friendship with the people which leads to informal discussions with them and ultimately to permanent Riches studies in their homes. In three months about a dozen Riches studies have been formed in this way, and now we have practically one phonograph to each worker.
An assembly of the Eastein Division was held at Ottawa on January 1,2,3, and was attended by friends from all parts of the Division. This brought a real blessing to all taking part therein.
Assuring you of our continued loyalty to the Watch Tower as part of God’s organization, and our continued service in His work, we are
Yours in the kingdom service,
Ottawa Company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
JEHOVAH’S MOUTHPIECE UPON THE EARTH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
I have been noting in The Watchtower the points you have been stressing of late conceining the criticism of the Society’s publications by those in high positions and otherwise. I find myself in disagreement with all these criticisms, believing The Watchtower to be Jehovah’s mouthpiece upon the earth ever since its first publication, in 1879, and I have been fed and nourished from its pages for the last forty years.
The warnings through The Watchtower are necessary and timely to all belligerents. If they still persist in this course, the Sciiptures advise whither they are drifting. We cannot mouin their loss, but think of them as Jehovah does: “My just one by faith shall live; and if he should shrink back my soul does not delight in him. But we are not of those shrinking back into destruction; but of faith in order to a preservation of life.” —Hebrews 10: 38, 39, Diaglott.
The above scripture is self-evident, that obedience alone to God’s law guarantees a pieservation of life to all those agreeing to its terms, and that is a delight to Jehovah, but if any of these turn aside, despising this precious gift of life, Jehovah has no more a pleasure in them and his bioken law slays them. It appeals to me that this and other scriptures corroborate the statements in The Watchtower, and authorize the warnings given. It appears of inestimable value that God’s law should now take its rightful place in the hearts of his people in this day of his power, when all opposing forces shall fall before him and his great name shall be exalted. The loss of eternal life to the above class pales into insignificance in compaiison to the majesty of God’s beneficent eternal law of obedience being upheld before men and angels.
Another point of contention we note by The Watehtowe r is the objection to one man’s controlling the Watchtower articles. ‘There should be a committee having control,’ they say. Brother Russell found out early in his career that only one man could successfully edit The Watchtower. Again in the early part of the Elisha period the icsults of an editorial committee's controlling the Watchtower articles demonstrated that one nnnd should have the chief control. In looking to the Scriptures for corroboration we find Jehovah’s arrangement from the first was carried out through one man at a time. One man, Moses, led
out the children of Israel; also the priesthood, one son of Jacob, Levi; one son of Levi, Kohath; one son of Kohath, Annam; one son of Amram, Aaron; and his son Eleazar succeeded him. Jesse had many sons, but only one chosen, David; and there arc hosts of other instances. Paul was the only one chosen for his special work. The twelve apostles were not given to dictate to him, ete.
In the Elijah period one man was chosen, and all the evidences now give conclusive proof that Jehovah still carries out Uis approved method by the selection of one nnnd to contiol the appointments of His capital organization in their operation upon the earth at this time. It’s the same old stoiy, rebelling against the Lord’s arrangement and falling by the wayside, as is demonstrated throughout Israel’s history and the [spiritual Israel’s] times, the Elijah period, up to now, and to the end.
Further in regard to the contention of some, as noted in The Watchtower, that it’s not due time to carry on a vigorous witness to the people of good will for their enlightenment, the physical facts prove their contention to be wrong. I have contacted a number this last year of energetic activity and enthusiasm. We see and hear from all points of the compass that they are coming out of every kindred, tongue and people, not prematurely, not sickly, but strong and sturdy with remaikable clearness of vision, gladly singing the song of their deliverance and icjoicing to have a part in declaring Jehovah’s judgments. If they are not of the great multitude, then who are they? They surely are not like those we contacted in the Elijah work.
Is it possible that this present vigorous campaign in behalf of the people of good will, with its contending voices for and against, may be the herald of another marvelous feature in the establishment of God’s kingdom in the earth before the wholesale slaughter of Armageddon?
We recall that in the past when the time came for the “projecting of the active power of Christ Jesus to things pertaining to the earth ’ ’, that most important feature in the establishment of the kingdom along with the casting of Satan out of heaven, a state of affairs similar to now obtained. In close proximity to that Jehovah authorized a vigorous world-wide campaign beginning February 24, 1918, declaring that “millions now living will never die”, which message brought the subject of the establishment of the kingdom vividly before the minds of all ‘ ‘ Christendom ’ ’. Some tune ago I met a graduate from Bovvdoin College, Maine, who said, “That lecture ‘Millions Now Living Will Never Die’ was very popular among the men at Bovvdoin, and that lecture made Judge Rutherford famous.” He has not the vision to see it made Christ’s kingdom famous.
Then, as now, there was a controversy for and against which made the subject of the kingdom prominent. That message has continued to reveibeiate, until now it is accentuated by the message to the real ‘millions’, the great multitude, who may abide until the kingdom is established in power.
Another correspondency obtained in Jesus’ day: Then the message of the kingdom was vigorously proclaimed just preceding Calvary, where the puichase price of the human race was guaranteed to justice and the kingdom rights were then secured. The strife of words then gave the kingdom greater prominence.
The interpretation of the prophecy of Obadiah concerning the Roman Catholic Hieiarchy is rich. We can see that the hour for Jehovah’s declaiation of vengeance against her is heie. It’s good to see how every prophecy agrees to the same order of piocedure against this giant foe; and who would dare to launch such a forceful attack upon her were it not sustained by all the prophets, each one giving some different aspect of the tactics of the enemy though all converge to the one point?
Vour letter marked private and personal came to hand, calling for another great campaign against “her” in battle. I am thrilled with the piospect. I believe this method of prolonged attack with the phonograph beginning March 14 will accomplish a mighty expose of that iniquitous system. I often want to say to you that in your endeavor to express the proper interpretation of the various prophecies I see eye to eye and am “standing by you until the morning” of perfect vision and daily remember you at the throne of heavenly grace. ‘Watch Tower! what of the night?’ we ask. We will not lose sight of the night, neither will we lose sight of the morning which cometh also. Praise Jehovah!
Yours in the best of bonds,
Edith E. Mason, Pioneer.
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N .Y., LJ. S. A.
officers
J. P. Rutherford President W. E. Van Ambukgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive piice for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creatuie and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus arc ehildien of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind ns expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom beforo all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous law’s shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
IIIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purpo-.es as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It docs not indulge in controversy, and its columns arc not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
■United States. $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Biutain, Australasia, and South Aitiha. 7-. American remittances should be made by Postal or Exprrss vioi.ev Order or by Hank Draft. Canadian, Briti-li, South Afi lean .mil Australasian remittances should be made, dneet to the lop.'itive branch otliccs. Remittances from countries other than tho-e iiuii-tioned may be made to the Brooklyn othce, but by Intel national Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..............31	Craven Terrace, London, VV. 2, Fnirland
Canadian.........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Ttoad, Strathlleld, N. S. W„ Austtalla South Afiican.........Boston House, Cape Town, South Af.ica
Please address the Society in cicry case.
(Translations 0] this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Blblo who by reason of infirmltv, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription prim may have The IVati hlou er flee upon written application to the publishers, made once each .vear, stating the reason for so ic-questing it. We nrc glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of addie-s, when requested, may be expected to appear on additss label within one month. A renewal blank (cairving notnc of expiration) v> nl be sent with the journal one month before the subscription cxpues.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Broollyn, N. Y, under the Act 0/ Hatch 3, IS'D.
“MOUNT PERAZIM”
The next testimony period, named “Mount Perazim”, will occupy the dates August 7 to 15 inclusive. This falls due right in the midst of the special summer campaign; hence theic will be no change in the special oilers of literature to be exhibited during this testimony period, only that the kingdom publishers will arrange their affairs to devote as much time as possible during said period to jilaec these special offers with the people. See the announcement elsewhere under “Summer Campaign’’, and also consult forthcoming issues of the Infoimant for fuller information.
SUMMER CAMPAIGN
The Lord’s storehouse is large and bursting with abundance. Appiopiiatcly a huge and most attractive offer will leal me the summer activities and efforts of Jehovah’s publishers. Such will consist of six bound books, on a contribution of $1.00, or, better still, six bound books together with seven booklets, on a $1.25 contribution. The Informant goes into more detail 10-garding this campaign and the Society’s provision thcicior. Let the publishers ordei now the extra literature needed m addition to what stocks they now have on hand for tins campaign, which began July 1 and continues to September 12 inclu-ive.
PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and covered with brown cloth and having rounded comers. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces. With the three phonograph discs which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds C ounces. The volume of sound is strong, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonograph is timed properly, at 78 r.p.111., and should be checked from time to time. This model, including three discs, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the three discs, $8.00. Remittances should accompany orders. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
HELP RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION WITHOUT DELAY
For the convenience of the subsetiber, a renewal blank is sent with The ll'atchloicer one month before expiration (on foreign subsetiptions, two months). Renew your subscription promptly and till in the renewal blank winch is mailed to you with your Watchtoncr. Sign your name uniformly; give stieet and number, city and state; date your renewal blank, and please use the blanks sent to you enclosed in The ll atchtoy.cr. The-'j subscription blanks tell us which numbers will bo neecsst.ty with your icncwal order. Always read carefully the leveise rule of the renewal blank. When you change your address always give the old as well as the new addiess, two weeks before you move,	‘
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
VouLVm	July 15, 1937	No, 14
RACKETEERS
“The wicked worketh a deceitful work.”—Prov. 11:18.
PART 1
JEIIOVAII has advised his covenant people concerning the way of the wicked in order that the righteous may walk in the way of the Lord and escape that which befalls the wicked. While the words racket and racketeer do not appear in the Scriptures, yet other words of the same import and meaning are used to identify the workers of iniquity. Words are employed to convey information. The word racket cannot be properly rejected on the ground that it is not a Scriptural term, for the reason, fraud, deceit and deceiving, which arc Scriptural terms, convey the same meaning as that of racket and racketeer. Addressing himself to conditions that would prevail at the end of the world, Jesus’ words show that at that time fraudulent and deceitful schemes and fraudulent workers would be more in evidence than in previous times and working in such a way "that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect”. (Matt. 24:24) It is certain, therefore, that those who are not of the very elect will be deceived by such schemes and schemers and that they are being deceived, because we are now at Die end of the world and the wicked crowd arc putting forth their greatest endeavors to deceive. Those who are in the temple with the Lord, and who abide there, are protected from such deceitful schemes, provided they obey the instructions received from the Lord. Those of the temple company yet in the flesh must be instructed, however, as to the ways and means employed by the wicked in working their iniquitous schemes, in order that the righteous may continue to go in the right way and, furthermore, to the end that they may be able to give instruction and aid to their companions, that is, the Jonadabs.
* The ignorant are those without knowledge; and such include those who at one time were in line for the kingdom but who because of selfishness failed to gain the information made available for them, and the result is, to them, that their latter state or condition is worse than the former. They were at one time counted by the Lord as watchmen amongst his people, but, failing to gain understanding, they become blind and ignorant, and concerning such the Lord God’s prophet says: “His watchmen are blind; they are all igno
211
rant.” (Isa. 56:10) At the present time there arc many of such, and they will not appreciate the truth concerning rackets and racketeers, but will rather resent it. Such ignorant and blind ones are easily deceived by the Devil and by his associates. The “elect” are not of this class that can be deceived, because they arc always diligent to ascertain the truth, that they may do the will of God; and because they arc pure in heart and arc diligent in obeying God’s law Jehovah grants unto them the desire of their heart to know his will and to be led by him through Christ Jesus. Such faithful ones are taught by .Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and therefore cannot be deceived. It becomes the duty and privilege of the ‘elect servant’ class also to transmit to those persons of good will toward God such information as is made available of and concerning the wicked racketeers and their rackets. What is here published, therefore, is first for the benefit of the remnant, that they may use that information to aid and comfort the Jonadabs, who are seeking righteousness and meekness.
3	Many persons arc ignorantly supporting a racket which works great injury to them and to others, and all such persons of good will would no doubt cease to support such a racket if they understood the truth. It is therefore the duty as well as the privilege of the remnant to aid such persons of good will to gain a knowledge of the truth. In proclaiming the truth of God’s purpose controversies should be avoided. The remnant do not seek controversies, but arc anxious to do the will of God by bearing testimony to the truth to others, that such others may avail themselves of the privilege of serving the Lord. The truth should never be used as a club with which to punish others, but should be used for the purpose of doing good to those who desire to know what is right. Telling the truth, however, necessarily exposes rackets and racketeers, and such exposure is for the purpose of enabling those of good will to learn where they get protection, that thej' may go in the right way. To do such work of testifying to the truth necessarily discloses those who are against God and his kingdom, and such truth is a punishment to the wicked; but Jehovah’s witnesses
212
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
must always keep in mind that their duty js to tell the truth as God has commanded, and the result will be according to the will of God, and therefore right; and if this results in chastisement to the wicked, then it is according to the will of God.
‘ The world is full of wicked creatures, and of such the religionists arc the worst. No good can result by abusing any practitioner of religion. Personal attacks on anyone are uncalled for. The business of the remnant is to do good always, and to do so by telling the truth, and all persons who are of good will toward God, desiring the truth, will profit by hearing the same. A debate with those who are holding and teaching false doctrines is not for the purpose of chastising the wicked, but such a debate might be entirely proper for the purpose of enlightening those who are held in bondage, that they might escape. There are many persons who are thus restrained by the religionists and the religious organizations, and such persons of good will sigh and cry because of the wickedness practiced by racketeers; and the Lord God sends forth his witnesses to proclaim the truth, that those who do thus sigh aud cry. may receive the information that will lead them in the right way. God’s faithful prophet wrote: “I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.” (Ps. 39:1) Surely this means that the servant of the Lord God will not indulge in controversial harangue with those who are wicked and who arc attempting to do injury to God’s cause and his people. When the wicked resort to lies, slander and vicious and malicious charges, the proper course for those who arc devoted to the Lord is to ignore such wicked ones; but, if opportunity arises, then speak the truth, that those of good will may be benefited. Jehovah’s witnesses, therefore, will be looking out to give the message to those who have an ear to hear. The purpose of giving testimony is not to convince the wicked, that such wicked ones may reform, because that is an impossibility; but the purpose is to aid those who arc truly seeking knowledge. The present is the lime of darkness upon the world and when gross darkness rests upon the people, even as God by his prophet foretold. Such darkness is upon those who have been deceived by the racketeers, who carry on their rackets for the purpose of deceiving. It is therefore also the time when those who are devoted to Jehovah God must, in obedience to his commandment, ‘arise and shine,’ by telling the truth and telling it boldly. (Isa. 60:1) For this reason it is the duty of The Watchtower to publish facts concerning the greatest racketeering scheme that has ever been practiced upon the human race, and which racket is deceiving and working great injury to millions of honest-hearted persons. What is a racket? and who are the most subtle and slimy racketeers?
8	A racket is a scheme, plan, dodge or trick used for selfish gain and which deceives and works injury to
others. A perversion of the truth for the purpose of inducing another in reliance upon it to part with something valuable is a racket. A false scheme or misrepresentation or suppression of the truth, which results in injury to others, and for pecuniary gain to the schemer, is a racket. A deception intentionally practiced, with a view to gain, is a racket.
0	A racketeer is a schemer who is artful, wily and cunning and who uses his plan or scheme to gain an unfair advantage over others. The racketeer gains an undue advantage over others, and then uses his scheme or plan to rob or pillage others, and this he does for real or supposed gain to himself. All racketeers arc public enemies and enemies of honest persons, and are the enemies of God. Rackets, practiced by racketeers, work injury to those upon whom the trick is practiced.
7	Men who are engaged in traffic that is unlawful and that works injury to the people are racketeers and public enemies. The stealing of children or persons and holding them for ransom is a racket, and the stealer or kidnaper is a public enemy. Men who engage in the white-slave trade are racketeers and public enemies. Real estate promoters who operate schemes to defraud others arc racketeers and public enemies. Those who operate a scheme by offering prizes to induce persons to buy or sell worthless goods, wares and merchandise arc racketeers. Men who engage in robbery, stealing and murder for personal gain are racketeers and public enemies. The man who engages in the scheme of blackmail and thereby obtains money is a racketeer and a public enemy. AU such public enemies cither put the people in fear or fraudulently overreach them. Men who engage in political schemes misrepresenting the facts in order to induce the people to support them that they may thereby reap a personal or pecuniary gain are racketeers and public enemies. Commercial men or corporations operating a scheme or schemes that result in injury to the people are racketeers and public enemies. Those who engage in any kind of fraudulent scheme that results in gain or injury to others arc racketeers and public enemies. Men who use motion pictures to mislead the people, and thereby gain any kind of profit in name, money or influence, are racketeers. All racketeers are agents of the Devil, whether they realize that fact or not. All wrongful schemes originate with the Devil, and that great enemy induces and influences men to use such rackets to do injury to others and to bring reproach upon the name of the Almighty God. Such is a general description of rackets and racketeers.
GREATEST RACKET
8	Put aside now preconceived opinion, and with an unbiased mind examine the facts concerning the greatest of all rackets that have ever been practiced under the sun, to understand the truth of which is for your own personal welfare. Honest persons have
July 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER-
213
some means of protecting themselves against many public enemies because they are warned against such enemies, can see how the enemies operate, and can take steps to safeguard their own interests. The most dangerous and destructive kind of racketeering is that which has the appearance of honesty but which is operated in such a subtle, deceptive manner as to blind the people to the real truth. The credulous and unsuspecting are caught unawares in the enemy’s trap and find it almost impossible to extricate themselves therefrom. The greatest racket ever invented and practiced is that of religion. The most cruel and seductive public enemy is that which employs religion to carry on a racket, and by which means the people are deceived and the name of Almighty God is reproached. There arc numerous systems of religion, but the most subtle, fraudulent and injurious to humankind is that which is generally labeled "the Christian religion’’, because it has the appearance of a worshipful devotion to Jehovah God, the Supreme Being, and thereby easily misleads many honest and sincere persons. Strange as it may seem, the two words "Christian’’ and "religion" are diametrically opposed one to the other. Most persons in the land called "Christendom" have been led to believe that the two words mean one and the same thing, and through lack of knowledge of the truth great injury is done to the people. The greatest public enemy is that which operates with a righteous appearance but which is fraudulent, brings reproach upon God’s name, misrepresents his purpose, and thereby robs the people of their money, their peace of mind, their liberty of speech and thought, and of the opportunity for life everlasting. Under the practice of the so-called "Christian religion" the world at the present time has reached that period described in the Bible in these words: "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that arc good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.”—2 Tim. 3:1-5, 8, 9.
9	Do not confuse "Christianity" with the so-called "Christian religion". The latter operates in the name of God and Christ but is wholly against Christ and his kingdom, which is the only hope of the human race. Religion labeled "the Christian religion" is a racket invented by the Devil to defame the name of Almighty God and is practiced by men, some of whom arc honest and practice it because they have been induced to be
lieve it is right, while others know that they arc wrong and arc working a fraud upon the people. The latter arc doubly dangerous to the interests of the human race. Because the name of Christ has been and is used to work a great fraud upon the people the racket thus practiced is the greatest of all. There arc many sincere and honest persons in organizations known as "religious" or "church organizations", and it is with the hope of helping such to sec the truth that this publication is put forth. What is here published is not an attack upon men, but is an attack upon the most subtle and devilish kind of frauds that ever existed. Those who desire to know the truth will be pleased to now carefully consider the origin of the so-called "Christian religion" and how it has progressed in the earth.
10	Christ Jesus is the Head or beginning of Christianity, because he leads and others follow in obeying God’s commandments. Christ means Anointed of God, the One who is commissioned to carry out God’s purpose. Christ is not and never was for one moment a religionist. lie always strictly obeys the commandments of the Almighty God. He instructed his faithful disciples in the Word and purpose of Jehovah God. After the resurrection of Jesus from the dead the holy spirit, which is the invisible power of God, came upon the faithful apostles and they understood the truth as it was not possible for them to understand it before that time. Those faithful men, in the name of Christ, vent about "from house to house" (Acts 20:20), teaching the people and preaching to them that the shed blood of Christ Jesus provides the redemptive price for man from condemnation, and that it is the purpose of Jehovah God to give life to those who believe on Christ and follow in his steps. Because those men were freely telling the truth to the people concerning Christ, the religionists amongst the Jews assaulted the apostles and brought them into the courts, demanding: "By what power, or by what name, have ye done this?" One of those faithful apostles of Jesus Christ replied in these words: "Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole. This [Christ] is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."—Acts 4:10-12.
11	During the remainder of the earthly career of the apostles they continued to preach to the people the message concerning Christ Jesus, his crucifixion and resurrection, and the coming of his kingdom as the only hope of mankind, and many of the common people heard and believed. To offset the work of the apostle, Satan the Devil began to build an anti-Christ organization, into which latter organization many
214
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
people were drawn. Ambitious men assumed the leadership amongst those who started to follow in the footsteps of Jesus, and those ambitious and selfish men became the teachers and leaders of the organization (Acts 20:29,30), and thus was the organization labeled as “the Christian church”, and the doctrines and practices thereof were from that time forward called “the Christian religion”. The Lord had warned his disciples of the coming of the anti-Christ, that is, those who should deceive the people in the name of Christ. (2 John 7) Such deceivers were manifesting themselves even in the days of the apostles. (2 Thess. 2:7) In this day (1937) the religious organization that has its headquarters at Vatican City, Italy, and which calls itself “the Christian church” or “Christian religion”, dominates the religion of the nations called “Christendom”. As heretofore shown, religious organizations began with Babylon and extended to all parts of the earth. When Home became a world power, which is known as Pagan Rome, that world power practiced the Devil religion ; and in time Pagan Rome blossomed into what is known as Papal Rome, which from then till now practices what is called the “Christian religion”. The following indisputable historical facts should be read with real interest, since they disclose that Rome completely fell under the Devil religion. The quotations following arc from The Encyclopedia Americana:
“ROMAN RELIGION. From the time that the Roman religion appears within the pale of traditional and recorded history it seems to have been constantly and progressively subjected to varying influences, both internal and external, and to have passed through many changes. . . . Fundamentally the primitive religious ideas of all the Indo-European peoples were quite similar. Even the Roman religion, in the days when Rome was governed by kings and had already begun to evolve complicated rituals and complex myths, still retained a suggestive similarity to that of India. . . . The early Roman gods were the personification of the elements of nature. The old Roman deities and supernatural beings of their nomadic life, the patrons of the chase and the guardian spirits of the mountains, the rivers, the earth, the sky and the upper heavens gradually assumed more definite attributes . . . The deities and religious customs and practices of all the tribes of Italy of Indo-European origin, which were quite similar, gradually became domesticated in Rome. Naturally as the Roman Empire broadened and became more cosmopolitan, its religious system also became broader and more allembracing. Having absorbed the deities of the Italic Peninsula, the habit of absorption became, with Rome, all-impelling, and the pantheon of the Imperial City, Teaching out its octopus arms in every direction throughout the already wide confines of the rapidly extending Roman domain, and even beyond it, brought new creeds, new deities and new religious philosophies
into Rome. Under such conditions as these little or no religious dogma could exist; nor did it. . . . Thus ecclesiastical Rome became as cosmopolitan and eclectic as the Roman Empire itself. This is but another way of saying, however, that the religious life of the Roman community was constantly shifting as the process of broadening continued.
“. . . Diana, the moon goddess, under one name or another and with somewhat varying attributes, the favorite deity of so many nomadic peoples given to the chase, and in all probability the chief deity of the nomadic Romans, gave place to the earth mother, the producer, the characteristic deity of an agricultural people. . . . Jupiter, the god of the sky, of the upper regions and of thunder, usurped the foremost place primitively held by Diana, the moon mother, becoming the titular deity of the Romans and the supreme god of the Latin races united under the imperial swaj’ of Rome. . . .
"... Juno, the female counterpart of the supreme deity [Jupiter] himself, and the definition of the supposed female qualities of the sky. In other words, she is but a subdivision of Jupiter himself, whose sister and wife she is represented, in Roman mythology, to be. . . .
“Next to Jupiter and Juno, his regal consort, the greatest of the Roman state gods, was Mars, . . . the patron of war, . . . Mars, who was especially honored in March and October, was the patron of the opening and closing of the war campaigns and of the sports connected therewith. . . .
“. . . At this early period in the life of the Roman people, the superior priesthood seem to have been almost inseparably connected with the nobility and the kingly rulers, the latter of whom had already begun to lay claim to descent from the gods. The seeds of ancestor worship had also already been planted, a custom which was later on to deify kings and emperors, as the legal and de facto representatives of the gods upon earth. . . .
“. . . It looked very much as if the old religion were about to go by the board when the establishment of the [Roman] empire saved it for the time being. The emperors, claiming to rule by divine right and direct descent from the gods, it was very much to their interest to uphold a state religion; which they did on a magnificent scale, bringing into the national church all the officers, employees and dependents of the government. The state church, at this latter stage, was an immense fraternity, all the members of which were bound, by virtue of their office, to support it. This revival of the ancient Roman religion was, therefore, less religious than political. . . . Babylonian, Greek, Assyrian, Egyptian and Eastern religious ideas found welcome in Rome. The Great Earth Mother of Asia Minor [therefore of Babylon] and Isis, the mother goddess of Egypt, were not only introduced into Rome but their worship, which was accompanied with elab
July 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER-
215
orate ritual and ceremonial, became almost universal throughout the Boman Empire; and such a firm root did it take among the masses of the Roman people and the Eastern nations under the domination of Rome that the early Christian missionaries found great difficulty in eradicating it.
. This craze for foreign deities went to unheard-of extremes, going so far afield as Persia, from which was introduced the great sun god, Mithras, with his elaborate mystical worship, which became very popular in the Imperial City itself. . . . Thus Rome, bathed in philosophy, scepticism, mysticism, emotionalism and stoicism, with nothing solid to which to anchor, drifted upon the rocks of national religious shipwreck. In this condition she was found ... for the development of the Catholic faith.”—The Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 23, pages 641-645.
12The “gods” mentioned in the foregoing are Gog and the wicked demons, which inhabit what is known in the Scriptures as “the land of Magog”. The faithful apostles of Jesus Christ saw the anti-Christ religion advancing in their day and forewarned the people against it. Soon after they passed from the earth the Devil saw to it that what began as the Christian organization was corrupted and turned into what has since been called the ‘‘Christian religion”, and which has since operated in the earth under the name of the ‘Roman Catholic religious system’. The following historical facts, taken from Lord’s Old Homan World, arc here appropriate:
“In the Hirst Century not many wise or noble were called. ... In the Second Century ... it was a disgrace to be a Christian in the eye of fashion or power. . . . The church . . . was a small body of pure and blameless men who did not aspire to control society. But they had attracted the notice of the government and were of sufficient consequence to be persecuted.” During the second century ‘‘bishops had become influential, not in society, but among the Christians”. Then ‘‘ecclesiastical centralization commenced; . . . The Church was laying the foundation of its future polity and power”.
13	It is certain that the Lord God had not marked out such a policy. It is equally certain that it was the Devil who was planting and cultivating the seeds of selfishness to accomplish his wicked purpose. The historian above mentioned continues: “The Third Century saw the Church more powerful as an institution. . . . Doctrines were systematized [into creeds and confusion] . . . Great bishops ruled the growing church. . . . The Church was rapidly advancing to a position which extorted attention of mankind [of the world, to be sure]. It teas not till the Fourth Century—when imperial persecution had stopped, when Constantine [the emperor of Pagan Rome] was converted; when the Church was allied with the State, when the early faith was itself corrupted, when superstition and vain philosophy [prompted by the Devil]
had entered the ranks of the faithful; . . . when synods were brought under political influence; . . . when politics and dogmatics went hand in hand, . . . that men of rank entered the church. When Christianity became the religion of the court and of the fashionable classes, it was used to support the very evils against which it originally protested. The Church was not only impregnated with the errors of Pagan philosophy, but it adopted many of the ceremonies of oriental [Devil] worship, . , . The clergy, ambitious and worldly, sought rank and distinction. . . . They became lazy, arrogant, and independent. The people were shut out of the government of the church. The bishop became a grand personage who controlled and appointed his clergy. . . . The mission of the [true] Church was lost sight of in a degrading alliance with the State.”
SUBTLE SCHEME
14	The Lord God gives warning to men in these words: “The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe.” (Prov. 29:25) The man who fears that he may lose some honor or other thing that he regards as valuable unless he pursues a compromising course is certain to fall into Satan’s trap. Ambitious men arc easily led into Satan’s trap. No doubt the early leaders in what is known as the Catholic Church organization were sincere, but some of them, particularly being ambitious for honor amongst men, and fearing they might lose what they had, quickly fell to the flattery of the Devil, who saw to it that they had plenty of it. About 40U years after the death of the apostle Peter the Roman Catholic ‘‘Hierarchy of Jurisdiction” was organized. After still further centuries had passed, and the people had been kept in ignorance of the truth, it was then an easy matter to induce the living ones to believe that a man whom they had been taught to honor as pope and the head of the Hierarchy is the successor of the apostle Peter. The people were thus induced to believe a great and injurious falsehood. There is no reason to say anything about the man who fills the office of pope, and therefore nothing is here intended to apply to an individual, but what is said is against the office. That office of pope had no existence in the days of the apostles. It was created by men at the instance of Satan, and the first man elected to that office was elected in the year 440 (A.D.). The Catholic Church did not exist until long centuries after the days of the apostles of Jesus Christ, and yet that organization today claims to be the church of Christ, and millions of sincere persons believe that falsehood. Neither Christ nor any of his apostles had anything whatsoever to do with bringing into existence the Catholic organization. Only the Devil could conceive the idea of organizing a great religious system and labeling it the ‘‘Christian church”; and his purpose, iu keeping with his name, was and is to deceive the people and keep them in ignorance of the truth concerning the church of
216
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
God. The church of God, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, is the only true church, and the names of those who are in it arc written in heaven and not on earth. (Heb. 12:23) Because that religious organization assumed the name of Christ and stealthily and gradually put forth its false doctrines it has become the most far-reaching and destructive racket that has ever been in existence, and works to the greatest injury to the people and to the defamation of God’s name. It operates upon false pretenses and false teachings.
PRETENSES
15	A pretense is the act of laying claim to something or holding out to others some teaching or doctrine to induce such others to take a coui'sc consistent with such pretenses. The Catholic organization, commonly called the “Catholic church”, is made up of the pope, bishops, cardinals, priests and others called “clergymen”; and all those who support that organization or who arc adherents thereof arc known as the “Catholic population”, but which “Catholic population” are not members of the church. In the Catholic organization there arc the high and the low clergymen, that is to say, the Hierarchy of authority, composed of men in high positions; while there arc many humbler men in the priesthood who obey the commands of the higher-ups. The Catholic organization has long held out and continues to hold out to the people certain claims or doctrines for the manifest purpose of inducing people to become adherents to or “children” of that organization. Among the doctrines so taught and held out is this one, to wit: That the Homan Catholic Church is the one true and only church. The following quotation is from the well-known Catholic authority: “The true Church must be Apostolical. Hence in the Creed framed in the first Ecumenical Council of Nieica, in the year 325, we find these words: ‘I believe in the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.’ ”—The Faith of Our Fathers (Gibbons), pages 38-42.
19	Credulous persons, who hear this claim and rely upon the same, arc induced to act, and therefore millions of sincere persons have been induced to believe that the Homan Catholic organization is the church of God, and for that reason they have submitted themselves to the organization which is ruled by the Hierarchy. If the claims or pretenses made by the Catholic organization are false, then it must be conceded that the people arc being imposed upon to their injury and that those who arc responsible for such pretenses or false claims are therefore racketccrs. By what rule shall these claims be measured to determine whether or not they are true or false? The sincere person who believes in God and in Christ, and who is of good will toward God, will quickly answer this question in these words: “The Word of God is the only true guide by which we must determine the truth or falsity of such claims.”
JT Is the Roman Catholic Church organization the true church of the living God? The answer must be, No. Refer now to the scriptures showing that the true church is the temple or organization of Jehovah God and that the one and true Foundation Stone or Rock thereof is the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Head and Lord of the church; and that all others in the temple or church are members of his body and that such latter-named ones must be transformed into the likeness of the Lord Jesus Christ, faithfully following in his steps, and that these are the witnesses of Jehovah God, who arc commissioned to bear testimony to his holy name. The office and mission of the church of God under Christ Jesus, compared with that of the Roman Catholic organization, shows that the two take exactly opposite courses. The Roman Catholic organization is now and for centuries has been engaged in religion, politics and commerce for gain, and is therefore the enemy of God and the enemy of all men. In the Scriptures a “tree” is used as a symbol of a creature or of an organization composed of creatures, and the fruits borne by that tree symbolically stand for what creatures or organizations hold before the people as spiritual food for their sustenance and growth. Jesus, speaking of the same, says: “A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. . . . Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall cuter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.”— Matt. 7:18-22.
1S	Jehovah God has covenanted to give to Christ Jesus and his faithful ones who follow him, and who arc made members of his church, his kingdom, which kingdom shall in time rule in righteousness and minister blessings to the people. (Luke 22:28-30) The kingdom of God has nothing that is commercial and has nothing in common with the harsh, cruel and  wickcd system that rules the world no w and which present rule is under the Devil and his representatives. Concerning this world Jesus said: “My kingdom is not of this world.” (John 18:36) “The prince of this world [Satan] . . . hath nothing in me.” (John 14:30) The Scriptures show that Christ Jesus takes his kingdom and rules at the time of his second coming, at which time he gathers unto himself his church. (2 Tim. 4:1) Jesus addresses himself to religionists of his time and of the present time, and to whom he says: “The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.” (Matt. 21:43) The Roman Catholic Church organization has never at any time brought to the people the fruits or messages of God’s kingdom, but, on the contrary, that organization has at all times co-operated with politicians, militarists, commercial giants, and other gangsters to rule and control the nations of the earth. Instead of bearing before the people the fruits of God’s Word, which sustain them, that is, the fruits
July 15, 1937
fffie WATCHTOWER.
217
of God's kingdom, the Catholic organization has bitterly opposed the kingdom under Christ. Every religious organization on the earth indulges in politics and in commerce, more or less, contrary to the will of God, and all these organizations ill-treat and persecute the men and women who bear the message or fruits of and concerning the kingdom of God before the people.
INCONSISTENT
19	The Scriptures lay down the unchangeable rule that everyone who is made a member of the church of God faithfully follows in the footsteps of Jesus, and therefore must do as Jesus does. “For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.” (1 Pet. 2:21,22) Again, Jesus says: “Every one that is of the truth hcarcth my voice.” (John 18:37) All such must obey his commandments or else suffer destruction. (John 14:15; Acts 3:23) To lay claim to the high office of the representative on earth of Jesus Christ, and then to take the course exactly opposite to what Jesus took, is wholly inconsistent and shows that the claims or pretenses of the Catholic organization are false. Consider now the well-known facts in the light of the above and supporting scriptures, and by such scriptures determine the truth or falsity of the claims of the Catholic organization.
20	Neither Jesus nor his apostles owned any real estate, houses or other property. Of Jesus it is written: “(He] hath not where to lay his head.” (Luke 9:58) Jesus and his apostles did not build cathedrals and draw the people into them to serve them, but the Lord and his apostles went about “from house to house” preaching the truth to the people and instructing them in the way of God. (Matt. 10: 5-15) All true followers of Christ Jesus have ever pursued the same course. Constantine, the politician and emperor of Rome, who was a pagan or heathen, claimed to adopt “Christianity”. He became a “Catholic”. Constantine was rich and doubtless had been induced to believe that he could huy his salvation. The following is quoted from Cardinal Gibbons’ 1’he Faith of Our Fathers, page 134: “Constantine gave to the Roman Church munificent donations of money and real estate, which were augmented by additional grants contributed by subsequent emj>erors. Hence the patrimony of the Roman Pontiffs soon became very considerable.” From that time onward the Roman Catholic Church organization became very rich in material things. Thus it is seen that it pursued a course wholly inconsistent with that pursued by Christ Jesus. The religious organization, in the fourth century, had bishops and rulers, many of them, and then the bishop of Rome was elected to the office of pope. That was the real beginning of popedom and was more than 300 years after the days of the apostles. (Sec The Encyclopedia Britannica, Volume 2, page 81.) Soon thereafter the pope, as the
head of the Roman Church organization, began to exercise political or temporal power. Pepin, king of France, after defeating the Lombards in the war, placed the pope as temporal ruler of the conquered provinces. Thus the papacy came into existence as a temporal power by means of a war of conquest, which is contrary to the Word of God. Says Cardinal Gibbons: “Charlemagne, the successor of Pepin, not only confirms the grant of his father, but increases the temporal domain of the Pope by donating him some additional provinces. This small piece of territory the Roman Pontiff's continued to govern from that time till 1870, with the exception of brief intervals of foreign usurpation.”—The Faith of Our Fathers, page 137.
21	In the exercise of his political power the pope has maintained his ambassadors at the courts of almost all the nations of “Christendom”. Such a course is entirely inconsistent with and at variance with Christ Jesus, the Head of the church of God, who declares that he has nothing whatsoever to do with the political affairs of this world, because Satan controls them.
22	From 1870 till 1919 the pope was almost completely shorn of his temporal power, as will appear from the historical facts. (See The Watchtower April 15, 1937, If 32-48.) During the period of time from 1848 to 1919 the Roman Catholic Church organization continued to dabble in the politics of the world, however, and to seek to gain political recognition and power amongst the nations of the earth. Immediately following the World War the pope sought a scat at the conference of the League of Nations that he might engage in dividing up Europe when the League of Nations was formed. The pope was prevented from gaining a scat at that conference; but after the League of Nations was formed and began to operate, the Devil saw to it that the papal organization got on top of the League, and it has been riding it ever since. Mussolini became a friend of the pope, and since then they have operated together. “In 1929 the Latcran Treaty adjusted the relations of church and state, in Italy. Shortly thereafter Mussolini and the Popo, strong characters both, clashed over the education of Fascist youth; in 1932 the Duce went to the Vatican, knelt in prayer, and, it is believed,'took holy communion. He was an avowed atheist, like his father, in youth; latterly he has become very religious.”—Inside Europe, page 195.
23	The ambition of Mussolini is to become a great war lord and to rule the whole world by force. The Roman Catholic organization, working with him, fully supports his ambition. When Mussolini began and carried on his bloody conquest against the poor blacks of Abyssinia, and in which war many lives were destroyed, the pope and the Catholic organization backed Mussolini up and “blessed” his murderous assaults. Now the dictator of Italy attempts to compel men and women to breed like dumb beasts for the purpose of producing men to be later sacrificed in war, and in
218
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
this the pope backs tip Mussolini. A press dispatch from Rome, published by the United Press and broadcast over many radio stations, under date of March 4, 1937, says: ‘ ‘ Italy’s Fascist leaders agreed today on a vigorous effort to increase the birth rate and provide more soldiers for the army of the future. A seven-point program was adopted for immediate application by the Fascist grand council, supreme advisory body, in another of its closely guarded night sessions under Premier Benito Mussolini. ... It was reported that Pope Pius would instruct Roman Catholic clergymen to give full support.”
24	Such a course is clearly in violation of God’s everlasting covenant concerning human life, and the so-called Roman Catholic “Church” is guilty under God’s law. (Gen. 9:8-13) Does it appear that swth an organization represents God and Christ, or that that organization fraudulently uses the name of God and Christ as a camouflage behind which it carries on its devilish anti-Kingdom work ?
25	The scarecrow held up throughout the lands now is that of Communism, and it is the papacy that is creator of and is behind that scarecrow movement. Everyone who dares tell the truth about the Roman Hierarchy is by that organization denounced as a Communist. The facts arc that Communism has been organized by the Jesuits, the secret order of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and then used as a camouflage or scarecrow to frighten the people to unite in a movement contrary thereto, and which latter movement is fully controlled by the papacy. In this manner the Nazis of Germany, with Hitler as the leader, were organized and now carry on a ruthless, cruel and murderous rule in that land; and which class of Nazis delight to persecute those who faithfully represent God and Christ and who bear the fruits of his kingdom before the people. Many of Jehovah’s witnesses in Germany have recently been put to death, and thousands of others imprisoned, merely because they had in their possession Bibles and books explaining the Bible, which enable the people to see God’s provision for suffering humanity. The Hitler government is in full accord with the Vatican of Rome. Would the Lord Jesus Christ approve such as the rale of Hitler? Certainly not; and since the Roman Chureh backs up Hitler, that is persuasive evidence that tire Roman Catholic organization represents the Devil and is the enemy of God and Christ.
26	At one time the Roman Catholic Hierarchy controlled Spain, during which time she prosecuted the wicked Inquisition, compelling people to become Catholics or suffer cruel torture. The people rebelled against the highhanded racketeers of Catholicism and organized a republic. Then the Roman Catholic militarists began prosecuting a rebellion against the republic of Spain, carrying on a cruel and vicious war of rebellion for the purpose of again placing the Boman Catholic Hierarchy in control of that country.
The Hierarchy wrongfully obtained possession of millions of money obligations of the Spanish go\ eminent, concealed the same in their cathedrals, and used it to prosecute a rebellious war, in which hundreds of thousands of persons have been cruelly murdered, many of them by Catholic priests. Mussolini and Hitler have supported the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in the prosecution of that rebellious war. Surely no representative of God and Christ on earth could engage in such a warfare, which is in open violation of God’s everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of human life.
27	Since the World War, and since the Roman Catholic organization has regained temporal power, she has become bold and aggressive as never before. A person would have to be mentally blind who does not now see that the purpose of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is to gain control of the political affairs of the world and to rule the people with dictators. The papacy Isas made an alliance with the political rulers of Japan, who make no pretense of being Christians, and she there prosecutes a campaign to silence everybody that speaks the truth against Catholicism. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy is vigorously pushing its campaign to gain control of the oflices and political affairs of the British Commonwealth of Nations, but her greatest effort is now put forth to gain control of the United States of America. A book published in 1935 by a former Roman Catholic Jesuit, who manifestly was sick of the duplicity practiced by the rulers in that wicked religious organization, amongst other things says: “In theory, Catholic Action is the work' and service of lay Catholics in the cause of religion, under the guidance of the bishops. In practice it is the Catholic group fighting their way to control America. . . .
“There was a time—it is now past—when only pious Catholics took part in the work of the Chureh. But today many Catholics who cannot qualify as pious are busy about Catholic Action. Catholicism, in America at least, has ceased to be a matter of religious observance. Catholicism now is something that partakes of clannishness, and that is constituted in large part by social and political and ‘club’ affiliations. Among the hundreds of Catholic leaders who arc outstanding for their loyalty to the cause are to be found quite a few who have little if any regard for Catholic doctrines or observances. Catholic Action would be a far less serious factor in this country were its only agents pious and devout Catholics. The starting point of the wave of Catholic Action in this country may be traced back to the inauguration of the National Catholic Welfare Conference in 1921. On that occasion Archbishop Hanna declared: ‘We have co-ordinated and united the Catholic power of this country. It now knows where and when to act and is cncouiaged by the consciousness of its unity. We feel ourselves powerful because our reunion has become \ Bible.’
July 15, 1937
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
219
From that day Catholic strength has grown apace, and Catholic organizations have multiplied. . . .
“New organizations spring into existence every month. Only last May (1935) a ‘Catholic War Veterans Association’ was established under the patronage of Bishop Molloy of Brooklyn. Already it has several ‘posts’ and it aims at becoming not only a nation-wide but an international organization. Women auxiliaries arc attached to the ‘posts’ under the snappy name of ‘Yeomancttes’. ‘I am sure,’ announced the chaplain, Father Higgins, ‘that we will have the holy backing of Cardinal Hayes and that the entire hierarchy will likewise approve.’ Contemporaneously with the Catholic War Veterans, the Catholic College Graduates felt inspired to do more than they were doing for Catholic Action and to set up a new organization, so that their leadership in Catholic life might become more effective. Fattier Parsons S.J., explaining the new move, writes: 4. . . Organize! Pool the intellects and the wills of as many of the graduates as can be got together. Give them a common objective. Fire their imaginations with the vision of a great movement which takes its roots from deep within the traditions that formed our Western civilization. Let them be daring. Let them be even revolutionary if the need be for that. ’
"... ‘Catholic men,’ he said, ‘should unite in order to be able to tell legislatures that they must not introduce bills which are inimical to the ideals of the family or the ideals of the Catholic Church. They should organize so as to be strong enough to insist that school teachers who teach "pernicious doctrines’’ be removed.’ ”—Home Stoops to Conquer, pages 15-18.
“Space will not permit to call attention here to the divers means employed politically and otherwise to push forward "Catholic Action’’, and thereby gain control of America and other nations. The purpose here is to call attention to the fact that a religious organization that indulges in such political, commercial, military and other wicked methods as those employed by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy could not possibly be the representative of Christ on earth, and that therefore the claims or pretenses of the Roman Catholic organization concerning its being the church of God are wholly fraudulent and false. Such alone should be sufficient to prove to every honest and sincere person that the Roman Catholic organization is the instrument of the Devil and therefore inimical to the welfare of humankind. If a person desires to jeopardize his eternal welfare by holding on to and supi>orting that wicked organization, which is the enemy of God and man, such is his privilege; but this is a warning, that he may have no excuse for later saying that he did not know the organization represented the Devil. The purpose of this publication is io aid honest and sincere persons, whether Catholic or otherwise, to see the truth, that they may seek and find the only place of security.
29 One who gains correct information concerning the Devil’s purpose is then enabled to understand more clearly what the religious racketeers are doing. Without a doubt the Devil brought into existence religious organizations to defame the name of Jehovah God and to enable men who are selfish, ambitious and covetous to carry on a great fraudulent scheme by which the people are kept in fear and subjection and then robbed of their substance and brought under the complete domination of Satan and his visible allies. Satan’s purpose is to rule or ruin, and he is using his organization invisible to that end. By what follows it should clearly appear to all sincere persons how the Devil has an organization and causes men under his direction to carry on the most devilish of all schemes and rackets that have been practiced amongst creatures.
(To be continued)
QUESTION'S FOR STUDY
U 1. How and why has Jehovah advised his covenant people concerning the way of the wicked? Point out the importance of a consideration now of the subject of rackets and racketeers.
H 2,3. Who arc ‘blind and ignorant’ as mentioned at Isaiah 56: 10, and why? Why will the “elect” not be deceived? What is the purpose of the infonnation made aiadablo concerning racketeers and their rackets? How is such information to be used in order that it may serve its purpose?
V 4. Describe the situation calling for the proclamation of the truths here being considered.
If 5-7. Define and illustrate the terms racket and racketeer.
If 8. What is the greatest of all rackets that have ever been practiced, and why? Why is it now so important that honest persons be informed concerning the origin and purpose of religion?
If 9. Why has the so-called “Christian religion” been the greatest racket of ail?
U 10. Explain whether Christ Jesus and his apostles were religionists.
T 11-13. Trace the development of the so-called “Christian religion”.
U 14. How and when did the Catholic Church come into existence? How and why has it become the most far-reaching and destructive of all the rackets?
If 15,16. What is the meaning of piclensc? Describe the Catholic Church as an organization, and the relationship thereto of the “Catholic population”. Why is it that millions of sincere persons hare submitted themselves to that organization?
If 17-18. With scriptures and a comparison of the office and mission of the church of God under Christ Jesus with that of the Roman Catholic organization, show whether the Itoman Catholic Church organization is or could be the true church of the living God.
If 19-21. Compare the course taken by Jesus and his footstep followers and that taken by the Catholic organization, in point of desire to possess matciial things and to exercise political power. What does this show?
If 22-21. Describe the anti-Kingdom activities of the Roman Catholic Church organization by its head and its chief official supporters.
U 25,26. What are the facts concerning the origin and purpose of Communism, and the relationship thereof to Nazism? Account for the present situation in Spain. What do these facts show as to the position occupied by the Roman Catholic organization?
1f 27. Point out the natuie and purpose of “Catholic Action”. What is therein clearly shown concerning the Roman Catholic organization as to whose instrument it is.
V 28,29. What is the purpose in making known these truths? What does this mean as to obligation resting upon those who are thus informed?
CONVENTIONS
FOR the encouragement of his people it is written in the Scriptures, “Blessed be [Jehovah] my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.” “ [Jehovah] is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I am helped; therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth, and with my song will I praise him.” (Pss. 144:1; 28: 7) The time of Jehovah’s war is here, and he has commanded his people to arise to battle. Uis army is a unit, and from time to time it is for their good to assemble together in general convention. Believing that Jehovah through Christ Jesus directs all things for their good, conventions arc being arranged for those who love the Lord, as follows, to wit:
Paris, France, August 21 to 23, 1937; Columbus, Ohio, September 15 to 20, 1937.
PARIS
Cheap transportation facilities are available because of the international Exposition in progress in Paris. Many of Jehovah’s people residing in Continental Europe, and many from Great Britain, have signified their intention to attend the Paris convention. A special train from London to Paris carrying approximately 800 to 1,000 people will go up to the latter city. General information concerning this train will be obtained by addressing the Society’s office at 34 Craven Terrace, London.
A goodly number of American brethren would attend the Paris convention, but steamship accommodations appear to be impossible, the space having been booked long in advance.
Hotei, accommodations arc being arranged by a special committee at Paris. Inquiries concerning the same should be addressed to the Paris Convention Committee, 129 Faubourg Poissonnicrc, Paris IX, France.
Detailed arrangements for this convention are under the supervision of the Central European office at Berne, Switzerland. Anyone desiring information other than what is here stated may write Convention Committee, Allmendstrassc 39, Berne, Switzerland.
ASSEMBLY PLACE
A general assembly place, seating 3,000, is arranged in Paris, together with smaller halls attached. More details will be published later in The Watchtower in the English, also in other languages.
The president of the Society will address the general public, announcements of which will be made later.
COLUMBUS
The convention at Columbus, Ohio, will be for the special accommodation of Jehovah’s people residing in America and in Canada, but will be attended by others from different parts of the earth.
TIME
The convention will open at two o’clock in the afternoon of September 15, and continue until the evening of September 20. All meetings of the convention will be held at the Fair Grounds, in the main auditorium, with adjoining halls as may be required. The Fair Grounds Association, the governor of the state, and the city of Columbus, have issued very cordial invitations for Jehovah’s people to hold their convention at the above place free of charge, and arc furnishing splendid cooperation. The mornings of September 16, 17, and 20 will be devoted to field service, in which all of Jehovah’s enthusiastic people who are attending the convention will participate. The afternoon and evening of those days will be given over to discourses and declaration meetings at the convention meeting place. All day of the 18th and of the 19th of September will be devoted to meetings at the Fair Grounds. On these dates the convention will be addressed by the president of the Society.
Sunday the 19th, from 12 noon to 1:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, an address will be delivered for the general public. More details will appear later, and on the program. The general assembly hall at the Fair Grounds is the Coliseum building, with seating capacity of approximately 10,000. Adjacent buildings connected with the Coliseum by public-address system will accommodate 20,000 more persons. The Fair Grounds will be covered with public-address system which will permit other thousands on the assembly ground to readily hear.
Memorial Hall: This hall is situate in the center of the city, and each day of the convention, at 7:30 p.m., meetings will be held in this hall for the general public.
Hotel and Rooms: The good people of Columbus have signified their pleasure in arranging to accommodate in private homes those who attend the convention. The cost for rooms in private homes will be from 50c per person per day upward to $1.50; the average cost will be 75c per day per person, two persons occupying a room. Hotel accommodations will be furnished for those who arc willing to pay a higher rate. Hotel and private home rates will be approximately as follows:
Grade A Rooms:
With single bed and running water, $2.00.
With single bed and bath, $2.50 up.
Double room with bath, $3.50 up.
Large-capacity rooms, combination tub and shower baths, single beds, three persons in a room, $2.50 per person.
Four to five persons per room, $2.00 per person. Six persons in a room, $1.50 per person.
Grade B Rooms:
With single bed and running water, $1.00.
220
Jvly 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
221
With double bed and running water, $1.50 (75c per person).
With single bed and bath, $1.50.
With double bed and bath, $2.50 ($1.25 per person). All the above rates are per day.
A list of higher-priced hotels and their rates may be had on request.
In writing for accommodations, please be very specific as to your requirements. State the following in your letter: Your name, street, city, state or province, nationality, white or colored, date you expect to arrive in Columbus and date you will leave Columbus, kind of accommodations desired (Residence Grade A or Grade B, Hotel Grade A or Grade B), number of rooms required, number of jwrsons in your party, number of married couples, number of single men, number of single women, the amount you want to pay per person. Your accommodations will be mailed to you; so it will not be necessary for you to report at the room assignment booth on your arrival, but you can go direct to your accommodations. The hotel or people with whom you are to stay will be notified by the Convention Committee that you are coming, and how long you expect to stay. It is requested that all persons attending the convention will obtain their rooms through the accommodations committee rather than by hunting up their own rooms. Your co-operation in this matter will greatly aid the committee.
Those who come in house-cars or trailers or have tents will be assigned free parking space in the Fair Grounds. You need not write about this in advance.
SOUND CARS
Every available sound car will have special opportunities of service. Bring your sound car.
Catering: A cafeteria will be maintained on the convention grounds, at which three meals per day will be served to those attending the convention ; and these meals will Ite served at a nominal cost, only a sufficient amount charged to cover the necessary expenses. The rates will be posted at the cafeteria. Those who desire to make other arrangements for their meals can do so, but the cafeteria is specially for those who desire to have meals served on the grounds.
Pioneer and Trailer Camp: Ample space is provided for the parking of house-ears and for camping purposes of the pioneers. This will be open as early as the 10th of September, and pioneers may park their trailers therein from that date until the end of the convention. The camp will be properly protected by police guards. All persons desiring to park their cars in this space will first report to the Convention Committee, at the Information Office, on arrival.
Information Office: An information office will be maintained on the grounds, in the Coliseum, cast entrance.
Information concerning rooms and rooming accom
modations will be obtained at building No. 2. All persons desiring information concerning rooming should report at this building on arrival.
Advance Information: All persons desiring information concerning rooms and hotel accommodal ions will address the Convention Committee, as follows:
Watch Tower Convention Committee
893 McClain Road
Columbus, Ohio
Requests for such accommodations should be made in writing, addressed to the Convention Committee early in July. An office was opened in Columbus on the 5th of July.
Service : The Service Office will be located in building No. 4. Territory for field service and the assignment will be made at that building. All persons upon arrival should register at the Service Office for service and there receive their instruction and assignment.
Post Office: A post office will be maintained on the convention grounds, and letters can be addressed to any person at the convention, marked "Convention Fair Grounds, Columbus, Ohio”.
Parking Space: Ample space for parking cars is provided for all those who attend the convention by automobile; and this parking space is free, but will be under the direction of persons duly assigned to direct the parking of cars.
Police: Ample police patrol will be provided for the convention and Fair Grounds, both day and night.
Check Room : A room for the cheeking of packages and other like things will be provided on the ground.
Foreign-language Meetings: Meetings for addresses in languages other than English will be held in the afternoon and the evening of Thursday and Friday, the IGth and 17th; otherwise all meetings will be in the general auditorium. See Program for further information.
Immersion: Complete arrangements will be marie for the immersion of all persons who desire to symbolize consecration. Immersion service will be held Sunday morning, at eight o’clock, at which time all candidates will assemble at the auditorium for further instruction.
Those desiring to be immersed, bring your own bathing suits and towels.
Hospital and Nursery: A hospital will be maintained on the ground, under the supervision of doctors and nurses, for the purpose of taking care of anyone who may become ill. Also a nursery will be provided for mothers who have infant children. There will be an open space where the children may play on the grass and be cared for, so they will not interrupt the meetings.
Music: It is the desire of the convention management to have an ample orchestra to lead the music. Therefore any person who plays a musical instrument
222
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
well will please notify the Convention Committee at the following address:
Watch Tower Convention Committee 117 Adams St.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and bring your musical instrument with you to the convention and report at the Information Office upon arrival.
Newspapers: Arrangement is made for a full-page report of the convention to appear each day in the Ohio State Journal. The subscription price for the entire convention newspaper report will be 35c. It will be mailed to subscribers daily. AH persons desiring to receive these newspaper reports may send their subscriptions to Convention Committee, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y., not later than the 7th day of September. After that date subscriptions will be turned in at the Book Room on the convention grounds. The papers concerning the convention report will be sent to any address on earth. It would be well to get your subscription in to the Brooklyn office, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y., on or before September 1.
Transportation: Transportation will be at reasonable rates by bus and by railway, while many will come on their own private, cars. The railway companies have made a special rate of ljc per mile in coach cars, for 25 persons or more. This rate for round trip is available to groups of 25 or more adult persons traveling by rail. Apply to your local ticket agent for further information. Special cars may be arranged in which the parties will travel together on the going trip. The return trip may be made individually on the regular trains. Stopovers arc permitted on the going and returning trips. Baggage may be checked on the train. The local agents of railway companies will give further information.
Bethel Special: A special train will be arranged by the Pennsylvania Railroad Company, and operated from New York to Columbus for the benefit of the Bethel family and other persons in the New York area. This Bethel Special will leave New York at 8: 00 a.m., Eastern Standard Time, on September 11, in order to get the Bethel family on the ground in time to make further preparation for the convention. This train will be made up of day coaches, and will operate as follows:
Eastern Standard Time
Lv. New York	8:00	a.m.
Lv. North Philadelphia 9:25 a.m.
Ar. Paoli	9:55	a.m.
Lv. Paoli	10: 01 a.m.
Ar.	Harrisburg	11:30 a.m.
Lv.	Harrisburg	11:37 a.m.
Ar.	Altoona	2:10 p.m.
Lv.	Altoona	2:14 p.m.
Ar.	Pittsburgh	5:00 p.m.
Lv.	Pittsburgh	5:10 p.m.
Ar.	Columbus	9:20 p.m.
This train makes the run from New York to Columbus in 13 hours 20 minutes, which is faster than the regular scheduled trains. It is necessary for 150 tickets (round trip) to be bought for this train before it will start. Therefore, all persons desiring to avail themselves of this opportunity to travel on this train will please notify Convention Committee, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y., on or before August 15. The cost of tickets will be published in a later issue of The Watchtower. Special trains will be operated from different parts of the United States. Take note of the following concerning the California trains:
Usual special train car parties to Columbus Convention will be arranged from northern and southern California, going via Southern Pacific. Summer tourist rates will be in effect as low as $69.95 for round trip, in air-cooled coaches. Second-class ticket, including sleeper, round trip will be as low as $87.40. Any ticket agent will furnish full information. Those desiring to join these parties should promptly notify C. V. Kncmeyer, 1553 Livonia Ave., Los Aimeles, Calif., or C. W. Gerdes, 61 Diamond St., San Francisco, Calif. Companies arranging for special trains or cars, and who desire the same to be announced in The Watchtower, please send the information to 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, as soon as possible, that publication may be had so that others who desire may join the train or party.
The convention should be a time of great refreshment and blessing to Jehovah’s people. All who recognize Jehovah as God, and the Lord Jesus Christ as his anointed King, and who love God and his kingdom, arc welcome and cordially invited to attend. Speakers of ability from various parts of the earth will be present to address the convention. It is confidently hoped and expected that this will be the most enthusiastic and blessed convention held in modern times. Mako your arrangements for vacation so that yon may attend the convention; and let all who love the Lord ask him to add his blessing upon those who attend, that it may equip his people better for the warfare, that they may lift high his standard and have greater opportunities and greater blessings in carrying his message to the people.
JEHOVAH i« good to all; and his tender mercies are over all las icorks. All thy u.orl:s shall give thanks to thee, O Jehovah; and thy saints shall bless thee. They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power; to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glory of the majesty of his kingdom. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion, endureth throughout all generations.
—Psalm 145: 9-13.
LETTERS
PHONOGRAPH HAS JEHOVAH’S BLESSING
Dear Brother Kuthebfokp:
Recently I have had the privilege of using the latest instrument the Lord has given us with which to tight the enemy, the phonograph. I had such good results with it that I could not refrain irom telling about my experiences. Out of fourteen meetings, with forty-two attendance, I was able to leave literature to the amount of nine books, seventy-seven booklets, and thirteen Bibles. This is certainly good evidence that the phonograph is the right instrument to use, and that its use has Jehovah’s blessing.
Since I am Greek, I have trouble in making myself understood. Since I have the phonograph to talk for me a more effective witness is given; and it results in better placements ami more time and greater joy in service.
May Jehovah continue to bless and use you to the honor of his name.
Your fellow publisher,
James Sarlis, Maryland.
RICHES OF JEHOVAH’S GRACE AND GOODNESS
Dear Brother Rutherjord:
At tire close of another month am very happy indeed to send you report of the study attended by the Bethel family in Toronto. The attendance was 15, 15, 11, 15 respectively. It is good to note that all attend this study regularly unless sickness or some unavoidable reason prevent one’s being present.
During the past month we have commenced the study of the articles entitled “Jehovah’s provisions”, and although we have as yet only touched upon the sections dealing with the players tiud their respective parts in the drama, the central figure of which is Joseph, words are hardly adequate to state or express the deep feeling of profound joy which is mingled with reverence at the rich provision this prophetical picture is to God’s people as food upon the lord’s table as well as its manifest setting forth of the riches of Jehovah’s grace and goodness to honest-hearted unrs who will listen to and learn the way of life.
I feel compelled to mention to you also the delight the family have found in the Uncovered l«ooklet, with its cleat-cut arraignment of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and its teachings. Only the wisdom of Jehovah eould cause this to be produced. Sometimes it seems that we cannot keep up adequately with the wonderful provision of spiritual food set upon the Lord's table.
Assuring you of our continued love for you as you serve the laird’s people, and of our praycis on your behalf for Zion’s sake, I am
Your fellow servant by the Lord’s grace,
F. C. Wainwright.
PRIVILEGE JEHOVAH HAS AFFORDED
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At an assembly of the Lord’s people held in Liverpool during the week-end of March 27 and 28, when 1,600 brethren representing most of the companies in the British Isles were present, your letter regarding the new campaign of activity against the enemy was rend by the British branch servant to the assembled company, together with a covering letter from the British office. This was received with great enthusiasm and it was good to be there to witness the keenness of all present to share in this work.
A proposal was put forward and seconded as follows:
“That this assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses convey to you an expression of their deep appreciation of the privilege Jehovah has afforded us of sharing in this new form of activity, and that all pledge themselves to carry forward the work outlined in your letter with zeal and vigor. Realizing the importance of the work to be done, and that quickly, also the goodness of Jehovah in giving such clear direction through His organization, we intend by his grace to faithfully perform our part to the praise and honor of his name. ’ ’
The assembled brethren were unanimous in support of the above, also that their waim love and greetings be conveyed to you.
I was asked to write this letter to you as chairman of the assembly. I insure you I have pleasure in doing so.
Yours in Jehovah’s service,
A. P. Hughes.
HELPED INTO THE CHARIOT
Dlar Friends:
Enclosed is one of the many letteis received in response to the public lecture, “Armageddon,” delivered by Brother Rutherford in the Oakland Municipal Auditorium on Sunday March 28.
The inquirer in tins instance, Miss Velma V. Ritter, did not even wait for a response to her letter, but looked up and found the San Fiancisco headquarters of Jehovah’s witnesses, secured all the literature published (even to the extent of chei ing up with a copy of the catalogue and asking foi six bookie.s listed in the catalogue which the pioneer sister who spoke to her had omitted from the total of books and booklets).
This is one of many who have, directly as the result of the March 28 chain broadcast, found the truth and have been helped into the chariot of the Greater Jehu, the Conquenng King.
In His service,
S. L. Biievit, Secretary, San Francisco company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
JEHOVAH’S PRECIOUS TRUTH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Rejoice in Jehovah’s kingdom. It seems of the greatest privilege to wiite to you, in tins great day of the Lord.
Brother, you are doing marvelous work in the name of the Lord. 1 pray the Lord’s blessing upon you. You suie open the eyes of the blind with Jehovah’s precious truth, vvlmh is like living waters.
We get your radio programs from Detroit, station WGR, each Sunday at 10 a.m. We can hear your voice, ns if it vvcie you.
We live six miles west of Milverton and five miles east of Moulton. Mother and Dad, who arc known as Sister and Brother C. Fleischaucr, arc ot the Truth also. They arc here each Sunday, listening in to hear the “Voice of the Truth”, as though it was a fountain of living waters. Oh, what a joy to bear the word of our Father Jehovah! Wc surely listen with silent ears to catch our food so that we may not hunger.
It seems our radio will not get any other of those stations. They must be short wave lengths. But in spite of all, our God peimits us to get that fountain of water which is a healing stieam each Sunday.
We can see now, when the veil of the Devil is removed from our eyes, and which has left us in the blind for so many centuries, that the time is here for our heavenly King of Righteousness to rule, and that happy days are coming for those who obey Jehovah. We hope with patient heart that soon all wickedness will be destioyed, as we icjoice to see our heavenly King tule.
With best wishes 1 pray to God to shower his blessings upon you, that you be for ever in the Kingdom service.
Your sister by Jehovah’s giace,
Mrs. L. Osier, Canada.
MANIFESTATION OF JEHOVAH'S LOVE
Dear Brother Rutherford;
The voice of man is weak, and of himself he can add nothing to the glory of the great Jehovah. The loving-kindness of Jehovah is boundless.
To undeistand the prophecy of Isaiah at 28: 17, which states, “and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies,” is an occasion for hope and joy; but to be given the privilege of cany-ing that “hail” to the people in the Unearned booklet is a manifestation of the love that the great Jehovah has for the people; also the booklet Pioteetion, which will enable those in Judea to see the abomination that maketh desolate, and to flee to “the mountain”.
It is difficult with words to give thanks to our God, whoso name alone is Jehovah; but the Scriptures say, at Isaiah 40: 31: “They shall run and not be weaiy”; at Psalms 119: 32: “I will run the way of thy commandments.”
In the army of a great King, with the Faithful Warrior leading,
Your brother by His giace,
Charles Alexander, Texas.
223
224
Gfc VZATCHT0WER.
Brooklyn, N'. Y.
IN UNITY AND LOVE FOR JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Greetings in Jehovah’s name.
Just a peisonal word from a colaborer here in Canada. I wish to express rny appreciation and joy for the pmilegc I have in Jehovah’s organization—feeding at his bountiful table so wonderfully provided with food convenient, using the strength derived by serving him and aiding and encouraging others to continue faithful and loyal.
I have read the booklet Uncovered. It is marvelous how one by one the false doctrines of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy are taken up, their own authority quoted, followed by an exposure from God’s Word, clear, Scriptural and reasonable. Mow appropriate the name “Uncovered”! and, together with the work outlined in your letter of February 2—-for which work the friends are vigorously preparing—it promises to ‘uncover’ the wicked organization of Satan.
The Watchtower, under the direction of the Lord, continues to bring the food convenient, the understanding of prophecy, and the drama ‘Joseph and ltrs Brethren’ promises to be the best yet.
The remnant and their companions are now hearing the command ‘‘Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle”, and in unity and love for Jehovah and his cause will go into action, resulting in a grand witness’ being given to the vindication and praise of Jehovah.
Dear Brother Rutherford, I have read all your writings and distributed many copies for the past seventeen years. 1 have used a sound car for the past three summers, and feel (hat I am personally acquainted with you. I recognize your work and lalior of love in the Lord; and may he continue to give you health and strength and his loving protection as you tearkssly serve his cause and his people.
Your brother in joyful service,
D. J. Ferguson, Canada.
P.S. From October 1 to February 28 I have placed 120 bound books and 2,173 booklets in the hands of the people, kept all my appointments, and traveled many miles in regional service.
WONDERFUL OPPORTUNITIES
Bear Brethren:
I want to take this opportunity to express to the Society, as such, something of the gratitude I have for a long time been longing to express in words. It is my gratitude tor the never-fading service the Society, beginning with Brother Rutherford, and thereafter ‘‘everyone in his place”, and one with him, is rendering us, all the pioneers, at whatever place on the taee of the earth we may have the privilege of making use of the simply wonderful opportunities that are ours. This sei vice of the Society involves big burdens of work and big economic burdens. Our gratitude to the Lord, who puts it into your heart to in this way carry his humble little ones in the glorious pioneer service, finds an outlet in continual praycis for all of you, dear ones, that he may mightily sustain you all in the work he has given you to do to the glory of the great name of Jehovah. Wo are one with you all: For Jehovah and for Gideon!
Your grateful sister,
Anna Wickbom, Sweden.
THE GREAT KING’S BUSINESS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Greeting in our Father’s name Jehovah.
I, too, like other brethren of the Lord, can’t hold back my love for you and the fellow workers for your good work nt the Great King’s business. I was permitted to attend the Newark convention. I become spellbound when 1 sec the feasts of good things our rich Father lias provided for us; and, bless his holy name, he will come out victorious.
Oh, that wo be found always with piaisc upon our lips in the testimony way, that the people will know how good J. ho-vah is! And when that old Devil is removed, how great it will be! No mind can even think how great this heaven and earth could be. To give this warning to the people, though the t!edi almost fall off my bones, I will not fear man nor devil, and will do all in fear of my great rich Father, Jehovah.
Be assured, dear brother, 1 am in full co operation with you. Your sister in the service,
Mas. Neelie Palmer, Kansas.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
A. H. MACMILLAN
New Smyrna, Fin. . Aug	1
West Palm Beach, Flu. “	3
Miami, J’l:	“	4. &
Orlando, I la	“	7
De Funiak Sp’gs, Fla. “	8. 9
Penacola, I la	“	11
Bogalusa, La	“	12, 13
New Orleans, Ln	*•	14, 15
Prairieville, La	“	17
Baton Rouge, Ln	“	18, 19
Alevandria, La		...Aug.	20
Ben>on, La		*>	21
Bl.imp'', Aik			“	22
Mc.Vib. Ark			“	24
Hopp, Ark			'•	25
Chidester, Ark			“	2(1
Gould, Atk		.... “	27
Elaine, Ark		.... “	28
Oneida, Aik			“	29
Helena. Atk			"	31
Canton, Ohio ........Aug.	3, 4
Massillon, Ohio ........“	5,6
Wooster, Ohio ..........“	7, 8
New Phllad'a. Ohio "	10,11
Coshocton, Ohio ........“	12,13
Dresden, Ohio ..........“	H
Cambridge, Ohio .......’’	15
Zanesville, Ohio .......“	17,18
Crooksville. Ohio .....Aug.	19. 20
Someiset, Ohio ..........."	21,22
Sli.ivvnee. Ohio ........."	21,'.’I
I.o/an, Ohio ............“	20
Clou-ter, Ohio ..........“	27
Athens, Ohio ............“	28
Marietta, Ohio ..........“	29,30
Gallipolis, ulno .....hept. 1
J C. BOOTH
Abernathy, Tex.......Aug. 1
Littlefield. Tex.....“	3,4
Farwell, Tex..........“	5, G
Plainview, Tex........“	7, 8
Lockney, Tex............“	10,11
Matador,	Tex.........."	12,13
Paducah.	Tex..........“	14,15
Quitaque,	Tex..........“	17, 18
Amarillo. Tex.......Aug. 10,20
Pampa, Tex....................“	2t,22
Holger, Tex...................“	24,25
Pony ton, Tex.................“	2(1
Goodlett, Tex.................“	27
Qiiunali, Tex.................“	28
Thalia, Tex...................“	20
Wklnta F’s, Tex. Aug 31, Sept.l
G. Y. M’CORMICK
New Brockton, Ala.	Aug.	4, 5
Eufaula, Ala. _ .......“	6
Union Splines, Ala.....“	7
Montgomery. Ala........“	8,9
Auliiiin, Ala.........."	11,12
Opelika, Ala...........“	13
Salem, Ala. ...........“	14
Roanoke, Ala...........“	15
Alexander City, Ala.	.. “	17
M. L.
Huntington, W.Va. Jul v 31, Aug. 1
Pliny. W. Va		.Aug.	3
Charleston, W. Va.	... “	4,5
	... “	6
Mt. Lookout, W. V a.	.. “	7, 8
Beckley, W. Va		... “	10
Ba ind ie, W. Va		... “ 11,12
Leonard. W. Va		... “	13
Glaee, W. Va		... “	14
Bluefield, W.Va		... “	15
War, W.Va		... “	17
HERR Logan, W. Va.........Aug. 18
Madison, W. Va..........“	19
Napier, W. Va...........“	20
Gilmer, W.Va............“	21
Buckhannon, W. Va.	.. “	22
Mon trove, W. Va........"	24
Parsons, W. Va.........."	25
Grafton, W. Va..........“	20
Independence, W. Va. “	27
Reedsville, W.Va....“ 29,30
Morgunt’u, W.Va. Aug. 31. Sept. 1
Mountain Creek, Ala. Aug.	18
Clanton, Ata. .........“	111,
Jemison, Ala..........."	20
Shelby, Ala............“	21.22
Brookwood, Ala.........“	21
Gordo, Ala.............“	25
Corona, Ala............“	26
Panisli, Ala...........“	27
Birmingham, Ala........“	28-31
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Fresno, Calif..........Aug.	1, 2
Atwater, C.-ilif.........“	4
Salinas, Calil...........“	5
Pacific Grove. Cnllf. “	6
.  _ . _ - .	. .	—. . .
Watsonville. Calif .... “	7,8
Santa Cruz, Calif......" 10.11
San Jose, Calif. ......“ 12,13
San ITancIsco, Calif. Aug 11.15
Oakland, Calif ........“	17,18
Sacramento, Calit.....“ 10,20
Salt Lake City,' ”1 tah" “ 2.\ 26
Gland Junction, Colo •’ 28,20
Denier, Colo....Aug. 31, hept. 1
A. 8. WRIGHT
Summerfield. Okla. .. Aug.
McAlester. Okla........••
Quinion. Okla..........“
Stigler. Okla.......„... “
Poi um, Okla. _________“
3	Henryetta, Okla......Aug.	8
4	Weleetka, Okla..........“	9
5	Bearden, Okla...........“	12
Atoka, Okla. ...........Aug. 15,16
Kosoma, Okla. .........“	18
0 Wewoka, Okla.........“	13
7 Atwood, Okla.......— “	14
Cloudy, Okla. ......... “	19
Boswell, Okla..........“	20
Idabel, Okla. “	21
Eagletown, Okla.....Aug. 22
Big Folk, Ark...........“	24. 25
Hot Springs, Ark........“	26,27
Little Bock, Aik........“	28.29
Marvel, Aik.............“	31
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Publish™ Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE b TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh St cretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” -Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and tlie Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed Go«i’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creatine and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are liis witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his par::o.L-> :u expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible injunction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people
of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its rcede.s and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studio >. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheies strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sectT or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of thj Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Brice
United States, $1.00; Canvda and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, a us'nt,’.r..vsiA, and South aiiiica, *. .. American remittances should be made by I'o-tnl or I.’\|>i< -s Mon. r Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South Afii<-iti end Australasian remittances should be made direct to the u-j ali.u branch offices. Remittances from countries oilier than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by Intel national Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British................34	Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, Enalaml
Canadian...........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontano, Cnnm! 1
Austialasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathlield, N. S. W„ Au-.li.iiia South African...........Boston House, Cape Town, South AL lea
Please address tho Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Iutilrm15, poverty or adversity are. unable to pav the subseripliOii j...........o
may have The Watchtoncr tire upon wntten application t-» tors publishers, made once each year, stilting the reason lor t.» ) -questing it. We are glad to thus nid the needy, hut tho write a application once each year Is required by the postal i< gul.itiei.i.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or n renewal * ub-scription will he sent only when leqiicsteil. Change of nddi< ', when requested, may be expected to appear on aildre-- label v.Itlun one month. A renewal blank (carrying nolne of expiration) x..11 be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expiii <.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Bxiollyn, N. ¥., under the Act of March 1, r'A3,
“MOUNT PERAZIM”
The next testimony period, named “Mount Pcrazim”, will occupy the dates August 7 to 15 inclusive. This falls due right in the midst of the special summer campaign; hence there will be no change in the special offers of literature to be exhibited during this testimony period, only that the kingdom pttblisheis will arrange their affairs to devote as much time as possible during said period to place these special oilers with the people. See the announcement elsewhere under “Summer Campaign’’, and also consult the recent issues of the Informant for fuller information.
SUMMER CAMPAIGN
The Lord’s storehouse is large and bursting with abtind-i’tie. Appropriately a large and most attractive oiler now le-at'iics the summer activities and efforts of Jehovah’s publiJieis. ;> n h consists of any six bound books, on a contribution of $1.00, or, better still, six bound books together with seven booklets, on a $1.25 contribution. The Informant goes into mole detail regarding this campaign and tho Society’s provision thmeior. Let tho publishers order now the extra htiratuie needed in addition to what stocks they now have on hand for this campaign, which began July 1 and continues to September 12 inclusive.
VACATION
The office and factory at 117 Adams Street will suspend operations from September 11-20 inclusive. This will peimit the members of the Bethel family to attend and serve at the Columbus convention and also to enjoy a few extra days in field service or otherwise befoie resuming regular work at Brooklyn.	'
All kingdom publishers will thercfoie anticipate their needs of literature to last until the end of September and should promptly wed in their orders to tins office so as to insure filling and shipping before the close on September 10. No mail will receive attention or be dispatched ficm hero during the above period.
CONVENTIONS
The Watchtower further announces the following conventions for Jehovah’s witnesses rind companions: 1’aus, 1 ranee, August 21-23 inclusive, winch will seive for G1e.1t Britinii and Continental Europe; Columbus, Ohio, September 15-20 inclusive, which will serve ttie United States, Canada, and otbeis who may be able to attend.
The president of the Society expects to be present at bo’h conventions. Make your tnrangements ior vacations during those periods. Let all of Ins people ask Jehovah to make these conventions a great witness to the honor of llis name.
See information in July 15 issue of Tl.e Walchtoieci.
Vol. LV1II
August 1, 1937
No. 15
RACKETEERS
“The wicked worketh a deceitful work.”—Prov. 11:18,
PART 2
JEHOVAH GOD has an organization, and all of his creatures who arc entitled to life form some part thereof. God does everything in order, and all of his creatures that may remain in his organization must be obedient to God’s law. At one time Lucifer was a part of God’s organization, and until he became lawless; and since then he, that is, Satan the Devil, the enemy of God, is the complete expression of wickedness. He is the enemy of all creatures who try to do right. Satan is a mimic and has attempted to form his organization of rebellious creatures along a line similar to God’s organization. Satan’s organization is divided into two parts, that is, one invisible and the other visible to human eyes. The Devil’s organization, as originally formed, existed from Eden to the Hood, and was there broken up at the time of the deluge, the visible part thereof being destroyed. After the flood the Devil built up again his visible organization, which he has used to deceive men and to defame the name of the Almighty God, and by and through his organization Satan is determined to rule the world contrary to God’s will or to destroy the creatures thereof.
1 The scripture at Revelation the twelfth chapter discloses the two great opposing organizations. God's organization is described in symbolic phrase as “a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars”. The Devil’s organization, in symbolic phrase, is described as "a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads”. The word “dragon” symbolically means “the de-vourer”, that is, the one who seeks to destroy; and that name is in keeping with Satan’s determination to rule or destroy. “Red” fitly represents his bloodspilling course of destruction; and in keeping therewith the Devil’s religious chief representative on the earth garbs himself in red robes. The chief part of Satan’s visible organization is that of religion, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is in the lead in all the religious movements in the earth. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy declares that the right and purpose of that organization is to rule the world; and where it cannot
rule, it has shown its purpose to destroy. It resorts to all manner of wicked and deceitful schemes to bring about the destruction of those who proclaim God's truth. The Roman Catholic “Hierarchy of Jurisdiction”, which rules or dominates the visible pait of Satan’s organization, is made up of the most subtle and harmful racketeers that have ever afflicted the human race. They are slick, wily, deceitful, and desperately wicked. That Hierarchy of Jurisdiction practices deceit by carrying on a monstrous racket, and therefore is described in the Scriptures as extremely wicked; and it is concerning such that the words of the text are written: “The wicked worketh a deceitful work.” That organization falsely claims to represent God and Christ, but in fact it represents the Devil and is moved entirely by selfishness.
3	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy church organization is the most perfectly organized political body on earth and is the most powerful one of all organizations. The British Commonwealth of Nations holds the distinction of being the greatest world power that ever existed. Its claim is that its possessions arc so far flung that the sun shines on some part thereof at all times. Made up of many peoples, kindreds and tongues, thcBritish Commonwealth is truly cosmopolitan. Many good people of England arc beginning to see the great danger that now threatens the Commonwealth and that such danger is the Roman Catholic Hierarch}. In practically all the colonics or subordinate portions of the Commonwealth Roman Catholic officials are in control and those office-holders utterly disregard the rights of non-Catholics. In both Northern and Southern Rhodesia, in West Africa, in the Fiji Islands, in Quebec and many other parts of the Commonwealth, political, religious Roman Catholics, under the domination of the Vatican, control the public offices. They manifest an outward allegiance to the British Commonwealth, but at heart those Catholic officials are loyal only to the Vatican. They suppress the truth and forbid the importation of publications that would enlighten the people of those colonies, particularly the natives, and thus they keep them in ignorance. If the people perchance get into possession of litera-
227
228
fffle WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ture that enlightens them concerning God’s Word and his kingdom, Roman Catholic officials take immediate steps to prevent the further publication of such literature and the promulgation of the truth. Those Catholic officials do not hesitate to promulgate lies, charging true Christians with crimes of which such persons arc in no wise guilty. Such lies are told to furnish an excuse to prohibit the people from possessing anything that explains to them the Word of God, which Word of God exposes the duplicity and crookedness of the Roman Catholic organization. From the subordinate parts of the Commonwealth pressure is being brought to bear, on England in particular, and it is only a question of time, and that a short time, until the British Commonwealth of Nations will be dominated and controlled by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Such a course of action is wholly inconsistent with that of a true follower of Christ, and those facts arc cited here to prove that the Roman Catholic organization docs not represent God and Christ but represents the Devil.
NUMBERS AND WEALTH
4	In the United States alone, it is claimed, there are twenty million of the Catholic laity, that is, “ children of the church” or ‘‘Catholic population”, which population is dominated by thirty thousand clergymen. The Catholic Church organization in America holds title to property valued at billions of dollars. The Encyclopedia Americana, in an article published in 1927, shows that at that time the Catholic Church throughout the earth had within its organization 294,583,000 persons. The material wealth of the Catholic organization is to be found in great sums on every continent and country of the earth, aggregating many billions. Whence does its tremendous wealth come? What representations and claims have been made by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to induce the people to put themselves under the dominating control of that organization and to supply the money to so greatly enrich the religious, political organization?
PURGATORY
5	Without a doubt the source of revenue of the Roman Catholic church organization, that which has brought the greatest amount of money into the coffers of the Vatican, is the doctrine of ‘‘purgatory”. Alil-lions of persons have put their trust in the clergymen and by the clergymen have been induced to believe that when a man dies it is only the body that dies, but that the soul of that man continues to live and that every soul goes immediately to one of the three plates, that, is, the righteous to heaven, the willfully wicked to eternal torment or hell, and those who have died in venial sin and who have not been cleaned uji go to “purgatory”, there to remain for an indefinite period of time, the duration of which may be shortened by money contributed by living friends and paid into the hands of priests of the Catholic Church to say
prayers on behalf of the dead. Also it is represented that the money thus contributed results beneficially to those who are living and that after death their time in “purgatory” might be shortened. Sincere people, believing such representations to be true, have rushed into the Catholic organization and have freely given up their money, hoping thereby to gain for themselves and their beloved dead great benefits and to relieve their dead friends from suffering the “fires of purgatory”. The result has been and is that billions of dollars of money have been poured into the Roman Catholic organization’s treasury, which money has been used and is being used by the Hierarchy, to carry forward its ambitious and cruel purpose to rule the nations and for the “higher-up priests” to live wantonly and fare sumptuously daily, while the common people suffer for Ihc necessities of life. If the Catholic doctrine of “purgatory” is false, then it must be considered by every honest person that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is operating the greatest racket ev< r known, by which racket the people are robbed of their money, their peace of mind, and their prospects of a knowledge of God’s purpose; and this alone brands the Catholic organization as the instrument of the Devil and the enemy of God and of man. It is also further proof that the claim made that the Catholic church is the church of God is another of the Devil’s lies, told for the purpose of deceiving the people and turning them away from Jehovah God. That no one may have reason to say, as many Catholic priests have said, that their doctrine of “purgatory” is misicpie-sented to the people, the following is quoted from the book of Cardinal Gibbons, a renowned Catholic authority: “The Catholic Church teaches that, . . . there exists in the next life a middle state of temporary punishment, allotted for those who have died in venial sin, or who have not satisfied the justice of God for sins already forgiven. She also teaches ns that, although the souls consigned to this intermediate state, commonly called purgatory, cannot help themselves, they may be aided by the [prayers] of the faithful on earth. The existence of purgatory naturally implies the correlative dogma—the utility of praying for the dead—for the souls consigned to this middle state have not reached the term of their journey. They ate still exiles from heaven and fit subjects for Divine clemency.
°“. . . His soul will be ultimately saved, but he shall suffer, for a temporary duration, in the purifying flames of Purgatory. This interpretation is not mine. It is the unanimous voice of tlie Fathers of Christendom.”—The Faith of Our Fathers, pages 205-20S.
’ This is a plain statement that the doctrine of “purgatory” is based upon tradition and not upon the Word of God, and according to the rule laid down by Jesus this doctrine makes void the Word of God, because it is false. (Matt. 15:3,6) For the purpose
Avccst 1, 1937
tffc WATCHTOWER.
229
of laying the foundation for the doctrine of “purgatory” the same authority, on page 217, says this: “For what is death? A mere separation of body and soul. The body, indeed, dies, but the soul ‘lives [on].’ . . . It continues after death, as before, to think, to remember, to love.”
* Such is the teaching of men in the Catholic Church organization, handed down for generations by tradition. You may choose to believe tradition or the Bible. "Which are you willing to believe? The Bible proof is now here submitted showing that the “purgatory” doctrine is wholly false and therefore of the Devil. The Douay is the Catholic Version of the Bible, and has the full endorsement of the Hierarchy. That Version says concerning the soul: “The soul that sinneth, the same shall die.” (Ezechicl 18:4, Douay) By their own version of the Bible the Catholic doctrine of “purgatory” is proved false. What is the soul? If is a living, breathing creature. Every man is a soul, but no man possesses a soul. In Genesis 2: 17 it is written: “But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou sbalt not pat of it: for in the day that thou ealest thereof thou shalt surely die.” By what authority is the claim made that death is merely the separation of the body and soul and that the soul lives on? That claim is based wholly on the Devil’s lie. God declared that man should die if he sinned. The Devil says there is no death; and Jesus says the Devil is a liar. (Gen. 3:4; John 8:44) “All they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship: ail they that go down to the dust shall bow before him: and none can keep alive his own soul.”—Ps. 22:29.
8	Catholic tradition says: ‘The dead continue to remember, to think and to love.’ The Catholic Bible says: “For there is no one in death, that is mindful of thee: and who shall confess to thee in hell [the grave (Aulh. Per.)]?” (Ps. 6:6, Douay) This same scripture in the Authorized Version says: “For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks?” (Ps. 6:5) “The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence.” (Ps. 115:17) “For the living know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing more, neither have they a reward any more: for the memory of them is forgotten.” “Whatsoever thy hand is able to do, do it earnestly: for neither work, nor reason, nor wisdom, nor knowledge shall be in hell [the grave}, whither thou art hastening.”—Eecl. 9: 5,10, Catholic Douay Version.
10	Seeing that the Scriptures conclusively prove that the dead are not conscious anywhere and not undergoing punishment or suffering in “purgatory”, it is clear that the “purgatory” doctrine is another of the Devil’s lies employed by men to deceive and to rob the people, and to turn them away from God, and to carry on the most subtle, devilish racket on earth. Note now, the Homan Catholic Hierarchy has always invoked the rule that the common people must not study the Bible
by themselves but must receive and believe only whatsoever the Catholic Church teaches. See The Faith of Our Fathers, page 74, where it is said that “God never intended the Bible to be the Christian's rule of faith, independently of the . . . authority of the [Catholic! Church”. On the contrary, the Scriptures, written in the Bible at the command of Almighty God, were written to be man’s true and unfailing guide that the man of God might be fully equipped. (2 Tim. 3:16,17) There is no text in the Bible that supports the theory of “purgatory”; and, knowing this to be true, the clergy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy tell the people that they must not attempt to study the Bible independently, but must take the interpretation of the priests. “Purgatory” is a religious doctrine, invented by the enemy of God and man for the purpose of turning men away from God.
11	Any kind of scheme or trick that is operated to cause others to unwittingly part with their money is a racket. Three-card monte, the shell game, the lightning-rod scheme, the real estate schemes or the prizecontest scheme, or any other scheme that is used to improperly take away from the people their money, is a racket. Inducing people to invest their money in lottery schemes or suchlike is a racket; all of which are bad and are strictly avoided by honest and careful persons. When a man or organization gains the confidence of others and then takes advantage of such others and thereby wrongfully causes them to give up their money, that is a vicious racket, because the one robbed has no way of protecting himself. When a man or organization induces the people to believe that tb< ir dead friends are conscious and suffering in a place called “purgatory” and that contribution of money by the living can help such suffering ones, and the people are thereby induced to part with their mom y to the priests, such is the meanest, crookcdest, most damnable racket that could be practiced. No man has ever received the slightest benefit for money given over to priests to say prayers for the dead or for the living; therefore the obtaining of money by the priests or clergymen upon the claim that they can benefit the dead is obtaining money under false pretenses and should be punished like all other similar crimes.
1J The Catholic Hierarchy makes it a regular business to call upon the Catholic population for money to supply what is called the “purgatorial purse” and suggests the contribution of specific sums for each person for whom prayers are made. The amount given for each name submitted is almost always suggested to be according to the ability of those who contribute. Twenty-five cents a name is sometimes used, and sometimes far greater sums. But suppose twenty-five cents per name is contributed by each of the twenty million “Catholic population” in America, and that this contribution is made once a week, that makes a very large sum of money that is wrongfully extracted from the pockets of the people. But suppose the amount is a
230
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
dollar a week per person, on the average; that would mean for twenty million persons one billion and forty million dollars per year. Persons of moderate means or much means, who are permitted to have an audience with the "august” clergy, contribute much more than a dollar per week each. The claim is made that the Catholic population of the world today is upward of 300,000,000, and if each of these is held up for twenty-five cents per week for the "purgatorial purse”, that alone would amount to the enormous sum of $3,f00,-000,000 per year. Add to that the other contributions that are regularly made to the Hierarchy, and, too, the weekly collections that are gathered in by the nuns from the laboring class, and it appears that there is a fabulous sum of money that continues to (low into the coffers of the Hierarchy as a result of the operation of the great racket, a racket that is greater than all other rackets combined.
CONTRAST
1S Radio stations frequently broadcast programs calling attention to the various rackets or fakes that are now being imposed upon the people, by which large sums of money are collected from people who are credulous. For instance, a puzzle scheme is advertised by which the public arc told that those who successfully solve the puzzle will receive so many votes, and thereafter by expending more money they may draw a very large prize. By this racket great sums of money are collected, and the prize is never paid; and then the police make a raid on the racketeers and arrest them. The United States post-office department issues an order prohibiting the use of the mails to carry on such a racket, and properly so. Contrast this with the "purgatory” racket. A Catholic priest publishes a letter telling Catholics that by contributing so much money they can aid their ‘suffering’ dead in "purgatory”. That letter advises the people that for each name submitted a certain sum should be contributed. The money is sent in regularly, paid over as a result of a false and fraudulent representation that it will result beneficially to the people. The United States government has a Roman Catholic as postmaster general and in control of the post-office department, and who is in fact an agent and representative of the Vatican. Has anyone ever* heard of his issuing an order forbidding the use of the United States mails to carry on the racket of collecting money from the people upon the representation that it is for the benefit of the dead? The "purgatory” racket is much more reprehensible than the prize racket above mentioned, because the people know they arc gambling on the prize racket. As to the "purgatory” racket the credulous are taken advantage of, kept in ignorance of what the Scriptures teach, and prevented by the racketeers from knowing the truth, and then they arc robbed of millions of money, and the post-office department piously folds its hands and says: ‘This is doing a good
work.’ Does any sane and honest person believe that an organization or religious system that carries on such a racket could at the same time be the representative of God and Christ on earth? The proof is overwhelming that the claims and pretenses made by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization that it is the church of God are a monstrous lie, a great defamation of the name of Almighty God, and that the same arc made for the purpose of robbing the people and turning them away from God.
REMISSION OF SINS
14 Another erroneous doctrine of the Roman Catholic church system is that the clergy of that system can forgive sins. The credulous Catholic population believe that the priest possesses such power and authority, and, so believing, they go to the priest at regular intervals and confess their sins that they may receive remission or absolution. One who commits the most heinous crime may do that and then straightway go out and commit another crime. A striking example is that of Mussolini. Until he made peace with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy he was an avowed atheist and a common gangster, but afterwards he went to the Vatican and made an alliance with the papal system and then went forth and committed greater crimes than ever before. He carried on a cruel war of conquest of Abyssinia in utter violation of God’s law, and no doubt received what the papacy calls "absolution” from the pope, because that "august official” attempted to "bless” Mussolini’s war activities. Men who believe that the pope or the priests have power to forgive sins embrace and practice that religion to case their conscience and to steel their conscience for further crime. Says the Catholic authority: "It follows, first, that the forgiving power was not restricted to the Apostles, but extended to their succcssois in the ministry unto all times and places. The forgiveness of sin was to continue while sin lasted in the world; and as sin, alas! will always be in the world, so will the remedy for sin be always in the Church. The medicine will co-exist with the disease.”—The Faith of Our Fathers, page 333.
IS The Roman Catholic church system has assumed to perform this great act of forgiving of sins for a money consideration, and still does so. The foregoing authority further’ says: "Nor did the Pope exceed his legitimate powers in promising to the pious donors spiritual favors in exchange for their donations. For if ours sins can be redeemed by alms to the poor, as the Scripture tells us, why not as well by offerings in the cause of religion?” (Page 370) "And the Church having power to remit the greater obstacle, which is sin, has power also to remove the smaller obstacle, which is the temporal punishment due ou account of it.”—The Faith of Our Fathers, page 365.
16 Every person familiar with the Papal history needs only to have it called to mind that John Tetzel,
August 1, 1937
(Rie WATCH TOWER,
231
a Dominican monk, became famous through Germany and other parts of Europe by reason of the fact that he sold indulgences for large sums of money whereby the purchaser was authorized to commit any or all kinds of crime with impunity. That racket has been carried on for so long a time that even the priests are convinced it is their inherent right to receive donations of money from the poor and from the rich u|»n the pretext that the priests have power to grant absolution or forgiveness for the commission of sin.
” It is not at all surprising that the political and commercial ruling element of Italy, Germany, Austria, and many other countries are supporters of the Vatican. Those men arc steeped in crime, and they must have something to case their conscience, and they are willing to pay for it. They are induced to believe that regardless of the crime committed they may receive absolution from the Papal Hierarchy. That racket, practiced by the Papal J lierarehy, has brought millions of money into the coffers of the Vatican; and particularly the politicians arc induced to believe that they must do their part by liberally contributing to the Catholic purse. It is not surprising that many of the officials of the ruling clement and the commercial giants of Great Britain and America are adherents of the Catholic religion and that they pay large sums of money in the nature of insurance premiums against loss by reason of their deliberate wickedness. Thus it is seen that the racket enlarges and that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has no real competitors anywhere in the field of racketeering. If the priests or clergymen of that system have no power to forgive sins, then their course is nothing else than a subtle scheme to filch money from the pockets of others and to bring reproaches upon the name of Almighty God. Now let us look at the real authority and sec who can forgive sins.
18	The Scriptures show that God alone, through Christ Jesus’ merit, can forgive sins. If a man docs not believe upon the Lord Jesus Christ and that his shed blood is the basis for the forgiveness of sins, then God will not hear his prayer or forgive him, but the wrath of God continues to abide upon that person, as it is plainly stated in John 3: 3G. It is written: “The blood of Jesus Christ his [God’s] Son eleanseth ns from all sin.’’ (1 John 1:7) “Without shedding of blood [the blood of Jesus Christ] is no remission [of sin].’’ (Heb. 9: 22) Again it is written: “In whom we have redemption through his [Jesus’] blood, even the forgiveness of sins.’’ (Col. 1 :14) Jesus conferred upon his faithful apostles specific authority concerning remission of sins, as stated in t hese words: ‘ ‘ Whose soever sins ye remit, they arc remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they arc retained.” (John 20:23) This authority, however, is limited only to those faithful apostles and applies to no one else before or after. No wonder the Roman Catholic Hierarchy advise the “Catholic population” to refrain from reading the
Bible, but to take only what “the church” says. When honest and sincere people know the Word of God, they will break away from the Catholic system; and the racketeers know that, and when that happens their racket is done. The claim that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy priests have power to forgive sins is extremely blasphemous and is another part of their racket or scheme. Surely this racket could not be carried on with sensible and reasonable people if they were first informed in the Scriptures and believed in God and Christ Jesus. This is further and conclusive proof that the Roman Catholic church system is not the church of God, but that it is a Devil religious organization, carried on to the reproach of God’s holy name, and works great injury to the people.
CEREMONIES
18	The Roman Catholic religious organization performs certain ceremonies or mere formalisms, (tn entering the cathedral the finger is dipped in what is called “holy water”, and the people arc induced to believe that even if that water had been pumped out of a pond, some man could make it holy. Then the man entering makes the sign of a cross upon himself; die priest then sprinkles the congregation with the same kind of water, reciting at the time parts of the fiftieth Bsalin, or some other scripture; then he proceeds according to the mass book (but not according to the Bible) by saying or repeating certain words in Latin, which probably no one present can understand. While doing this the priest wears peculiar clothing and continues to perform other acts, such as the above. Such is a religious practice, wholly unauthorized by the Scriptures, and is a reproach upon God’s name, and is but another means to induce the credulous to believe here is where they get their protection and salvation. Hoping to find some authority for those senseless ceremonies the Roman Catholic Hierarchy cite the ceremonies performed by the Israelites in connection with the tabernacle. They ignore entirely, however, the Bible statement that those ceremonies performed by the Israelites were merely moving or living pictures performed under the direction of Jehovah, particularly foretelling things to come to pass in the future. (Heb. 10:1; 1 Cor. 10:11) Such types performed by the Jews were no authority for anybody to perform those ceremonies afterwards, because they pertained to the law and Jesus Christ fulfilled the law and nailed it to his tree. (Col. 2:14) The ceremonies performed in connection with the tabernacle in the wilderness particularly foretold the coming of Christ Jesus and his great sacrifice to provide the ransom price for the remission of the sins of men, and the presentation of his blood in the Most Holy, that is, in heaven itself, there to make satisfaction for the sins of the people. (Heb. 9:20-24) Christ having fulfilled the law, then the Devil institutes a ceremony in mockery of what the Lord has done, and causes his agents,
232
WATCHTOWER.
BROOKLYN, N. Y.
the clergy, to carry on senseless ceremonies to overawe the people, falsely claiming the same find authority in the ceremonies performed by Israel. lie puts it in the mind of selfish and sinful men to arrogate to themselves the power to do what Jesus alone had authority to do. When Christ Jesus came and performed his work, all such ceremonies as were practiced in God’s law to Moses ended with His crucifixion. “Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.’’ (Gal. 3:21) “For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believcth.”—Romans 10:4.
20	Those ceremonies performed by the Hierarchy priests result in great reproach to the name of the Lord God and in furthering the practice of their racketeering upon the people. Neither Jesus nor his apostles after him indulged in any kind of formalism or ceremonies. Jesus instituted the Memorial of his death, which is celebrated each year as a reminder that those who have covenanted with God to follow in the footsteps of Jesus must be broken with him and suffer as he suffered (1 Cor. 11:23-2G) ; and then the Catholic priests blasphemously attempt to change the emblems of wine and bread into the actual blood and body of Christ, and to induce the credulous ones to believe it, to the end that they may be further overawed and submit themselves to racketeering schemes.
21	Fixed and formal ceremony is entirely contrary to what Jesus instituted with his disciples. Such formalism is what the prophet of God referred to when he said what Jesus subsequently repeated, to wit: “Ye hypocrites! well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.” (Matt. 15:7-9) This is further proof that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization is not the church of God, but represents God’s enemy.
IMAGES
22	In the ceremonies performed by the Roman Catholic organization they employ images. A Catholic authority says: “The Christian religion [not the Bible] has allowed the use of [images] statues and paintings to represent the incarnate Son of God, the saints, and angels, and these images are a legitimate aid to devotion.” (The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume 12) This practice of the Catholic church is diametrically opposed to God’s law. Jehovah God expressly commanded that no image shall be made and used. (Ex. 20:3-5) The use of images by the Hierarchy, therefore, further shows that the Catholic organization is not the church of God, because His church does not openly violate God’s law. Jesus always obeyed God's commandments, and the members of his church must do likewise. To his people God gives this commandment: “Every man is brutish in his knowledge: every
founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them. They are vanity, and the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.” (Jer. 10:14,15) Of course, the Hierarchy would not wish the Catholic population to know that these texts are in the Bible, because that knowledge would ruin the racket and spoil the game of the racketeers.
23	But one says, ‘How about the statue showing Jesus Christ being crucified on the cross? Should not we have that kind of statue in our place of worship?’ Jesus was not crucified on a cross. God’s law provided that the accursed sinner shall be hanged upon a tr< e. The Catholic priests know this, because their Bible so states. (Sec Galatians 3:13, Douay Version.) (Deut. 21:22,23) Jesus died in the place ami stead of a sinner, and therefore as a sinner, although holy, pure and undefiled; and his death complied with God s law, and therefore must take place by his being nailed to a tree, and the facts show he was so nailed to the tree. “Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree.”—Gal. 3:13.
24	The wooden cross and shrines were used in the practice of religion by the heathen long before the birth or death of “the man Christ Jesus”. The practice of the Catholic system in connection with a cross was borrowed from the pagans. A well-known authority says: “The cross was worshipped by the Fagan Celts long before the [birth] and death of Christ. ‘It is a fact,’ says Maurice, ‘not less remarkable than well-attested, that the Druids in their groves weic accustomed to select the most stately and beautiful tree as an emblem of the deity they adored, and having cut the side branches, they affixed two of the largest of them to the highest part of the trunk, in such a manner that those branches extended on each side like the arms of a man, and, together with the body, presented the appearance of a iivuk cross, and on the bark, in several places, was also inscribed the letter Thau [G’rccA;].’ It was worshipped in Mexico for ages before the Roman Catholic missionaries set foot there, large stone crosses being erected, probably to the ‘god of rain.’ The cross thus widely worshipped, or regarded as a sacred emblem, was the unequivocal symbol of Bacchus, the Babylonian Messiah, for he was represented with a head-band covered with crosses. This symbol of the Babylonian god is reverenced at this day in all the wide wastes of Tartary, where Buddhism prevails.”—The Two Babyions, page 199.
“ ‘The adoration of the statues of the Buddha and of his relics is the chief external ceremony of Ihc religion. . . . The central object in a Buddhist temple, corresponding to the altar in a Roman Catholic church, is an image of the Buddha, or a dagoba or shrine containing his relies.’ . . . The form of religions worship contains many points (veneration of relies, auricular confession, beads, processions, etc.) which
Augvst 1, 1937
tte WATCHTOWER-
233
bear a striking resemblance to practices of the Roman Church, acknowledged by all, but explained differently. ... In the land of its birth, India, Buddhism had to endure a long-continued persecution, and was at last entirely driven out, after it had flourished there about twelve hundred years. The time of its introduction into the other countries is as uncertain as its early history in general.”—McClintock and Strong’s Cyclopadia, Volume 1, pages 907-910.
2S	To bow before an image made of a cross is contrary to the Word of God, in violation of his law above cited, and is further proof that the Catholic church organization is not the chureh of God. Why pray publicly before an image of Christ and pretend you are praying to Jesus, when Jesus himself is fully alive in heaven? Teaching his followers to pray, he said: “But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father, which secth in secret, shall reward thee openly. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.” (Matthew 6: 6,7) Jesus then proceeds to outline a model prayer. (Verses 9-13) But the Hierarchy does not wish the common j>coplc to follow that model prayer,
’®The followers of Christ Jesus, who are of the church of God, therefore pray to God in the name of Christ Jesus, their Lord and Head, as directed by the Lord. (Matt. 6:9; John 14:13,14) “If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.” (John 15:7) Praying with beads and before statues and images is false worship. God is pleased with those who “worship him in spirit and in truth”. (John 4:23,24) Religionists arc the enemies of God. because they have forms of pretended worship of God but they have no real devotion to God and to his kingdom. What is here said is not an attack upon men, but an expose of a devilish system, created and put in operation by God’s enemies, which reproach his name and work injury to the people.
27 The foregoing evidence proves conclusively that religion is a racket and that those who practice it for gain are racketeers, and that the chief ones among all racketeers are those who make up and form the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, who rob the people of their money, take away their liberty of thought and action, and put in jeopardy their lives. It is against such deceivers of the people that God speaks these words: “The wicked worketh a deceitful work.” (Prov. 11:18) The wicked are those who once had God’s favor by being placed in a position to know’ his Word, and who then employed what knowledge they obtained to use for selfish or pecuniary gain. Since Satan’s world has reached its climax, the time has come for the people to have a chance to know the truth and to determine whether they want to follow their worst
enemies or want to render themselves in obedience to the great God of the universe.
23 The nation of Israel had God’s favor because they were his covenant people, and that nation departed from the commandments of God, and their clergy taught them religion instead of God’s commandments. Likewise in the early days following the death of tae apostles of Jesus Christ, men wdio learned of God’s purpose were greatly favored by him with some knowledge of his truth. It was then that ambitious men in the organization departed from the commandments of God and adopted and taught the doctrines of men and formed what is now called “the Christian religion ’, which is used and practiced in the nations called “Christendom”. Within such religious organizations, and particularly within the Catholic organization or under it, there arc many persons who desire to know and to serve God faithfully; and God will now give them an opportunity. By his prophets Jehovah foretold the conditions which now exist and the record of which appears in the Catholic Douay Version of ’he Bible, and a part of it in that Bible reads: “For among my people are found wicked men, that lie in wait as fowlers, setting snares and traps to caleh men.” (Jcr. 5:26, Douay) These words of the Lord specifically describe the Roman Catholic “Hierarchy of Jurisdiction”, which rules the underpriests and the “Catholic population”, and which Hierarchy lass claim to being God’s people. The honest people under tiic Hierarchy must now hear the truth, that they may flee from that wicked organization and find refuge under Christ Jesus the head of Jehovah’s organization. For that reason Jehovah sees to it that all such persons of good will, who desire to know and to obey him, shall have an opportunity to hear the truth.
23 Further describing those selfish, arrogant, boastful, cruel clergymen, the racketeers in the organization (or “house”) which they rule, the Lord says to them: “Your iniquities have turned these things away, and your sins have withholden good things from you. For among my people arc found wicked mtn, that lie in wait as fowlers, setting snares and traps to catch men. As a net is full of birds, so their houses arc full of deceit: therefore are they become great and enriched. They arc grown gross and fat: and have most wickedly transgressed my words. They have not judged the cause of the wido w, they have not managed the cause of the fatherless, and they have not judged the judgment of the poor.”—Jcr. 5:25-28, Douay.
30 The Roman Catholic Hierarchy have “houses” all over the earth within which they practice fraud and deceit, carrying on their racket, and by w’hich the credulous, honest, sincere people arc induced to wrongfully give up large sums of money, which has greatly enriched that organization. The money, therefore, has been obtained by’ fraud and in the name of God. Aside from the honest and sincere people of good will under the Catholic organization, there arc mil
234
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
lions of others claiming to be Christians, but who are not, and who use their religion for selfish gain. Those include priests, politicians and other racketeers and prognosticators of what shall come to pass. Those men indulge in what is a horrible abomination unto God, and therefore he continues to say to them: “Shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? or shall not my soul take revenge on such a nation? Astonishing and wonderful things have been done in the land. The prophets prophesied falsehood, and the priests clapped their hands: and my people [my pretended people, who practice religion for gain] loved such things: what then shall be done in the end thereof?” —Jer. 5: 29-31, Douay.
11 The Roman Catholic Hierarchy have told the common people, or the “Catholic population”, that they must not read the Bible; and clearly such is for the purpose of keeping the people in ignorance of the truth. The truth when promulgated interferes with the racketeers in carrying on their racket. It must now be apparent, to all honest people of earth who have any knowledge, that the Roman Catholic organization is a religious, political organization, indulging in a selfish work, which blasphemes the name of Almighty God, falsely and fraudulently represents him, carries on a racket in the name of Christ, and is the great enemy of God and of the people. The Almighty God foretold exactly the conditions existing in this very day showing how the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is a selfish and devilish organization, operating under the misleading title of “Christian religion”, and desperately attempting to gain control over all the peoples of the earth in order to satisfy its selfish and ambitious desires.
13 The fact that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy practices deceit is conclusive proof that it is not the representative of God and Christ, for the reason that there is nothing deceitful about God and Christ Jesus. The so-called “Protestant” religious organization has entirely fallen away from God and Christ and, in fact, lias become a part of the racketeer system. The proclamation of the truth offends the selfish leaders in that part of Satan's organization and causes them to berate the witnesses of the Lord, who proclaim his Word of truth. The religionists do not wish to hear the truth, because it burns their ears; and they do not wish others to hear the truth, because they know those who honestly hear and believe will withdraw from their organization and thus the pastures of the religious practitioners are spoiled and their source of revenue ends. Those religious systems and practices are the worst kind of a racket, for the reason that by such means the people are easily deceived; and all will be deceived except those who honestly and sincerely put forth diligence to gain a knowledge of the truth and walk accordingly with God.
13 In the Word of God, as set forth in the Bible, man is given instruction in righteousness in order that
a man who desires righteousness may be thoroughly furnished and equipped for all good work. (2 Tim. 3:16,17) The person who equips himself with a knowledge of the Scriptures and is then diligent to follow the course there marked out must and will engage in doing good work, the chief part of which good work is to make known to others the goodness and loving-kindness of Jehovah God and the blessings that he will administer to his obedient creatures through Christ Jesus and his kingdom. Anyone today who proclaims the truth will of necessity be and must be the object of the attack, and that viciously, by Satan and his visible representatives. Let no one, therefore, who loves God and righteousness be discouraged because of such vicious attacks, but rather know that this is an evidence that there is enmity between the righteous organization of Jehovah and the wicked organization of the Devil and that all who arc on the Lord God’s side will be hated and persecuted until the time the wicked are destroyed.
31 The end of the world is here, and the day of reckoning with the enemy is near at hand, and God’s announced purpose is to wipe out the enemy soon ; but before doing so the warning must be sounded even that the enemy may hear and that the people of good will may he informed as to their only means of protection. God has commanded that this work of proclaiming the truth must be done, and he has assigned that task to the remnant and their companions. For this reason the Lord God now commands his covenant people saying: “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her [Satan’s organization] in battle.” (Obad. 1) It is the battle of Jehovah, and those who love God and who are now on earth will take great delight in engaging in this battle by declaring the message of truth. Their part of the work' is to sing the prunes of Jehovah and make known his name and his kingdom. All of the remnant and all of the people of good will toward God will now prove their love for God by boldly and fearlessly obeying his commandments in proclaiming his message of truth.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
7 1. Who of Jehovah’s creatures form some part of his organization and will remain therein? Trace the development of the vast organization now determined to rule the world contrary to God’s will.
I 2. Identity the two great opposing organizations disclosed at Revelation 12. Describe the activities of the “great led dragon” through his chief visible agency on the earth at this time, as showing also the fitness of that name.
V 3. How do affairs in Britain, for example, give evidence of the duplii ity and crooked nets of the Roman Catholic organization? With what efieet have such influence and pleasure been brought to bear? What docs it prove concerning that organization’
T 4. What is the standing of the Roman Catholic organization as to numbers, wealth, and sources of revenue?
? 5-7. What is the doctrine of “puigatory”? What has been the result of the teaching of that doctrine?
U 8,9. Show that the doctrine of “purgatoiy” is entirely un-scriptuial.
4 10. Account for the Hieraichy’s having so long he'd (i.e “Catholic population” in ignorance of the iuBity of its
August 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
235
doctrines, particularly of the doctrine of “purgatory”. IT 11,12. What is meant by the term >ackct? Show that the doetriuo of “purgatory” has made possible the most vicious of all rackets.
? 13. Contrast the “purgatory” racket with other prominent rackets; also the governmental official attitude toward that and these.
U 14-17. Explain and illustrate how the Roman Catholic doctrine concerning remission of sins serves to further sustain a wicked racket.
H IS. What do the Scriptures teach concerning remission of sins! What is here clearly seen as the reason for the Hierarchy’s advising the “Catholic population” to refrain from reading the Bible? What does this show as to the Roman Catholic system’s being the church of God?
If 19-21. Explain the Roman Catholic organization’s performing certain ceremonies similar in part to those performed by the Israelites, and whether such ceremonies can have any merit.
H 22. What do the Scriptures teach concerning the use of images? What does this prove regarding the Roman Catholic church?
V 23,24. ‘How about the statue showing Jesus Christ being crucified on the cross, and the use of such statue in prayer?’ Point out the origin of such practice.
? 25. With scriptures, show why the Hierarchy do-'S not wish the common people to follow the Word of God in the matter of prayer.
If 26, 27. What does the foregoing prove concerning religion, and the position of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in its relation to the people?
? 28,29. Referring to Jeremiah 5: 25-31: Who are “my people” heio mentioned? Who are the “wicked men” found among them, and how hate they ‘waited as fowlers, and set snares to catch men’? What good things have been turned away from them, and by what iniquities and sins? flow docs verse 27 apply? Verse 28? Verses 30,31?
? 30-32. By what means has the Roman Catholic Hierarchy acquired its wealth and power now used for its selfish purposes? Why have the “Catholic population” been told not to read the Bible? Why is it that the religious leaders are the outstanding opponents of the proclamation of the truth?
If 33. What is the purpose of the Bible? To what will a proper study of the Bible, and diligent use of the knowledge gained therefrom, lead?
If 34. What is the nature and purpose of the message now to bo pioclaimcd? Who will engage in the battle now on? How? Why? To what end?
WHY MUST JESUS DIE?
WHY should the great, the good, the pure, the sinless Man, Jesus, die in such an ignominious manner as that of being nailed to a tree? Was there no other means whereby man could live? The sacred Scriptures answer that there is no other way whereby man could get life. Divine justice demanded the life of the perfect man Adam and took that life because of his sin against the law of his Creator. Divine justice could receive nothing as a substitute for Adam except the life of a perfect human creature, the exact equivalent of the perfect Adam when in Eden. Adam was put to death because he was a sinner. The one who would redeem mankind must die as a sinner, yet without sin. And all this Jesus did.
It is important here for us to sec why Jesus came to earth, grew to manhood’s estate and died. His chief object in being born into this world was to be a visible witness for Jehovah Clod, whom Satan the Devil was misrepresenting and reproaching before all creation. Jesus confessed this as his prime mission to earth when he said to the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate, these words: “To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth hcareth my voice.” (John 18: 37) There was also a secondary object in his coining to earth and being made flesh. The prophet David, in the fortieth Psalm, verses seven and eight, speaking the words of Jesus beforehand, said: “Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me; I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.” (I lob. 10: 7-10) Thus we see that he had come to do God’s will. The prophet Hosea expressed the will of God concerning mankind when he said: “I will ransom them from the power of the grave: I will redeem them from death: 0 death, 1 will
be thy plagues; 0 grave, I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.” (Hosea 13: 14) Since Jesus came to carry out the Father’s will to ransom the human race, he must do this. This is the only means whereby man could live. Therefore Jesus said: “I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.”—John 10: 10.
Jesus likened his humanity or human nature to bread. He said: “I am that bread of life. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven that a man may cat thereof, and not die. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. As the living Father sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that cateth me, even he shall live by inc.” (John 6: 48, 50, 55, 57) By this we understand that Jesus gave up his human life in order that the value thereof might bo presented to divine justice in heaven as the great ransom price. To cat means to partake of food to satisfy hunger. He who hungers for righteousness and partakes of the value of Jesus’ sacrifice by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ and doing the Father’s will, that one will have life and thus will satisfy his hunger. The apostle Paul makes it clear that the death of Jesus was for all those of the entire human race who believe, when he says: ‘Jesus, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man.’ “There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.” —Ileb. 2: 9; 1 Tim. 2: 5, 6.
The Scriptures state: “Sin is the transgression of the law.” “The wages of sin is death.” (1 John 3:4; Rom. 6:23) Adam transgressed the divine law and for this reason suffered the penalty of death, and this penalty came upon all mankind by inheritance. Jesus the perfect man permitted his life to be taken that it
236
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
might be used for releasing all believing ones among Adam’s offspring from the great enemy death, and that they might have a full opportunity for life, lienee his life was made an offering for sin, or a sin offering.
For many centuries Jehovah foreshadowed this great event in the outworking of his purposes, arid this fact adds to the importance of it; in fact, without the sacrifice of Jesus it would have been impossible for any of the human race ever to live at all.
Looking back, then, at the picture (Leviticus 16) that Jehovah God made by the use of the Jewish people and their ceremonies, we sec that the bullock slain on the annual atonement day pictured Jesus the perfect man at the age of thirty years. The court surrounding the sacred tabernacle and in which the bullock was slain was a picture of the condition of perfect humanity and of justification on that account. Therefore the bullock slain in the court foreshadowed or pictured the fact that the perfect man Jesus died in that condition on earth as a perfect man. By his death he provided the ransom price. He did this to carry out the heavenly Father’s purpose.
In the picture, the slaying of the bullock was the beginning of the sin offering. After the bullock was slain its blood was put into a vessel and the high priest carried it in this vessel, ultimately reaching the Most Holy of the tabernacle, where it was sprinkled on the mercy seat. The high priest in the Most Holy offering the incense before sprinkling the blood pictured Jesus during the three and one-half years of his sacrificial ministry; and the high priest’s sprinkling the blood on the mercy scat pictures Jc-ms the true high priest, resurrected to life divine, appearing in heaven itself in the presence of God, there to present the merit of his sacrifice as the sin offering on behalf of mankind. —Heb. 9: 24.
The Scriptures clearly show that Jesus was the antitypical or true bullock and was made an offering for sin on behalf of mankind; first on behalf of the true church, then on behalf of all other believers. As it is written: “Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures’’ (1 Cor. 15: 3) ; “who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father” (Gal. 1:4); “for he (God] hath made him to be sin [an offering for sin] for us, who [that is, Jesus] knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.”—2 Cor. 5:21.
The law that God gave to the Israelites merely foreshadowed what great things Jesus would do. Because of the imperfections of mankind, including the prophet Moses and others, that law could not accomplish the deliverance of mankind from death. Hence, Romans 8: 3 states: “For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.”
In the type or prophetic picture, the slaying of the bullock and the carrying of its blood into the Most Holy as a typical sin offering foreshadowed the fact that the redemption of man’s sins could be accomplished only through the blood of the perfect sacrifice. And for this reason, says the apostle Paul, “without shedding of blood is no remission. It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens [namely, the tabernacle and its furnishings] should be purified with these [that is, with the blood of these dumb animals] ; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.” (Hob. 9: 22, 23) The patterns here referred to arc the Holy and the Most Holy in the tabernacle picture, which foreshadowed or pictured the heavenly condition; and the entrance of the high priest into the Most Holy of the tabernacle with the blood foreshadowed Christ Jesus entering heaven. Even as the apostle Paul states in Hebrews 9: 24, saying: “For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which arc the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us.”
When Jesus died upon the tree on Calvary, he provided the ransom price, because his was the death of a perfect human creature, exactly corresponding with the perfect man Adam. Adam’s death, however, was the result of a forfeited right to life. Jesus’ death was a sacrifice. Adam was a sinner and died a sinner. Je ,us was perfect, holy, and without sin; and while he died in the same manner, yet by his death he did not forfeit the right to live as a human creature. By dying he reduced his perfect human life to an asset or kind of value that might thereafter be used to release mankind from death.
We here give an illustration to aid in understanding this point. For convenience we will call a man John. John is languishing in prison because ho cannot pay a fine of one hundred dollars. lie has a brother named Charles who is willing to pay the fine for his brother John but has no money with which to pay. Charles is strong and vigorous, has time to work, is willing to work and can earn money by working; but his stiength and time and willingness will not pay the debt for John. Mr. Smith has some work to be done and is willing to pay money to have it done. Charles engages himself to work for Mr. Smith and earns one hundred dollars and receives that amount in cash. By his labor Charles has here reduced his time and strength and vigor to a money value and has received that money value, which money has purchasing power and which can be used to pay John’s obligation and thus release him from prison.
Charles then appears before the court which has entered the judgment against his brother John, and offers to pay the one hundred dollars which the lawdemands for John. The money is accepted from Charles and John is released. By this means John is judicially relieved of the effects of the judgment and
August 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
237
is set free, and bis brother Charles has become his ransomer or deliverer.
In this illustration John represents Adam. Because Adam violated God’s law, Jehovah judicially determined that Adam should forfeit his life by dying. He enforced this judgment during a period of nine hundred and thirty years, during which time Adam begat all of his children. The effect of sentencing Adam to death was to render all of his children subject to death. Adam went into death, and since then great numbers of his children have likewise died. We can say, then, that Adam and all those who have died and arc in their graves arc in the condition of death, and that is what the prophet of God calls it.
In this picture Charles represents Jesus. It was God’s will that the perfect man Jesus should redeem the offspring of Adam from the condition of death. Je.ais was willing to pay the debt and redeem mankind, but the perfect, righteous, human creature Jesus could not accomplish that purpose while living in the flesh, for the same reason that Charles could not use his strength, time and energy to pay the debt of his brother John, but must first reduce those things to a purchasing value. Jesus must reduce his perfect humanity to a purchasing value, which we may call
merit, and which merit or purchasing value would be sufficient for the payment of man’s debt and release all the obedient ones from that judgment. In order to provide this price it was necessary for Jesus to die. In his death upon Calvary, then, he produced the price. But the value of that price must be presented before Jehovah in heaven itself before Jehovah could release all such obedient ones from the effect of death. And this, we shall see from the Scriptures, is what was done.
In due time the knowledge of these great truths will be given to every one of Adam’s race. (Isa. 11:9; John 1:9) The ransom price was provided at the cursed tree. In order for the human i ice to receive the benefit of the ransom sacrifice, it was essential for Jesus to be raised from the dead. Uis resurrection is therefore of vital importance. When all men come to a knowledge of this fact and all the obedient ones have profited by the value of the ransom sacrifice, there will be great rejoicing amongst the human race. When the grand finale is sung and all the harpers of heaven and earth unite in beautiful harmony, blending with the voices of all creatures perfected and happy, the great ransom sacrifice will be recognized by all as one of the strings of the doctrinal harp of God that will yield sweet music to every ear.
PHILADELPHIA
JEHOVAH’S beloved Son and great High Priest, Christ Jesus, addressing the church in Philadelphia, in Asia, is described as the “holy” and “true” One, and “he that hath the key of David”, and is clothed with all power and authority to establish the kingdom. When he begins to exercise his royal authority, nothing can stop him; and when he shuts out Satan and his organization, never again can it be brought into existence.—Ps. 110: 2-6.
He commanded the apostle John, saying: “And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write; These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man shut-teth; and shutteth, and no man openeth. I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name. Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and arc not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown. Him that overcometh will 1 make a pillar in the temple of my God; and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name
of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name. He that hath an car, let him hear what the Spirit (Jehovah by Christ Jesus] saith unto the churches.”—Rev. 3:7-13.
“Philadelphia” means “brotherly love”, and therefore means the love of Christ which holds together the brethren in Christ and is the moving cause for their unselfish devotion to and service unto Jehovah. (2 Cor. 5:14-19) Those having such love joyfully perform the ministry of reconciliation committed unto them by Jehovah.
During the period of time from the beginning of the work of Christ Jesus in preparing the way before Jehovah in view of his coming to the temple and until now there have been some amongst the consecrated who have put forth their best endeavors to serve God as his witnesses. True, some started in this way and became “weary in well-doing” and fell by the way, yet there are those who have all along borne the brunt of the fight and delighted to do the work that has been committed to them. They have not sought the approval of men in the church or outside of it. They have been targets for many who have claimed to be followers of Christ and who in fact have busied themselves with the Devil’s work of injuring the faithful workers. They have worked, not only in season, but out of season to
238
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn-, N. Y.
themselves, always ready and anxious to do with their might what their hands have found to do, that the name of the Lord might be magnified. The language of Jesus shows that their efforts have been pleasing to him, when he says: “I know thy works.” (Vs. 8) This is equivalent to saying: ‘You have been faithful according to your endowments. ’ He takes note of them that they have followed in his footsteps and have not shunned to declare the truth, and that they have had and have manifested his spirit of love.
Then he tells them that they have kept his Word and have not denied his name; that there is service to do; that they have a little strength to do it and that he has ‘‘set before [them] an open door, and no man can shut it”. (Vs. 8) The door here mentioned is not an entryway into heaven, nor into the kingdom, but manifestly means an opportunity to do some work in attending to the kingdom interests here on the earth. The time clearly seems to be shortly before the Lord appears at his temple (in 1918) for judgment, because he says: ‘‘Behold, I come quickly; hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown.” (Vs. 11) The loss of the crown or opportunity to be crowned would take place at judgment. The judgment at the temple would be adverse, and the kingdom interests would therefore be removed from the unfaithful and given to the faithful. The Lord, by the parable of the ‘‘talents” (Matthew 25:14-30), showed that when he would judge his house, at the coming to his temple, there would be found a class that had been faithfully devoted to him and that such would be especially blessed by him. (Matt. 24:46) At that hearing he would say to the faithful: ‘‘Thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things.”—Mutt. 25:21.
He further showed that at that judgment some would lose their opportunity for any further service unto the Lord; hence their opportunity for the crown of life would be gone. (Matt. 25: 28) Those who held fast what they had until the coming of the Lord to his temple, and who then received the approval of the Lord, and who there and after that time continued to serve faithfully through tribulation and, while being maligned and ill-treated, yet joyfully went on doing the will of God, and who thus continue unto death, shall receive the crown of life. (Rev. 2:10) But it is manifest that no one could hope to receive the crown of life who would turn back or who fails or refuses to avail himself of the opportunity of serving the Lord as it comes.
‘‘Philadelphia” describes that condition of those in the church who are determined that nothing shall ‘‘separate [them] from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord”. (Rom. 8:36-39) Coming to his temple the Lord said to such: ‘‘Behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it.” Regardless of all opposition that Satan and his agents put forth, that door must remain open and the service
of witnessing to the name of Jehovah will go on to the end. It would be well for those who oppose the service work to take notice that the work of the Lord will go forward and that their opposition cannot hinder it. Those who really love God have the privilege of doing that work and may be sure thereof so long as faithful. Let the faithful ones therefore take courage and rejoice.
Surely before the coming of the Lord to his temple there were manj' in the congregations of the church who claimed to be serving God and giving praise to his name and to the name of his beloved Son, and who therefore claimed to be ‘‘Jews”. (Vs. 9) The word Jew or Judean means ‘giving praise to Jehovah’. The Lord knew that their pretensions were false, that they did not really love God and his Christ; they were selfish; and therefore the Lord calls them ‘‘liars’’. They were in the church, but are not described as those of Philadelphia.
While those described as of Philadelphia were faithfully trying to do God’s work others who claimed to be consecrated to the Lord consorted with the enemy to cause their brethren suffering, bodily pain, injustice, and even imprisonment. It was in 1917 that a great trial came upon the church, but by the grace of God some of the pei’secuted ones remained true and steadfastly held their integrity. In the light of these well-known facts note the words of Jesus: ‘‘Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they' arc Jews, and are not, but do lie: behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.” (Vs. 9) The Lord will make known his love concerning those who remain faithful and true to liis name. Even the hypocrites shall see this before the end.
About the time of the coming of the Lord to his temple there came upon ‘‘all the world” an hour of great temptation or putting to the test, and many fell away from God and his truth. Being cast out of heaven (Rev. 12:7-9) Satan hurries to prepare for the final battle at the earth. Every means known to him is brought into action to turn the people away from Jehovah God. The denominational church completely falls away. Many who had left the churches and had been brought to a knowledge of the truth became blind so that they could not sec that Satan has an organization. They have ridiculed everything said concerning Satan’s organization, have opposed the Lord’s work, and have turned away and gone back into the world. Only a remnant of those first enlightened by the truth have remained firm, and to this little company the Lord commits ‘‘the testimony of Jesus Christ”.— Rev. 12:17.
When the Lord came to his temple he found these had patiently tried to serve him. The promise to those who had remained firm and steadfast is: ‘‘I will keep thee from the hour of temptation,” ‘‘because thou hast kept the word of my patience.” (Vs. 10) Patience means constancy and steadfastness in the performance
Augist 1, 3937
^©WATCHTOWER.
239
of duty amidst persecution and opposition, the one thus performing rejoicing in the fact that he knows he is doing the will of God; and he therefore rejoices even in tribulation. Jesus was patient in his devotion and service and he left an example for his true followers. (Hcb. 12:2,3) Jlis word to them was and is: “In jour patience possess ye your souls.’’ “lie that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.’’ “In the world j’e shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.” (Luke 21: 19; Matt. 24:13; John 16:33) “If we suffer, we shall also reign with him.” (2 Tim. 2:12) In the “hour of temptation” the Lord poured out his spirit upon his people and made them his ministers and brought them into the secret place ol his organization, giving the promise that those that abide there shall be safe, “I'or in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said.”—Joel 2:32.
The lord’s “lightnings” flash at his temple and he illuminates those of the temple class, disclosing to them the “open door” that cannot be shut, and they joyfully enter and serve him with gladness of heart. He keeps his own in Zion now bj’ giving them the opportunity of declaring the name of Jehovah and his
kingdom. God puts his message in the mouth of such and sends them forth as his witnesses to sing his praises. All the professed ones in so-called “Christendom” have allied themselves with the Devil’s organization in this hour of great temptation. But the remnant alone stand firm and true. Not by their own strength do they stand, but by his grace. They continue faithful in devotion to him.
As the hour draws near for the Lord to appear at his temple he says to those who love him (vs. 12): ‘If you overcome I will make you a pillar in the temple of my God and you shall go no more out; and I will write upon you the name of my God, and the name of his organization, the new name of Jerusalem which cometh down out of heaven from God, and I will write upon you my new name.’ Those who are constrained by the love of Christ, and are therefore wholly devoted to God and his service, and thus continue unto the end, shall be for ever blessed. All of the church having the hearing ear arc called upon to hear what the spirit of God through Christ now speaks to his people (vs. 13), and those who do hear and obey shall be given the name of the Mclchizedek priesthood and be for ever in Jehovah’s blessed organization.
LET
THRILLING EXPERIENCES WITH SOUND EQUIPMENT
Devk Fei.row Servants :
Greetings in His holy name.
You will lx; very much interested to hear of our thrilling experiences with the sound car and phonographs, also of the tin co Jonadabs who have joined us in the pioneer work.
They told me that they had never even di earned that the pioneer work was so wonderful. They, too, like many others, had been misinformed about the pioneer, having been told that it was very hard to make good in the pioneer work. Not even trusting in the Lord. (Mal, 3: 10) The truth is that we have too much to eat all the time, as the Lord has promised.
Tho sound car is tearing down the enemy strongholds very fast, and tho great multitude are flocking around it and taking their stand for the kingdom. Our phonographs are so busy that wo arc wearing out one record every ten days; and the average number of listeners for each phonogiaph in tho county is fifty. We have no difficulty in reaching tho homes with tho phonograph, or the business district. Our method is very simple. Wo state that wo have a very important message concerning the setting up of Jehovah’s kingdom, which is soon to relieve the people of their sickness and suffering and to give them peace, prosperity and happiness—the kingdom we have long prayed for. Thon if they say they arc not interested or are too busy, we say, “Whatl Not interested in the Lord’s kingdom! ”
Our average placements per day, working with two for each phonograph, aro twenty bound books, sixty booklets, and three Bibles. Saturday is the best day for the sound car in towns, as almost everybody is in town on that day. Wc liavc 1500 listeners each week. Am suie that if the Jonadabs really knew how thrilling the pioneer work is they would all want to got in, as the Loid is a sure Provider.
You will be interested to hear of our experiences in the difTeient towns with the phonographs and the sound car. Mabank had been very much opposed to our work; but after we workcd it thoroughly with the sound car, and all the homes with the phonograph, the people have a different feeling.
The day after we had put the sound car on, the preacher got up in the pulpit and told tho people that our books were full
TERS
of lies, and started to quote nn article which Brother Rutherford was quoting from Cardinal Gibbon’s statement. Tho preacher said, “Here is what J. It. quotes.” Well, one man got up and said, “I have twelve of his books and none of mmo read like that.” Then a lady got up and said, “1 hive some of his books, nnd they check right up with the Bible.” The pieaehcr got himself into a hole, and could not explain after the meeting.
Our next town was Kaufman. The Baptist preacher came into the baker’s shop the same time 1 did, to get four loaves of bread. I called for two loaves. The b iker told me to keep mine, but took the preacher’s money. The preacher asked me if that was my sound car outside. I said it belonged to the Watch Tower. Then be asked what they cost. I told him that money could not buy them. He said, “If we Baptists could only have something like that vve could get somcwhcic. ” I told him to read Riches, and he would get there quick. He took liichts and booklets, and said ho would read them. (Maybe the free bread opened his eyes.) 1 had placed the book Riches with the baker a few weeks before. Well, a few days ago the preacher lost his job for telling his people about Riches.
Our next town was Crandall. 1 played the sound ear, vvnilo the other four used the phonogiaphs at tho homes. Alter playing one musical and a rccoid, Mr. Murphy, a businessman, asked me to play some more, and gave me twenty-five cents contribution. While talking, the city maidial in chaigc of the town camo up and listened to the sound car. The results were that wc placed eighteen bound books, tineo Bibles aud sixty booklets. I was asked to play “Fathers”; and almo-t all of the people in the two chuiches had their heads out of the church windows. The city marshal took some books and a 6’..-I., and asked us to come back again, as he had enjoyed the program. Mr. Murphy had most of Judge Rutherford’s books and had loaned them to the city marshal.
All join me in sending you all our warm Christian love; and may Jehovah richly bless you and keep you all faithful to tho end.
Your fellow servants in the greatest work of all times, Jos. Howarth and Party, Pioneers.
240
JJHe WAT C H TOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
WILL RELY UPON JEHOVAH AND CHRIST JESUS
Dear Brother Rutherford :
The Detroit [Mich.] Division of Jehovah’s witnesses, assembled at Toledo, Ohio, during the May 29 and 30 campaign, send you losing greetings. We desire to expiess our confidence in Jehovah, his anointed King, his kingdom organization and his kingdom servants. We believe that Jehovah is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting; that the Logos was tho beginning of his mention and is the active agent in the creation of all things. That the Logos is now Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
Wo believe that Jehovah's organization is called Zion and that Jesus Christ is the Chief Executive Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion and members of Jehovah’s organization. As such we believe that vve are taught by Jehovah, and we know that we lia’c great peace. We believe that we are Jehovah's witnesses, whose duty and privilege is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
Wo believe that Jehovah keeps his word and places the members in tho body as it pleases him and that he sends forth his angels to gather out of his kingdom organization all those who offend and become lawless. We have complete and abiding confidence that Jehovah makes no mistakes in selecting his servants, which includes those servants now on earth who bear much responsibility.
Consistent with these firm beliefs, wo resolve as follows: to wit:
That we will not allow ourselves to become disturbed by the activities of the “evil servant” in attacking those in positions of responsibility in the kingdom organization, but will confidently rely upon Jehovah and Christ Jesus, our Leaders and Teachers, to direct the work of the kingdom and place tho members therein according to Their perfect wisdom and judgment.
That vve will with increasing zeal and diligence busy ourselves with our duties, privileges of testifying to the supremacy of Jehovah, declining his purposes toward mankind and bcai-ing the fruits of the kingdom to those who will hear, “and rise up against her in battle” during this “strange work”.
That, knowing tho enemy to be very subtle, for our further protection we resolve to destroy immediately any literature published by the “evil servant” that we may receive through tho mail or otherwise, and that we will refuse to listen to anyone, in tho organization of outside, who endeavors to debate or argne with us respecting this course of action. That vve acknowledge the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society as tho visible portion of Jehovah’s organization and that the Society is the channel through which the Lord provides us with food convenient and issues instructions regarding the work of his kingdom that is to bo done on earth.
That we hereby express our confidence and loyalty to the Society and its divinely appointed servants, especially you, Brother Rutherford. We arc keenly aware of the rich blessings of tho Lord which have been and arc so bountifully bestowed upon you in your unselfish service to Jehovah and his kingdom.
LOYALTY TO JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
On May 29 and 30 fifty Jehovah’s witnesses and friends assembled at Las Cruees, New Mexico, for a convention, ft was the riist assembly ever held here, and all the friends had a good time together in the service as well as in the meetings.
There have never been any arrests there; so, instead of an assembly, we called it a service convention.
Brethren from thirteen towns within a radius of 200 miles were there.
This resolution was adopted unanimously: 1 ‘ We, your brethren in assembly convened at Las Cruces, New Mexico, desire to express our appreciation of Jehovah’s truth as published in The Watchtower and reaffirm our allegiance and loyalty to Jehovah’s organization.” We arc sending a copy of this to tho Watch Tower.
Those assembled expressed a desire to meet again; so pie-liminary arrangements were made for another assembly or convention on September 4-6.
GRATITUDE TO JEHOVAH GOD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Jehovah’s witnesses assembled at Kalispell divisional campaign send our fervent love and greeting to the Watch Tower Society, and its president, Brother Rutherford, and further express our deep gratitude to our Jehovah God for feeding us at his table with food very conveniently dispensed through columns of The Watchtower and other publications of the Society.
Therefore be it known from now on we shall gladly push tho witness work to the fore by every implement Jehovah has provided for us, such as books, booklets, and phonographs. Brethren, wo are 100 percent with you in this great battle against tho Devil and his organization. We shall fight to the finish, by Jehovah’s grace, and the vindication of his holy name.
This resolution was adopted by all those attending and present at the regional campaign in Kalispell, Montana, May 29, 1937.	-------------------
IN UNITY SERVING JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford;
I do not want to trespass on your valuable time, but I am urged to convey to you an expression of love. Jehovuh loves you. I love you because you arc beloved of him whom you seivc. All the Lord’s sheep love you for the same reason that I have. I am sure that tho prayers of those who are in unity with you and desirous of serving Jehovah, our heavenly Father, through tho channel provided, Jesus Christ, will bear you up, dear brother, to the throne of grace, whence come all tho glorious blessings with which we arc surrounded. Thanking you lor very iCjiiy blessings through our Lord and Master, I esteem it a favor to have The Watchtower for instruction and guidance. Hoping that some other dear brothers will send you a far better expicssion of love than I am able to, and hoping to see you m the near future, thankful to be a brother by giaco in the Lord's sei v ice,
P. W. Stokes, England.
THE DEVIL KNOWS THAT TRICK
Dear Brethren:
I am much pleased with the latest Watchtower and its admonition against strife and contention. If a matter is of ti tiling worth it is better by far to take the wrong and lemain silent; and usually the one who has done injuiy to someone else is set aside by the Lord himself m His own due time. An army is quickly dcstiovcd when the soldiers begin to tight against each other; and the Devil knows that trick. Thcielorc those who arc wise keep themselves away from those that eicato disturbances.
Those who are wholly devoted to the Lord and his seivno find no time to engage in any controversy with anyone who makes the service a sccondaiy matter or who finds no time to engage in tho service. It is a sure saying, “Idle hands are the Devil’s workshop.”
Wo ere in a real fight now, and be it tar from me that 1 shall e'er fight against my ical brethren. It is for us to stand by each other, and be examples to our “Joundab” biethicn. When misrcpiescntations are hulled against those who we know are serving the Loid faithfully, it is oui duty to disbelieve such and to turn away from the evil-doer. No good can lie accomplished by favoring such.
In his loving-kindness our Lord is preparing again for Ins people a great treat through the announced convention to be held at Columbus, Ohio Anyone who desires to be pleasing to the Lord, and who appreciates this favor, gladlj lays aside all plans previously made and centers all efforts upou the privilege to be a part of that event.
We know from previous experiences that the Lord will open the windows of heaven and pour out a blessing for us all who go there with the one desire to be used by him to the accomplishment of his purpose. By tho Lord’s grace vve shall be privileged to be present, and render any service pleasing to him.
I shall look iorwaid with keen interest to the convention. Tho busy summer will pass by quickly, and ere long vve shall greet the brethren at Columbus. May the Lord bless you all richly with stiength and joy.
Yours in the kingdom service,
Rose Grelnacher, Pioneer.
‘L.

\.t> b'1!
&
: Ml , j "w . ._
/it


(Watchman, (fthat of the^OghF
Isaiah 2MI.



Vol. LVIII Semimonthly
AUGUST IS, 1937
CONTENTS
Companions .................
Jehu and Jehonadab _______
Who May Serve ____________
Noah .... _ ______________
Eefuge . _________________
Gibeonites ---------------
Joseph’s Half Brethren 
Slave_____________________
Virgins___________________
“Ten Men”_________________
“Many Nations” ...........
Sheep Made Manifest.......
Feast of Ingathering __ .... ..
No. 16
U p./A
.... 243 „ 244 ”.247 „ 247 _ 248 _ 248 _ 249 -250 _ 250 .. 251
_ 251 .. 251 . 252
New Name and Morning Star Promised 253
Sound Equipment Experiences (Letter) 256
Service Appointments
Summer Campaign Conventions .....
..256 ..242 ..242 ..242 ..242
■ '!</


THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adama Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
officers
J. F. ItUTIlEEFORD President W. E. Van AmbuI’.GH Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” -Latah 54a 13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatuies; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now tho Loid Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive pi ice for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Cbiist Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and arc his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been pinned by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has muted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
'I1IAT 1H1: RE-.1.1I P ami blessings of the peoples of earth can eome only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Chiist, which lias now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, nnd that under tho kingdom all thoso who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
ITTS journal is published for th? purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God rind Ins purpe.,ci as expressed in the Bible, It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, aud its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, 5100; Can Anv and Misceli xneol'S Foitnrr.s, 51.50; GllCAT IlBllAlN, ALblUAI.ASIl, AND SOLTll AIT’.lCl. 7-. Anmncan remit tain is should be nimle by Postal or f.’xpirss ilorc-Order or by 11 ink IVialt. Cuimli in, Britisli, South Afiinin ami Australasian rci'iitt.inies should lie made dimct to the h'pectivo branch ohices. Keniittnnces from coimtims other than those nien-tioned mas' be rivide to the Brooklyn ollice, but by J»tc>nationul Postal Money' Older only'.
Foreign Offices
Eritish..........	31 Craven Terraco, London, W. 2, England
Canadian..........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5. Ontano, Caii'ida
Australasian . . “ Beresford Bond, Strathficld, N. S. W., Australia South A/itcan.........Boston House, Cape Town, South Af.ii.i
Phase address the Society In every case.
(Translations of tills journal appear In several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or nriversitv are unable to pay the sub'cription pne<» In iv Imve The. Watchtower tree upon yvilttcn npjiiication to tii • publishers, made once cacti year, stating tlio le.ison lor -a ic-questing it. We are glad to lints aid tlio needy, but tin- wntti'i application once each year Is reunited by the postal reguliitioiri.
Notice to Subscribers? Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only v.liin ic<|iioxte<l. tTmiure of mldio--, when requested, may he expected to npjioar on addiess lain I willii > one month. A renewal blank (lariyin; notice of oxpu.ition) x. ill be sent with the journal one month before the subsciiption cxpiiei.
Entered as second-class matter at the post of/lec at ll>ool.lgn, N. J'., under the Act of March 3, 1379.
“KING OF KINGS”
The next testimony period, October 2-10 inclusive, will be world-wide, coextensive with the earthly realm of the King of kings, after whose title the peiiod is named. The publication now of the book Ilichcs in many languages makes it appropriate foi this book to be concentrated on then, the same to be offered together wjth a self-covered booklet. Other details of the service are due to be published in the Infonnant, which please consult. Let your preparations and ariangements begin at once, ns unto the King of kings. Your prompt report, from whatever part of the earth you inhabit, will be awaited at tlus office.
SUMMER CAMPAIGN
The Lord's storehouse rs large and buisting with nbuml inee. Appropriately a large and mo.t attractive offer now fi.iBrit < the summer activities and efforts of Jehovah’s publi-heis. Such consists of any six bound books, on a contubution of .>1.00, or, better still, six bound books together with seven booklets, on a $1.25 contribution. The Infoimaut goes into more detail n-garding this campaign and the Society’s provision therefor. Let the publishers ordei now the extra literatuic needed in addition to what stocks they now have on hand for this campaign, which began July 1 and continues to September 12 inclusive.
VACATION
Tim office and factory at 117 Adams Street will suspend opeiations from September 11 to 2(j inclusive. This will permit the members of the Bethel family to attend and serve at the Columbus convention and also to enjoy a few extra days in field service or otherwise before resuming legular work al Brooklyn.
All kingdom publishers will therefore until ipate tlieit needs of litciaturc to last until the end of September and should promptly send in their oideis to tins office So as to insure filling and shipping befote the close on September 10. No mail will leieive attention or be dispatched from heie during the above period.
CONVENTIONS
The Watchtower fuither announces the following conventions for Jehovah’s witnesses and companions: Paris, Fiance, August 21-23 inclusive, which will solve for Great Britain an I Continental Euiope; Columbus, Ohio, September 15-20 inclusive, which will serve the United States, Canada, and others who may be able to attend.
The president of the Society expects to be present at bath conventions. Make your ariangements for vacations diring those penods. Let all of his people ask Jehovah to make Ihefe conventions a great witness to the honor of Ills name.
See information in July 15 issue of The Watchtower.
Vol. LVIII
August 15, 1937
No. 16
COMPANIONS
“And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”—John 10:16.
JEHOVAH GOD made the earth and created man on it. He made the earth for man, and he made man for the earth. (Isa. 45:12,18) “The earth abideth for ever. ” (Eccl. 1:4) These scriptures shouid be sufficient to prove that from the beginning of the creation of the earth God purposed to have human creatures for ever on the earth. When man sinned and was condemned to death, no doubt Satan concluded that he had prevented God from carrying out his purpose. But not so. All power is in Jehovah God, and he says: “I have purposed it, I will also do it”; “My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure.” (Isa. 40:10,11) God’s law which had condemned man to death must stand. He never reverses his judgment. How, then, would God provide for man to be on the earth for ever, in order to accomplish his purpose? It was after the sentence of Adam to death that God expressed his purpose to redeem the human race and then to take out from amongst mankind a “people for his name”; and those who maintained their integrity and proved faithful unto death God expressly declared shall have a resurrection change and be made spirit creatures. From the record it therefore appears that God’s purpose first expressed was and is to populate the earth with a perfect race, and his last or second expressed purpose is to create a spirit class from amongst men. IIis purpose, then, is to have two companies, taken from amongst men, that shall live for ever in vindication of his Word and his name. One of those companies is spiritual, and the other human, and they must of necessity be companions; There could be no discord between the two companies in the final analysis. Not only will Jehovah God vindicate his Word and name by placing on the earth perfect men who shall live for ever, but he will take out from amongst men another class, which shall be exalted to a higher and greater place than Lucifer ever occupied. These two classes are designated in the Scriptures as “companions”. The word companion means “knit together, associated together, neighbor or brother”.
‘The condition or provision precedent, and which is given to both the spiritual and the human companies,
243
is this: Complete devotion to God by laying aside every selfish thing and joyfully doing the will of God. That means a full consecration to God and then faithfully carrying out the covenant made. Salvation to those of cither company depends on full faith in God and in Christ Jesus and in complete obedience to the will of God at all times. Jesus was explaining to a young man what he must do that he might have life, and the disciples of Jesus stood by and heard the Master's words, and they said amongst themselves: “Who then can be saved?” One of the disciples, then addressing Jesus, said: “Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life. But many that arc first shall be last; and the last shall be first.” (Matt. 19:16-30) Thus it appears that those who arc of either company must forsake all selfish things and devote themselves entirely to Jehovah. One company proving faithful shall sit with Christ Jesus in his throne of glory and necessarily must be spiritual. The other company being faithful shall inherit everlasting life and be for ever on the earth. The Scriptures disclose that Jehovah’s purpose first expressed was to have on earth a perfect human company and that his last expressed purpose is to take from amongst men those who shall be made spiritual; and therefore, in harmony with the words used by Jesus, ‘the first shall be last, and the last first.’ Other scriptures show that in carrying out his purpose the spiritual class is first selected and the human company is the last selected. The man without faith does not see these things, and cannot see them, and hence he says it is impossible; but Jesus said to his disciples on the occasion above mentioned: “With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.” (Matt. 19:26) Whatsoever is the will of
244
We. WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. V.
God shall be done, and we are certain it will come to pass as he has purposed it.
’The Lord Jesus speaks of both of the companies here mentioned as “sheep”, manifestly using that symbolic term to indicate obedience, since the sheep is docile and obedient. (John 10:7-16) Jesus laid down his life for the sheep, and not for the goats: “I lay down my life for the sheep.” (John 10:15) “Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.” (Matt. 20:28) Jesus laid down his life for as many as believe on him and serve him in obedience to God's commandment. The lifeblood of Christ Jesus purchased as many of the human race as lic-licve and obey, and no other. The ransom sacrifice docs not result beneficially for the willful and deliberate sinner. Adam was a deliberate sinner because he was fully aware of God’s law and the effect of his disobedience. Therefore it is written: “And Adam was not deceived; but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.” (1 Tim. 2:14) There is no reason to believe that the ransom sacrifice was for the benefit of Adam, but it was and is for the benefit of those of Adam’s offspring who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and obey. Speaking of the Lord Jesus, the prophet John the Baptist said, as is written: “He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is true. For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God: for God giveth not the spirit by measure unto him. The Father lovcth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believelh on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believelh not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”—John 3:33-36.
4 The theory of men concerning “universal salvation”, that ultimately God will save all, is entirely unscriptural and wholly unreasonable. All the Scrij>-tures concur that those who receive salvation must believe on God and Christ Jesus and obey. Salvation is of God by and through Christ Jesus and is ministered unto those only who believe and obey God and Christ: “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Rom. 6:23) “And being made perfect, he [Jesus Christ] became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.” (lleb. 5:9) “For the time is coinc that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?” (1 Pet. 4:17,18) Concerning those who obey not the Lord God it is written that Jesus, as the Executive Officer, will destroy them: “In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.”—2 Thcss. 1:8,9.
8 Who, then, are the two companies, both likened unto sheep, who are recipients of Jehovah’s blc-sing? They are designated in the Scriptures as the “little flock”, meaning those who will be associated with Christ Jesus in his kingdom (Luke 12:32), and the “great multitude”, who will for ever serve Jehovih God on the earth. The little flock is chosen first, and the “other sheep” or great multitude are chosen lest, and therefore Jesus said concerning the two classes or companies: “I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I mud bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”—John 10:14,16.
8 It seems very essential at the present time that those who have undertaken to serve God and Client Jesus should have knowledge and understanding of the two companies of the Lord’s sheep and the duty and obligation of each and the obligation of one to the other. Some who are of the “little flock”, as it appears, are yet on the earth, and associated v.itii them are some who doubtless form the great multitude. There appears to be confusion in the mind of some of each class as to what is the proper relationship of one to the other. It is reported that there are even contentions and disputes amongst those who claim to be of one or the other of the two companies. Mutely there can be no real cause for such contention, ami therefore where contention exists it must be due to a misunderstanding or due to the wrong disposition made manifest on the part of some. When the proper relationship of the two companies one to the other is seen in the light of the Scriptures, there should he no difficulty for those of the earthly company, ami certainly none for the other, in seeing their respective positions and faithfully and joyfully filling the place to which each is assigned.
’Prior to the coming of the Lord Jesus faithful men served God, but there was no provision for them to gain everlasting life. With the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus God opened the way for the selection first of the spiritual class; and when this spiritual company is selected, then the way is made clear for the earthly class to come forward and be gathered into the fold of the Lord. The purpose here is not to go into a detailed discussion of the ransom sacrifice, but rather to point out the true and Scriptural relationship between the spiritual and earthly companies, having in mind that the ransom sacrifice inures to the benefit of both companies, because there is no other way to gain life.—Acts 4:12.
JEHU AND JEUONADAB
8 The things which came to pass upon Israel and those associated with Israel, and which were recorded in the Scriptures, “happened unto them for cnsamplcs [types (munyin)]” for the enlightenment of tho<e who are upon the earth at the end of the world, which
August 15, 1957
8TieV/ATCHT0WEFL
245
means the present time. (1 Cor. 10:11) Following this announced rule of the Lord the consecrated today can from a study of those types gain a correct view of the proper relationship of the “little flock” to the “great multitude”. The admonition of the scripture is addressed to both classes: “With all thy getting get understanding.” (Prov. 4:7) That means that it is of greatest importance that we have the proper appreciation of our relationship to Jehovah and Christ Jesus and to each other. The moving cause for the action of both companies must be the same in order to be pleasing to God. The motive must be unselfish, and therefore the creature is prompted by love or unselfishness to serve God and Christ. After Jehovah had revealed to his people the meaning of his words concerning Jehu, then he made known to his people on earth the meaning of the term “the great multitude”. It was then that God’s people began to get understanding concerning the two companies whom Jehovah favors with the benefit of the ransom and to whom he gives salvation and everlasting life.
’Since the ensemplcs, or types, were made for our benefit, all such should be considered as a guide for the acquiring of proper information. Jehu was an officer in Israel engaged in the work of executing The judgment of Jehovah against the Devil religionists, lie was anointed or commissioned to do that specific work, and he proceeded to do it under God’s commandment. Jehu was primarily a type of Christ Jesus, the great Executive Officer of Jehovah, who executes the vengeance of Jehovah against the Devil and his organization. Religion is the chief part of the Devil’s organization. Jehu also pictured the faithful body members of Christ, the aforementioned spiritual class, who are included in the 1 ype by reason of being members of the body of Christ. Jehu had just executed forty-two of the Devil’s religionists, who supported the unfaithful king of Israel, and was proceeding about his further work of execution when he came upon Jchonadab. “And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jchonadab the son of Rcchab, coming to meet him: and he saluted him, and said to him, Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And Jchonadab answered, It is. If it be, give me thine hand. And he gave him his hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot. And he said, Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord. So they made him ride in his chariot.”—2 Ki. 10:15,16.
10	Who was Jehonadab? lie was a son of Reehab. The descendants of Jehonadab were afterwards known as those of “the house of the Rcehabitcs”. They were not Jews, and therefore were not in the law covenant with Jehovah. They fled for safety to Jerusalem, and there they proved their integrity, and manifestly they were not amongst those who insisted upon slaying God’s prophet Jeremiah, but who stood for right. (Jcr. 26: 8) Jehonadab, who in the Scriptures is also called Jonadab, was an honest man. He was against Devil
religion. He was not a religionist. He had learned of Jehovah God and sought to serve him. His descendants, the house of the Rechabites, were honest and sincere men, who were diligent in performing their vows and agreements even though made to men. This shows that the first essential for one to appreciate God’s goodness is honesty. It further supports the conclusion that dependability is required of those who are pleasing Io God. Jehonadab therefore dearly pictured that class of persons on the earth who at the time of the coining of Christ Jesus, the great Exteu-tive Oflicer, manifest a good will toward God and h j organization and are against the Devil religionist •, including those who practice the so-called “Chri.tian religion”. They are men of sincerity who beliexe in right and try to do right, and when they learn of God and his kingdom they seek him. Such are the one; that form the great multitude. By observing the relationship between Jehu and Jehonadab one can sec what is the proper relationship of the great multitude to the little flock.
11	Jehu saw Jehonadab coming to meet him. This shows that the people of good will seek the Lord an I ask the way to Zion, that is, God’s capital organization. Jehu graciously received Jehonadab and said 1o him : “Is thine heart right, as my heart?” The hiart it The seat of motive, disclosing what is the purpose of one in attempting a certain course of action. The motive of Jehu was to do the will of God and Io do so with reel joy. He was commissioned to do a work and he delighted in doing it. He was fighting against the Devil religion, which defamed God’s name, lie therefore showed a pure heart devoted to God and his law. To the question of Jehu Jehonadab said: ‘I am with you; my heart is with your heart.’ Otherwise stated, Jehonadab was in full sympathy and accord with what Jehu was doing, and desired to join him in his work. Jehu then offered his hand unto Jchonadab and took Jchonadab up into his chariot. Clearly that pictures Christ Jesus inviting the men of good will, who have set their heart on doing the will of God, into God’s organization. Then Jehu said to Jchonadab: “Come . . . and see iny zeal for Jehovah” (A.Zi’.l'.); meaning, 'Come, and I will show you by iny works that I have faith in God and that I have a burning desire to do his will.’ Jehonadab rode with Jehu and went to the place where the De\il religionists were worshiping, and he acted under the direction of Jehu. Jehonadab appeared publicly and identified himself before the people as a helper and supporter of Jehu, lie became a companion in service with Jehu, God's anointed servant. The prophetic picture is now in course of fulfillment. Christ Jesus, the Greater Jehu, is at the temple of Jehovah, clothed with full power and authority, and is executing the judgments of Jehovah God. Those of the temple or anointed company are associated with Christ Jesus as members of the “faithful and wise servant”, acting at the command
246
eKe WATCH TOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the Lord Jesus Christ. By virtue, then, of their relationship to Christ Jesus they are also pictured in Jehu. The antitypical Jchonadab, that is, the people of good will, are against the Devil religion and are now seen seeking Christ Jesus, that they may learn the way to God’s organization. They must now see the zeal of the antitypical Jehu, that is, Christ Jesus. It is prophetically written concerning the Lord Jesus Christ: “I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother’s children. For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee [Jehovah] are fallen upon me.” (Ps. 69:8,9) The purpose of Jehu’s inviting Jehonadab to come and sec his zeal manifestly was that Jehonadab might learn what is required of those who serve God, and this shows that those of the great multitude must also possess the zeal peculiar to the Lord’s house. All must be unselfishly devoted to God and bis kingdom. The same faith and devotion required of the little flock is required of the great multitude. Necessarily, then, this causes questions to arise in the minds of those who arc walking in the narrow way.
QUESTIONS
” The following questions are from time to time being propounded by some of both of the abovementioned classes and some are doubtful as to what they should do. These questions are, to wit: In the organization and service of the Lord on the earth, who may vote for the selection of company servants? Who may serve in carrying out the work of the organization? Who may be placed upon a committee of service? Who may properly lead a company study? Is it proper for the Jonadabs to serve together with the remnant? The correct answers to these questions can be appreciated only after first ascertaining what is the true relationship of the members of the temple to those who are Jonadabs or who will form the great multitude. The correct answer to each of these questions must be in full harmony with the Scriptures.
** It is reported that some members of the organization, and who claim to be of the anointed temple company, say to the Jonadabs something like this: “1 am of the anointed; you are not. Jehu drove the cliariot, and you must understand I am driving here in this organization.” That statement is entirely wrong because out of harmony with the Scriptures. Jehu driving the chariot pictured specifically Christ Jesus the King, who is in full command of the entire organization of the Lord and all persons therein. No individual on the earth is driving the chariot, which pictures God’s organization. All are servants. Members of the temple company yet in the flesh are serving under the command of Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Jehu, and the driving of the organization is not their commission. They arc not bosses, but servants of the Lord, and they have specific duties to perform, which duties arc set forth in the Scriptures. Jehu was not
unkind to Jehonadab, and since Jehu also pictured the anointed members of the temple, under their Head, Christ Jesus, this proves that the temple company must not be unkind to the “other sheep”, or the Jonadabs, but, on the contrary, must be kind, considerate, and always trying to help them.
“ Who, then, can properly vote in the selection of servants of the company of the anointed ones? Only those who are of the anointed, because such are members of the organization of the Lord and are commissioned by the Lord to act under his direction. They should always vote after first asking the Lord to direct. Jchonadab was not commissioned or anointed, and the company or class which Jehonadab pictures are not commissioned or anointed. Voting in a company is not a privilege or franchise such as is enjoyed by citizens of the nations of the world. Voting for servants in the church is an obligation or duty laid upon and exercised by those who are members of the anointed or temple company. (Acts 14:23) One who does not even claim to be of the anointed temple company should not have a desire to exercise the power of voting, but should be glad to be in harmony with the will of the Lord expressed through his anointed company and willing to serve under whosoever is selected for that purpose. The Lord Jesus is directing his organization through those of the temple company. Jehovah, acting through Christ Jesus, places the members in the body as it pleases him. (1 Cor. 12:18) Christ Jesus acts as the Officer of Jehovah in carrying out God’s purpose. The body members move as directed by the Lord Jr,us Christ. The Jehonadabs, or “other sheep”, do not bear that relationship to the Lord.
15 Jehonadab did not select his own scat in the chariot, nor did he attempt to drive the chariot. He was there to do what he was asked to do, and he did so. Following out the picture, Christ Jesus invites his “other sheep”, the Jonadabs, to find refuge within his organization and to go along with him; but there is no Scriptural authority for their attempting to say who among the anointed shall or shall not serve in a position amongst the anointed. The Jonadab should always keep in mind that he finds protection, by the grace of the Lord, in His organization, and, his heart being in harmony with the Lord, he will delight to do whatsoever is the will of God. Casting a vote for a servant in the church does not increase his privilege or increase his safety, and failing to cast a vote does not take away anything from him. Selection of servants in the church should be made only after asking the Lord to direct, and then action should be taken by the temple company or members of the church. Selfishness must be entirely put out of the way, and no one should vote for the selfish reason of putting any one person into a position, but rather he should cast his vote that the will of God might be done in selecting the right persons.
August 15, 1937
WATC H TOWER-
147
10	When Moses, also a type of Christ Jesus, assembled the covenant people of God in Moab, he gave them instruction in harmony with the will of Jehovah God. He instructed them especially in connection with those who should take the lead in the service. He said: “Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.” (Dcut. 1:13) Those who are selected as servants in the church should be the ones who give evidence of having a deeper appreciation of their own relationship to the Lord and to their brethren. The Jonadahs are with the anointed remnant for the purpose of learning and acting with the remnant in harmony with the Lord’s will.
WHO MAY SERVE
17	As to who may serve in the organization of the Lord, it is entirely a different matter. All who undertake to do the will of God are his servants. The Scriptural answer to the question, therefore, is that the anointed and the “other sheep” arc servants and it is the privilege of all such to perform service as opportunity is offered and to do so, being prompted also by genuine zeal or burning love for the Lord. All t!;e servants of the Lord as such are companions, and all should see to it that they serve exactly in harmony with the Lord’s organization and in the spirit of the Lord. The chief purpose of service is to proclaim the name and kingdom of Jehovah and to do so in an orderly manner as directed by the Lord. Whatsoever is done should be done to the glory of Cod, that his name be honored, and this without regard to honoring men. When the anointed remnant and the Jonn-dabs arc associated together in service, those amongst the remnant who give evidence of understanding and zeal for the Lord should take the lead in the service, and the others should follow or work together in foil harmony.
18	Is it proper to select a Jonadab to serve as a member of the service committee? Yes; under certain conditions. It is the duty of the company to see that the service work is properly organized to carry on to the glory of God and his kingdom and therefore done in an orderly manner. If there are in the company those who arc of the anointed and who show the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, these should be given preference when selecting the members of the service committee. If there are those who claim to be anointed and yet show no real zeal for the Lord, such persons should not be placed on the service committee. If there are those amongst the company who claim to be Jonadabs and who do show forth the zeal of the Lord, thus demonstrating that the heart of such is devoted to God and his kingdom under Christ, those persons may properly be placed upon the service committee and should serve earnestly and faithfully. All the members of the company, both anointed and Jonadabs, should work exactly in harmony as com
panions. The Jonadabs here become the helpers to carry on the service work.
19	Who may properly act as chairman or conductor of a company study of the Word of the Lord ? If there are present in the company those who are mature men in Christ Jesus and who therefore arc of the anointed and show forth the zeal peculiar to the house of the Lord, and who possess the qualification to conduct a study in an orderly and profitable manner, such persons should be chosen as conductors or chairmen of the study company. If all who arc present in the study class or company arc Jonadabs, then certainly it is proper for those present to select one amongst their number who is a Jonadab to serve in the capacity of chairman to conduct the study. The purpose of all such studies is that those engaged therein may grew in knowledge and in the spirit of the Lord, .".nd it is never the purpose to give honor to some pci son by placing that person in the chair to conduct the study. The teachers are Jehovah God and Chi 1st Jesus. (Isa. 30: 20) Those who have a zeal for the Lord and arc apt to instruct should be selected to conduct a study. Unless the person seeks to conduct a study in a manner that will be beneficial to those engaged therein he should not be placed in the position of chairman or kader.
Zl> Would it be proper for a Jonadab to lead the company workers in the field service at such times as the duly appointed company servant is absent ? When a number of persons come together to engage in the service in the field, and the company servant is not present, and Jonadabs arc present who are devoted to the Lord and show the zeal for his home, it is proper for one of such persons to be selected to take the lead in the field service. Sometimes one of the “elective cider” spirit severely criticizes .Jonadabs for taking this course, and such criticism is ent ircly wrong. The following scriptures are cited in support of the conclusions above stated, and show that the Jonadabs are the helpers and companions of the anointed, that the obligation of selecting by vote the servants of the company rests upon the anointed, and that all who have devoted themselves to God and his King should engage together in the service to the glory of the King and Jehovah.
NOAH
21	Jehovah has made various pictures or typos foretelling the Jonadabs or “great multitude” company, and amongst these arc the following: Noah and the seven members of his family pictured the two classes, that is, the “little flock” and the “great multitude”. “And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for time have I seen righteous before me in this generation. Of every elean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female; and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female. Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the
248
3Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, X. Y.
face of all the earth. For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth. And Noah did according unto all that the Lord commanded him.” —Gen. 7:1-5.
22	Noah was duly commissioned “a preacher of righteousness”, acting under the command of Jehovah. (2 Pet. 2:5) There is no record that Noah employed any help outside of his family to build the ark. His family pictured a human class doing what humans can do, therefore picturing the same as the Jonadabs, the great multitude. Noah brought the specific animals into the ark; and his family, or Jonadab prototypes, undoubtedly helped do the work as they were assigned and directed by Noah, and this they did for the merciful preservation of life, and in behalf of which living creatures Jehovah thereafter set forth the terms of the everlasting covenant. Within the ark, both before and during the flood, there were daily duties to be performed of feeding and caring for those living creatures, and the family of Noah rendered assistance in this behalf, thereby foretelling what is to be done by the Jonadabs as helpers or companions of the remnant. Noah’s household had recognition of Jehovah God through Noah. Certainly Noah would direct the members of his family as to what they should do. Noah’s family were carried over from the old world, being protected and saved from the deluge. Likewise those whom they represent, the great multitude, have the promise of being carried through Armageddon.
REFUGE
23	One who had committed a crime unwillingly and was a fugitive might flee to the city of refuge and find protection there. ‘‘These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of Israel [meaning those held in religious organizations and who lice therefrom], and for the stranger [non-rcligious ones, who arc not associated with any church organization and who flee from the Devil’s organization to the Lord], and for the sojourner among them; that every one that kilieth any person unawares may flee thither.” —Num. 35:15.
24	The manslaycr had to stand trial, and the burden was on him to prove that the bloodshed by him was without malice and therefore accidental or done unawares. (Num. 35:24,25) Likewise those persons of good will, that is, the Jonadabs, must stand trial and prove that their past course in the Devil’s world was ignorantly taken or was accidental by reason of birth, teaching, or the like, and this they must prove by turning about and following the course that is approved by the Lord, and which is therefore innocent. There were others besides priests and Levites residing in the city of refuge. (Num. 35:6; Judg. 9:1-6; 2 Sam. 2:1-4,11) The manslayer who fled to the city of refuge must first be given aid freely, but his conditioned pro
tection depended upon closely abiding in the city and being obedient to the rules of the city and being engaged in some activity there so that he would not be a burden upon the other inhabitants of the city. The apostle announced the same rule. (2 Thc&s. 3:8-12) All must work, otherwise they should not cat. The manslayer contributed to the good of the Levite city, and he must stick close within the city bounds, that is, God’s organization, until the death of the high priest, meaning the completion of the priestly work of the church before their resurrection change. The one thus fleeing to the city of refuge was not an official member of the city, but he received protection and aid and comfort from the city while complying with the rules thereof.
GIBEONITES
25	The Gibeonitcs were non-Israelitcs, and they sought Joshua and put themselves under his command and were by Joshua made “hewers of wood and drawers of water”. Joshua pictured Christ Jesus, who now says to the non-anointed who seek him: “Ye are cursed [that is, devoted to Jehovah God, his servants; and hence no human has the right to kill you (Lev. 27:28), but you must be obedient to the Lord] ; and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house [place, Zion, that is, God’s organization] of my God.”—.Josh. 9:23.
20	Mark this, that the Gibeonitcs had nothing whatsoever to do with the selection or appointment of the Levites for service, hut they did help the Lev ites who were appointed according to the Lord’s choice or selection. The Gibeonitcs, being made ‘wood cutters and water carriers’, surely represent those servants who perform service to which they arc assigned by the priests of the Lord, that is, the anointed ones of the Lord’s house. The Gibeonitcs relied upon Joshua to aid them in battle, and, when hard pressed, they asked Joshua 1o make a hurried march for their help and said: “Slack not thy hand from thy servants.” (Josh. 10:6) This shows that the “other sheep” or great multitude rely upon the Lord Jesus and his anointed body members to lead them in the light and to do so for their protection and help. They call upon the anointed to be diligent about it, and all those who have the spirit of the Lord hurry on to the service in aid of the “other sheep”. The Gibeonitcs must serve with the Israelites, thus showing that the “other sheep” join in the service and do as they are directed through the Lord’s organization. Some of the Gibcon-ites afterwards helped David and were pul in positions of importance to serve. “Now these arc they that came to David to Ziklag, while he yet kept himself close, because of Saul [picturing the ‘evil servant’ class] the son of Kish: and they were among the mighty men, helpers of the war. . . . and Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and
August 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
249
Johanan, and Josabad the Gederathite.” (1 Chron. 12:1-4) Thus it is seen that Shcmah “the Gibeonite” was placed over others of the company, being assigned to duty to serve. This pictures that the class represented by him, namely, those w ho form the great multitude, are appointed to places of service in the Lord’s organization although they are not members of the organization.
NETHINIM
” The term Nethinim means “given ones” or “dedicated ones”, and was applied to the men who rendered service in connection with the tabernacle and temple. They were not Israelites: “Now these are the children of the province that went up out of the captivity, of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his eity; . . . The Ncthinims: the children of Ziha, the children of llasupha, the children of Tabbaoth, ... So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.”—Ezra 2:1,43,70.
M Later the priest Ezra went up to the restored city of Jerusalem, and on that occasion he sent for certain non-Jews or Nethinim, to render service: "And I gathered them together to the river that runneth to Ahava; and there abode we in tents three days: and I viewed the people and the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi. Then sent I for Eliezer, [and others named therein:] for Ariel, for Shcmaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshullain, chief men; also for Joiarib, and for Elnathan, men of understanding. And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia, and I told them what they should say unto Iddo, and to his brethren the Ncthinims, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring unto us ministers for the house of cur God. And, by the good hand of our God upon us, they brought us a man of understanding, of the sons of Alahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel; and Shere-Liah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen; and Ilashabiah, and with him Jcshaiah, of the sons of Mcrari, his brethren and their sons, twenty; also of the Ncthinims, whom David and the princes had appointed for the service of the I-cvites, two hundred and twenty Ncthinims: all of them were expressed by name.” (Ezra 8:15-20) Thus it is seen that there were thirty-eight in all of the Levites and 220 Nethi-nims, all of them expressly named; and the men of understanding, that is, who showed their qualifications, were placed in key positions of service. “Iddo the chief” appears to have been one of the Nethinim and was assigned to a place of service over the others who ministered at the house of God. Thus it is shown in the type that the Levites, the anointed class, and the great multitude, the class not anointed, work
together. The Nethinim assisted Ezra’s delegation in preparation of and in doing the work that was assigned to them, thus proving that the two companies on earth as companions serve together.
29 When Nehemiah went to Jerusalem to rebuild the defenses of the city, the Nethinim or non-Jews were assigned to important posts of service and rendered service accordingly. Here it is clearly shown that the Nethinim separated themselves from the heathen and associated with God’s remnant people returned to Jerusalem. (Neb. 3:1-31; 10:28-32) “Now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem; but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their cities, to wit, Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon’s servants. But the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel [the tower]: and Ziha and Gispa [also Nethinim] were over [that is, they occupied positions of more importance, to which they had been assigned] the Ncthinims.” (Neh. 11:3,21) This definitely shows that non-Israelitcs had joint charge over other Nethinim, and this certainly supports the conclusion that it is Scripturally proper to assign the non-anointed, that is, the Jonadabs or “other sheep”, to places of importance in the service and to assign them over others or companies or divisions, and also to put them in positions as leaders of study classes composed of Jonadabs, as hereinbefore stated.
JOSEPH’S HALF BRETHREN
"Another picture showing the relationship of the “little flock” to the great multitude is that of Joseph and his half brethren. Joseph was, in the prophetic drama, a type or representative of Christ Jesus, and also foreshadowed the anointed ones, that is, those who are members of the body of Christ, including the remnant now on earth. The ten half brothers of Joseph represented those persons who have had a change of heart, and who have become persons of good will toward God and his faithful remnant and therefore have become of the "other sheep” of Christ Jesus, picturing the "great multitude” company. (See The Watchtower February 1 to March 15, 1937.) Joseph presented his half brothers to the king of Egypt. Then Pharaoh said to Joseph: “If thou knowest any men of activity among them [Joseph’s half brethren], then make them rulcis over my cattle.” (Gen. 47:1-6) This shows the propriety of the remnant’s appointing as servants of the Lord the Jonadabs and assigning such as arc qualified to places of responsibility in the service. It supports the conclusion that it is proper for Jonadabs or the “other sheep” to be associated with the remnant in the service, to be assigned to such places by the service committee, that is, such places as captains of a division or like places in service. Where such Jonadabs exhibit the necessary qualifications, and particularly the zeal for the Lord and full humility in walking with the
250
&he WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Lord in obedience to his commandments, they are Scripturally assigned to places of service over others.
31 In this connection another thing of very great importance appears, and that, is that it is absolutely necessary for all those who undertake to serve God to get on together peaceably and to avoid all strife or contention. Joseph gave instruction and admonition to his half brethren when sending them back to Canaan, to wit: “So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.” (Gen. 45: 24) The rendering of this text according to the Swedish Bible is as follows: “Do not quarrel in the way.”
”To those who are of the “other sheep”, pictured by the half brethren of Joseph, those words of admonition are very important at the present time. It being important that the Jonadabs get on peaccab’y together, it is certainly of equal importance that the anointed proceed peaceably; and this is supported by other scriptures. To all of these the Lord now says: “See that ye fall not out by the way”; meaning that you must sec to it that you dwell together in peace and that you go forward unitedly in the service of the Lord. This is a time for peace and harmony among (he people of God’s organization and a time for war between God’s organization and the Devil’s crowd. Loyalty and faithfulness, peace and harmony are therefore essential that all may manifest the spirit peculiar to the Lord’s house and in order that they may present a solid front against the enemy. Not only is it a shame for any of God’s people to be at war among themselves, but those who indulge in such controversies to maintain their selfish desire or positions are certain to be cast out by the Lord.
’■‘In harmony with this the Lord through the psalmist gives a direct and perfect lead to those who are of God’s organization. These are represented as saying: “I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go unto the house of Jehovah”; that means, into the temple, showing that now is the fulfillment of these prophetic utterances. This is the time of judgment when the Greater-than-Joseph is on his throne. Now the admonition is given to all of God’s servants, those who are a part of God’s organization and those who are under the organization, to wit: “Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.” (Ps. 122:G-S, A.K.V.) In this latter verse of the scripture both the little flock and the great company, the remnant and Jonadabs, arc designated as “companions”; and these must be knit together, working together to the glory of God.—Psalm 122.
SLAVE
Jeremiah the prophet was sent by Jehovah to proclaim to Jerusalem her impending doom and to give warning to those who believed on God and served
him to flee to the place of safety. At the instance of the Jew religionists Jeremiah was thrown into the dungeon of the prison. At that time there was an Ethiopian named Ebed-melcch serving in the house of Israel’s king. The slave saw the cruel and wicked injustice heaped upon Jeremiah by the religionists, and he approached his lord and king and interceded for Jeremiah that he might, be saved from the dungeon. Ue ministered unto God's prophet. In this Ebed-mclech pictured those persons of good will who are subjected by the religious organizations of “Christendom” and restrained of their liberty by reason of being under those organizations, and who see the gri.it injustice that is heaped upon Jehovah’s anointed remnant, whom Jeremiah pictured. Jeremiah here represents the little flock; the Ethiopian slave represents the great multitude. The action of the slave pictuics the great multitude coming out and publicly declaring before the ruling class, the king, that they arc on the side of God and his people, and thus by their course of action they become witnesses for Jehovah and his kingdom. (Jcr. 38: 7-13; 39:15-18) The great multitude therefore arc witnesses for Jehovah, but they do not bear the official name, for the reason tin t they are not of the anointed house of Jehovah. They perform the service along with the remnant. Tiny must possess the same faith, devotion and zeal.
V1KGINS
33 In beautiful poetic phrase Jehovah’s prophet describes the spiritual class, which constitutes the bride of Christ Jesus, and who is designated in the prophecy as “the daughter” of the “King of Eternity”. Then he tells of a class of purified ones, because they are called “virgins”. This shows that those associates must be washed in the blood of Chri-t Jesus by exercising faith in his blood, and be devoted to him, and devoting themselves to God’s service. In the Scriptures these “virgins” are specifically called the “companions” of “the King’s daughter”. “The King’s daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold. She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needlework: the virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into the King’s palace.”—Ps. 45: 13-15.
36 Even the faithful “witnesses” of old, named by the apostle Paul specifically, and who will receive life on earth, are the companions of the spiritual class. Another proof that such earthly class was announced as the first purpose of Jehovah and is perfected last, is written at Hebrews: “And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the, promise; God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.” (Ileb. 11:39,40) Here is the positive proof that the spiritual class must be selected first and then the earthly company perfected, and in due time they shall
Augvst 15, 1937
fJIle WATCHTOWER.
251
all be of onefold, giving praise and service to Jehovah God. Certainly the “virgins” mentioned in this prophecy did not merely adorn the bride of Christ by their presence, but rendered assistance to her. The faithful men of old who served as “witnesses” for Jehovah, even to the pouring out of their lifeblood, are set forth as examples of faithfulness which the spiritual class are admonished to follow. Those faithful men are called martyrs or “witnesses” (Ileb. 12:1), and they were witnesses to Jehovah then as some are witnesses to him today. All of these firmly stand together, each class joyfully taking the position assigned, and render service as assigned, to the glory of God. Thus they arc shown as companions knit together in God’s service, fighting in the common cause of righteousness.
“TEN MEN”
” The symbolic term “ten” represents completeness of things pertaining to the earth. The word “Jew” is from the word “Judah” and means 'one who praises Jehovah’, and particularly refers to Christ Jesus, who is “the Lion of the tribe of Juda” and the King of all who serve Jehovah God. (Rev. 5:5) Ilis faithful followers yet on the earth arc called the “feet of him”. (Isa. 52:7,8) Here again, in the prophecy of Zechariah, the two companies are shown to be closely knit together as companions in the service, as it is written: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities: and the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray be fore the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts; I will go also. Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold, out of all languages of the nations, even shall take Itold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, Wc will go with you; for we have heard that God is with you.”—Zech. 8:20-23.
“ Verses twenty to twenty-two inclusive, as above set out, disclose people of good will coining from many parts of the earth and saying to each other: ‘Let us pray before Jehovah, seeking the Lord of hosts’; and they seek the Lord in his organization. Thus they do in the day of Jehovah, that is, after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple. Then the prophet says that “ten men”, meaning all the men on earth of good will who will compose the great multitude, “shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,” which means Christ Jesus; and since the skirt hangs down in proximity of the feet, “the Jew” here also represents the remnant, the faithful members of the body of Christ, and these people of good will say to them: “We will go with you; for we have heard that God is with you.” They openly declare themselves on the side of God and his King and kingdom. They bend their backs and their knees to the Lord Jesus Christ and praise
his name. They lay hold upon the Lord and declare their heart devotion is to God and to Christ Jesus. They are not. ashamed to publicly declare themselves on the side of Christ, the King, and Jehovah, the great King of Eternity. They do not hesitate, but they delight to be associated with the remnant in hearing testimony to the name of Jehovah and his kingdom and in bearing the reproaches that fall upon all who show their zeal and devotion to God and Christ. In this prophetic picture the remnant take the lead, and the Jonadabs or great multitude, pictured by the ten, joyfully join them and follow in the right way. They bring their offerings with them for the service, that is, they give all their praise and devotion, and they give their time and energy and money to further the cause of the kingdom to the praise of Jehovah and his King.
"MANY NATIONS”
30 Jehovah’s prophet describes the people of “mrny nations” going up to God’s organization to receive information at the mouth of those who form the hor-c-hold of the Lord, and to seek instruction concerning Jehovah and his kingdom. Ilere again the remnant is shown rendering aid to the great multitude. Savs the prophet: “And many people shall go [up] and say [to each other and to their acquaintances], Come yn, and let us go up to the mountain [the kingdom] of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob [meaning the spiritual sheep of the Lord, members of the royal 1 ouse] ; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion [the temple, God’s dwelling place] shall go forth the law [the authoritative rule of action], and the word of the Lord [the correct and authoritative message concerning the Kingdom] from Jerusalem [that is, the organization of the Lord, wherein are God’s witnesses].”—Isa. 2:3.
40	The people of earth of good will see the “abomination that inaketh desolate”, namely, the religious organizations claiming that they are going to rule the earth, and these persons of good will flee from Satan’s religious organization and hasten to the kingdom of Christ. (Matt. 24:15) There they find instruction and engage in the service of the Lord with the remnant, and thus the two classes, the spiritual and the earthly, become companions and serve together.
SHEEP MADE MANIFEST
41	For some time past the “other sheep” of the Lord have been made manifest, and their acts fully support all the scriptures above cited on this point. Christ Jesus, the great Judge, is at the temple, and before him arc gathered the nations for judgment, and such judgment is based upon the evidence that the nations themselves are now giving against themselves. (Matt. 25:31,32) This evidence they furnish bv their manner of treatment of Jehovah’s witnesses, thus showing their heart condition towards the Lord and his kingdom. Jehovah’s witnesses, the remnant,
252
CFHa WATCHTOWER.
Ekooklyx, N. Y.
in obedience to God’s commandment and under the leadership of Christ Jesus, go forth preaching this gospel of the kingdom. The persons of ill will, particularly the religionists, being of a cruel and extremely selfish heart, persecute the witnesses of Jehovah, and the Lord likens them unto the “goats”, and thus the cruel ones ill-treating Jehovah’s witnesses bear testimony against themselves and convict themselves. On the other side are made manifest the people of good will who, seeing the cruel treatment unjustly heaped upon Jehovah’s witnesses by the “goat” class of religionists, and seeing how these faithful ones are used to bear the reproaches that come upon the name of God and Christ Jesus, clearly discern that Jehovah’s witnesses are the Lord’s servants and that the religionists are the Devil’s servants. The people of good will know that the religionists have not the favor of God, because they are persecuting God’s children and servants. They conclude that the remnant not only are right but are suffering for righteousness’ sake in the Lord's service, and for his name. Being of good will, therefore, these visit the remnant, render aid and comfort to them, and declare their support of those witnesses who are serving God. They publicly manifest their support of the remnant, and thus they take their stand on the side of God and his kingdom, joining the remnant and becoming their companions in service. They hear the approval of the Lord Jesus to them in these words: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” Thus again the Lord shows that the class or company first appearing in his purpose is brought forth last in the execution of his purposes; supporting the words of Jesus that ‘the first shall be last and the last first’. The Lord here definitely identities these people of good will as his “other sheep”, who become the companions of the sheep first selected, and thus all act together as companions iu the service of Jehovah, his King and his kingdom.
FEAST OF INGATHERING
42The feast of tabernacles, also called “the feast of ingathering”, which God commanded should be observed by his covenant people once each year, was participated in by the Israelites, women, children, and ‘the strangers within thy gates’. At the end of every seven years, at this feast the law of God must be read in the presence and hearing of all those who are gathered. This clearly illustrates the selection of the spiritual class, which has been made; and now the “strangers”, the “great multitude” company, are being gathered in. It shows that the spiritual remnant and the earthly great multitude become companions in the feast of rejoicing unto the Lord. “And Moses commanded them saying, At the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles, . . . Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and thy stranger that
is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words of this law.”—Deut. 31:10-12.
43	This shows the gathering together of the remnant and all the people of good will, picturing the iiri :t multitude, and which the Lord shows must be done, that is, the ingathering must take place, before Armageddon. It shows the relationship of the spiritual da ,s to those of the “other sheep”.
44	This is a time of rejoicing by all those who arc devoted to Jehovah because these by faith see that the day of deliverance is at hand, and also the time for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Together the remnant and the great multitude join in son- s of praise, joy and thanksgiving unto Jehovah and his King. (Rev. 7: 9-15) Standing upon the short ; of Patmos, John had a vision of this day, and at ti e direction of the Lord he wrote: “And the Spirit mid the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth scy, Come. And let him that is athirst come: and wlwsirner will, let him take the water of life freely.”—Rev. 22:17.
45	Here Christ Jesus, the Spirit, and his bride, the spiritual class, are observed proclaiming thL j-o .pel of the kingdom, telling that the day of deliver, nee is come and that all of good will may seek safety in the Lord’s organization. His “other sheep”, or great multitude, hear the testimony of Jehovah’s witim, es, and they join in the service and say: “Come, all you of good will who love God and his King; come ami receive the blessings of life everlasting upon the earth.” This shows their companionship in service to the praise of the King and the kingdom.
40	In the face of all the foregoing harmonious scriptures, showing that the remnant and the great multitude are companions in service unto the Lord, there are those who make the claim of being God’s children and who say: “Where is the great multitude? We do not sec them. They must come after Armageddon.” This is conclusive proof that those who thus say are not of the temple, and hence are outside of God’s organization. Have in mind that it was John who said: “After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands.”—Rev. 7:9.
41	It is only the class pictured by John, namely, the spiritual remnant company in the temple, that see the great multitude, and those who do not see are certainly not of the temple. If they ever were in line they have been gathered out of the kingdom and cast into outer darkness.—Alatt. 13:41,42.
4S	The foregoing scriptures prove beyond all doubt that now wc are in the time when the remnant and the Jonadabs must be firmly knit together as companions in loving devotion and service of Jehovah and his kingdom. In peace they must work together harmo
August 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER
253
niously and always rejoice in the Lord because the day of deliverance is at hand and the time has come when the Lord has found and is bringing forth his “other sheep”. The Lord Jesus at the temple having gathered his spiritual sheep to the temple and being now engaged in gathering unto himself his “other sheep”, he invites all who love and serve Jehovah to rejoice with him. (Luke 15:6,7) The remnant and the Jonadabs must now get and hold understanding. They must have a proper appreciation of their relationship to the Lord and to each other, and as companions they must move forward fully united in the sen'ice of the King, at all times joyfully and zealously lifting high the standard of Jehovah, that others may learn of God and his King and kingdom and may find the way to life on earth and may participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
fl 1. What <lo the Scriptures show to be Jeho: all's purpose concerning the earth ? Why has that purpose not yet been accomplished f What further purpose does his Word disclose ?
fl 2. What are the requirements of each of the companies taken from among mon, ns a condition precedent to their entering into the inheritance provided for them? Apply Jesus’ words, ‘The first tlinll be last, und the last fii.->t.’
V 3. Explain Jems’ words, “I lay down my life for the sheep.” fl 4. With sciipturcs, show whether the theory of ‘‘universal saltation” is reasonable.
fl 5. Who are the two companies of "sheep”, who receive Jehovah’s blessing?
fl 6,7. Why is it now so important that the two companies of the Ixird's sheep clearly understand their idationship to well other?
fl 8. What is the importance of the statement at 1 Corinthians 10: 11? To whom is Proverbs 4: 7 addressed? Get understanding of nhat, especially?
9.	Whom <li<l Jehu picture, mid how?
fl 10. Who was Jchonadab, and how did he thus picture a class now manifest?
fl II. Relate what took place when Jchonadab met Jehu. Apply the prophetic picture.
fl 12-10. From the prophetic picture, und with related scriptures, explain as to who can propel ly vote in the selection of company servants.
fl 17,18. Explain as to who may sene in carrying out the work of the organization.
fl 19. Who may properly act as chairman or conductor of a company study of the Word of the Lord?
fl 20. Would it be proper for a Jonadab to lead the company workers in the field service?
fl 21,22. How does the record of Noah and the niembeis of his family present a picture of the "little flock” and the "great multitude”?
fl 23, 2-1. Apply the prophetic provision of the "cities of ief-uge”.
If 25,20. How did the assistance and privilege of service provided for the Gibeonites picture the position and privileges of the "great multitude” class?
fl 27-29. What arrangement was made for service by and among tho Ncthinim? Why was that provision made for them? What instruction is seen theiein concerning the service privileges of the great multitude?
1	30. How does the prophetic picture of Joseph and his half brethren show tho iclationslup of the "little flock” and the "great multitude”?
fl 31. Point out the important instruction provided at Genesis 45: 2-1.
fl 32,33. How does Psalm 122 serve as a lead to those who are of God’s organizalion?
fl 34. Show that the relationship and ministry of Ebed-mclech to Jeremiah were piophetie.
fl 35. Who are "the King’s daughter” and "the virgins her companions”, mentioned at Psalm 45: 13-15, and how is that prophetic, scripture hating fulfillment?
T 315. Point out the relation hereto of Hebrews 11:39,10.
'fl 37,38. Identify the "ten men” and the "Jew”, of Z.eihri-riah 8: 23. How does the procedure there recorded lune fulfillment?
fl 39, 10. Compaie Zechariah 8: 20,21 and Isaiah 2: 3, as foretelling the "gnat multitude” class and indicating their motive or purpose in their coming forth.
fl 41. Point out the manifestation now of the "other sheep” class us shown also in the fulfillment of the parable of the sheep and the goats.
1 42,43. What was the "feast of tubeinrmles”? When ami how was it observed, and who paiticipaled therein? Point out its prophetic significance.
fl 41,45. What is now seen to have been foicshown in the vision by John as recorded at Revelation 7: 9 15 and 22: 17?
fl 46,47. Who sec, and who do not sec, the 1 ulfillment now of Revelation 7:9? Why?
fl 48. What, then, is evident from the foregoing scriptures as to the existence and iclationslup, and pnvdege and responsibility, of two companies of the Loid’s "sheep” at this time?
NEW NAME AND MORNING STAR PROMISED
ADDRESSING the congregation at Pergamos the Lord makes known two classes, one the unfaithful and compromising class, and the other the faithful and true class; and he separates the one from the other. The true class take a firm stand against every part of Satan’s organization and declare themselves emphatically on the side of the Lord. Then the Lord, addressing his words to the faithful class, says: “To him that overcometh will 1 give to cat of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.”—Rev. 2:17.
The only other place in the Bible in which the Greek word here translated “white stone” appears is in Acts 26:10, where Paul in effect says: “I gave my
voice [vote] against them”; and he gave his vote by means of a stone or pebble, which was a symbol of authority or privilege to vote. Upon the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of God and finding a class faithful he speaks of such collectively as the “faithful and wise servant”. These are not addressed individually, but as a class. The “white stone” is not given individually, but to the faithful servant class. It is the token of God’s approval or official designation of sueh as his servant or representative; and Jehovah gives his vote for such by and through Christ Jesus and confers upon the faithful class this favor by giving to that class the white stone. Such official and authoritative designation is not known or understood by any one except those who have received the stone,
254
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that is to say, the vote of Jehovah’s approving them. The language of the text is, the "name . . . which no man knoweth saving he that receivcth it’’, meaning the class receiving the stone. The new name is written in the stone, meaning that such is the class receiving God’s vote or approval, and upon whom he confers the great privilege of bearing this name and having a dear understanding of Jehovah and his purposes. There is thereby established a confidential relationship between the faithful class and Jehovah, and these are given the privilege of understanding the purpose of Jehovah and communicating the same to the people. Therefore there is a close correspondency or relation between the "white stone” and the Urim used by the high priest. (Num. 27:21; Neh. 7:65) It is only the priestly class, taken out and approved, that now enjoy the blessed privilege of having an appreciation of the meaning of Jehovah’s name, and of lira ring the "new name”, to wit, "Jehovah’s witnesses.”—Isa. 43:10-12; 02: 2; 65: 15.
Manna was a divine provision for the sustenance of life. When Jesus was on earth he was the Manna or Bread that came down from heaven. (John 6:51) Now he is the divine Bread of Life, and, being divine, is therefore hidden from human eyes. Hence the description, “the hidden manna.” lie is the divinely provided One upon which the remnant now feed while in the wilderness condition, and this One is hidden from those who do not love G'od. This fact he now reveals to his remnant by his spirit and by his Father’s lightnings. "Manna” literally means "What is it?” Many who claim to be followers of Christ do not understand the meat and drink now being enjoyed by the remnant, and they ask: ‘What is it that is now published by the Society?’ It is only the remnant who see present truth and rejoice in it. They are feeding upon this feast prepared for them in the presence of the enemy. This explains why many who claim to be followers of the Lord do not see present truth.
The approved class receives a new name, thus indicating a confidential relationship _ with the Lord which no man can infringe upon or even know. ‘The Lord knows those who are his’; and here his promise is to establish a close and confidential relationship between the approved ones and himself, and all the opposition that might be brought against them could not in any way infringe upon their good name with the Lord. A good name with him is to be desired above all riches. (Prov. 22:1) These are really in the joy of the Lord. These faithful ones, brought over into the ElLsha period of the church, rejoice to proclaim the King and his kingdom.
The Son of God warns of swift and certain judgment coming upon those in the church "in Thyatira”, that is to say, upon those in the condition represented by Thyatira, and which is displeasing to the Lord. (Rev. 2:18-29) The weight of authority is, "Thya
tira” means "daughter”; and this is supported by the words of verse twenty. The work of spreading the truth continued to increase during the period pictured by the prophet Elijah, and this increase was foretold in the words (vs. 19), "the last [is] more than the first.” In that period of time, however, there developed a condition that was displeasing to the Lord; a female influence was there operating particularly toward the elective ciders or leaders of the church and tending to draw husbands and brothers away from the true service of God, tending also to cause them to take a compromising position with Satan's organization. Hence the Lord says: "But I have this against thee, Because thou lettest alone the woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess; and she teaches and seduces my servants, to fornicate, and to < at idol-sacrifices.”—Vs. 20, Emphatic Diaglott.
Jezebel, the wife of King Ahab, improperly influenced her husband. She is made prominent in the Scriptures in connection with Elijah. (1 Ki. 16:31; 19:1-3) Such strongly suggests that Thyatira pictures a condition existing in the church during the Elijah period thereof. It was in that period of time particularly that women attempted to make themselves prominent and influential in the church and were encouraged so to do by some of the leaders. One of the original incorporators of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society was a woman, the wife of the then president thereof, and she insisted on editing The Watchtower and, being resisted, led other women to take a wrongful course against the Lord's work. The Scriptural statement, "that woman Jezebel, winch callcth herself a prophetess,” surely refers to certain female influence in the church exercised over leaders or men prominent therein.
Jesus is authority for the statement of truth that a man must love the Lord more than he loves his wile or any other creature, otherwise he is not worthy of the Lord’s favor. (Luke 14:26; Matt. 19:27-29) When female influence, whether it be that of wife, sweetheart, mother, or sister, causes a man to deviate from faithfulness and wholehearted service to the Lord, that influence not only is wrong, but will lead to destruction. The Lord likens such unto the wrongful influence exercised by Jezebel over the king which led to her destruction and to his. This scripture (vs. 20) could not refer to Babylon, because surely God never gave the Devil’s organization any ‘time to repent ’ (vs. 21) ; but it docs refer to an improper condition existing in the true church, and exercised by women, and that wrongfully, which is illustrated by Jezebel.
There are and always have been good women in the church, performing duties wdiich the Lord assigned to them. There have been and are others who attempt to do that which they are not authorized to do. The good women serve as witnesses to the Lord. The others attempt to dictate to the men what they should do.
It is a fact well known by many that prior to the
Avgcst 15, 1937
STJe WATC H TOWER-
255
Lord's coming to his temple certain women in the true church exercised great influence over men who were leaders or elders, causing them to compromise with Satan’s organization and to decline or refuse to take a bold and unequivocal stand for the Lord and his kingdom interests on the earth. Women also, by wrongfully exercising their influence, induced leaders or elective elders to refuse to ‘hold the Head’ and to become heady and to go contrary to God’s arrangement. They were swayed by passion or influence extraneous to the Word of God. Even to this day the same influence attempts to interfere with the Lord’s work. The condition was especially marked, however, during the Elijah period of the church. In that time classes were organized by women, and women in the church prepared lessons, sermons or discourses for the elective elders and directed them what to say. Ambitious women in the church influenced their husbands or some of the weaker brethren to carry out their own wishes with reference to the organization or conduct of the ecclcsia. Women in the church resorted to flattery of leaders and elders in order that they might influence them. Whether this was done unknowingly or deliberately would make no difference, but it does show Satan’s attempt to disrupt the Lord's organization, which the Lord foreknew and foretold. The Lord had pointed out that the woman has her place in the church, but her place is not to teach man nor attempt to influence man in his rightful performance of duty as a servant of the Lord. ¥70111011 in the church have induced their husbands or others to compromise concerning God’s work in order that they might gratify some selfish desire or ambition. The true rule is that where the Lord places a man in a position to serve Him he cannot please the Lord and deviate therefrom one jot or tittle by being influenced therein by another, and partieulaily by a female. Paul commended the faithful service of the women in the church, but warned against their improper course.
The Lord announced that 'this work of iniquity’ should not prosper, but that, coming to judgment, he would pronounce such as “dead works”. (Hob. 9:14) “Lo! I cast her into a bed.” (Vs. 22, llolh.) The flesh of Jezebel was consumed by dogs. Those of whom she was a prototype are cast into a bed which they desire, and all those that yield to their influence and who do not repent, into tribulation. (Vs. 22) This tribulation seems to have befallen those who have been wrongfully influenced by women, and they are not singing aloud the praises of Jehovah, but are crying in sorrow. “Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.”—Isa. 65:14.
The anointed ones today see that there are those who have been drawn away from the Lord and his service by female influence exercised in various ways, and those who have followed this wrongful course
have reached the end of their service and their works are dead. (Vs. 23) In this connection the Lord said: “And all the churches shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts; and I will give unto every one of you according to your works.” (Vs. 23) We all know that the Lord Jesus is the Head of the church, and the course of action that he maiked out must be followed, and he knows the motive that influences the action of each one. These words further prove that “all the churches” (including Pergamos and Thyatira) must be in existence at the same time when the message applies, and therefore the message to the church could not and docs not cover a long period of time (from the apostles unto the present), but applies only at the second coming of the Lord. Its understanding can be had only after the Lord comes to his temple for judgment.
Now it can be seen that men who are leaders have been the ones especially who have compromised with the Devil's organization and who are therefore the ones that have committed “fornication” as mentioned. The question may be asked, How are the women, particularly in the church, tempted by the Devil? The answer is that they have been used in a special way to seduce the seriants of the church by the wronginl exercise of their influence, thus causing the servants or leaders to he guilty of illicit relationship with the Devil’s organization and to compromise therewith for their own sustenance. A woman who would influence her husband to serve some part of the Devil’s organization in order that she might enjoy ease and comfort in the way of home or like things would be wrongfully inducing her husband. Where the Lord furnishes an opportunity for the husband to serve him, the wife should sec to it, if she is devoted to the Lord, that she in no manner stands in the way of service, but, on the contrary, should co-operate in cveiy way possible, because the greatest privilege that cun l;e given to a man is to serve God and his Christ. Then the Lord speaks of those who have not yielded to the improper influence but who have steadfastly maintained their integrity with the Lord, and says: ‘I will put upon you none other burden. But that which ye have already, hold fast till I come.” (Vss. 21,25) The promise of the Lord is that the “Jezebel” workers wrould be separated from his approved ones when he would appear at his temple for judgment. Until then they were told to hold fast the faith, love, and ministry committed to them, always contending for the faith first delivered to the saints. Then he adds words of encouragement to the faithful: “And he that overeometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will 1 give power over the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron ; as the vessels of a pot’er shall they be broken to shners: even as I received of my Father.”—Vss. 26,27.
Keeping his works “unto the end” must mean to the “end-’ which comes after ‘this gospel of the king-
256
WATCHTOWER.
Brooki. vx, N. Y.
Joni has been preached to all the world as a witness’. Seeing that the church is now in the time in which the members thereof have a glimpse of the immediate future, may not these words of Jesus indicate that the overcoming remnant will be permitted to see Satan’s organization dashed to pieces and thereafter have some work on the earth to the glory, of the name of Jehovah? Jehovah seems to be addressing the same overcoming class who are members of Zion when he says through his prophet: “Arise, and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass, and thou shalt beat in pieces many people; and I will consecrate their gain
unto the Lord, arid their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth.”—Mic. 4:13.
The overcomers are then told that they shall have a position of honor with the “morning star”, evidently meaning Christ in glory: “And I will give him the morning star.” (Vs. 28; also 22:16) “Star” means prince, which is one of the titles given to the beloved Son of God. He is the “Prince of Peace”, upon whose shoulder rests the government of the world. And now for the encouragement of all the faithful remnant of the church on earth the Lord reveals these truths to them. Such today joyfully lift up the voice and sing unto Jehovah the new song.
VERY INTERESTING SOUND EQUIPMENT EXPERIENCES
Dear Brother Rutherford:
You will be interested to hear how the sound car and the phonograph are teaiing down the enemy’s strongholds. After contacting one of the Lord’s isolated servants, he told me the opposition was too strong to witness the town from door to door, and that the chief of police was xery bitter. (They had never heard the sound ear or the phonogiaph.) Well, on the Saturday, when almost everyone comes to town, wo put the sound ear on for two hours. About 1500 heard the good news of the kingdom. Eight tamo up to the sound car and expressed theimehes. Two weic Spanish, who asked us to put on a Spanish piogram in a large Spanish settlement. This we did the next day.
We then put the phonographs on in most of the homes and stoies in the business section, finishing the town on Monday evening. Wo exen went as far as playing the phonographs on the streets in town with as many as til teen hstencis around a phonogiaph at one time, and once right in front of the police station, placing two bound books, six booklets and one Bible.
On tiic Monday while we were playing the phonograph a man came up and told how they had a big luss in one of the large churches the day before about our message. The preacher got up in the bullpit and told his flock that a bunch of people were going about the countiy, calling at the houses of the people with books full of lies. (He mentioned the author’s name, J. F. R.) The preacher was misrepresenting the publications by quoting statements made by you from other publications. One man got up and stated that he has twelve of those books, and that none of them read like those quotations. Then a woman got up and said, “I have sexeral of those books, and each one cheeks up with my Bible.” .Satan oxerstepped himself, and the Truth goes forward.
Another cxpenence from the county seat: During the first
of a series of Saturday afternoon programs a Baptist preacher caiue up to the sound car and asked me to lead over the nue the parable of ‘‘the rich man and Lazarus”, in which to pioxe his point on the hell-fire doctrine. I told him that it was a parable and that he did not understand it. Just then a man walked up, and the preacher beat it quickly. The' man said, ‘‘I was just going to expose him if he tried to stait something, because I was shooting dice with him txvo weeks ago. 1 questioned him about shooting dice, and he ‘said that a preacher has to hate some recreation.”
The baker in this toxvn had read Uiches. I came in tor my bread, and one of the preachers was also there for his bread. The baker shoved my money back to ino and told me to keep it; but he rang up the preacher’s money. The pieacher then asked me if that was my sound car out there. I icphed that it belonged to Jehovah. He then asked how much the sound ear cost. 1 told him they were not for sale. He then said, ‘‘If we Baptists had something like that, we could get somewhere.” I then told him to read tins book Itichcs, and that he would get s< newhero quicker. He took Unites, and promised to read it. Later I hcaid that he had lost liis church assignment.
We were asked to bring our sound car to a colored church on Pastoral Sunday. There were 250 present. When we arnxe I the church tvas still in session. 1 then walked to the back of the church and heard the preacher say, ‘‘1 see the Kingdom Car has arrived. Would you all like to have a thirty-minute reees*, or to hear Deacon So-and-So preach for another half hour?” All voted for the recess.
All join me in sending you our warm Christian love; and may Jehovah continue to richly bless you and to keep you faithful to the end.
Your fellow servants in the greatest xvork of all ages, The IIowabth-Sills-Bourgeois Group, Pioneers.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
Helena, Ari.........Auk. 31 Nashxille, Tenn............Sept. 5,8
Memphis, Tenn........Sept.	1,2	Louisxille, Ky....... “	8,9
Tyronza, Ark.......... “	3	Cincinnati,	Ohio ... "	10.11
Joiner, Ark......... “	4	Columbus,	Ohio .... “	13-20
A. H. MACMILLAN
Portsmouth, Ohio ....Sept.	2,3	Cincinnati, Ohio .....Sept. F, 9
Greenfield, Ohio..... “	4	Middletown, Ohio .... "	10.11
Hillsboro, Ohio ...... “	5	Dnvton, Ohio .......... “	12, f.
Williamsburg, Ohio	..	'•	7	Columbus, Ohio ........ “	14-20
J. C. BOOTH
G. Y. M’COHMICK
Oklahoma City, Okla. Sept. 2, 3
Tuba, Okla.......... “	4, 5
Coffeyville, Kans... “	7, 8
St. Louis, Mo ........Sept. 9.10
Indianapolis, Ind. .... “ 11.12 Columbus, Ohio ........ “	14-20
Alabama City, Ala. ..Sept.	2	Chattanooga, Tenn. ..Sept. 7,8
Boaz, Ain............ “	3,4	Aashiille,	'Jenn..... ••	9, lit
Grove Oak, Ala. _____ “	5	Louisx Ilie,	Kx....... “	11,12
Fort Payne, Ala...... “	G	Columbus,	Ohio .... “	1120
Mooresville, W. Vn..
Mannington, W. Va. Fairmont, W. Va. Clarksburg, W. Va.
Sept,
41
M. L.
2,3
4, 5
7
8, 9
HERR
Salem, W. Va.....
Ellenboro, W. Va. ., Pai kersburg. W. Va, Columbus, Ohio ...
Sept.
it
10 11 12.13 14-20
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Wakeenev, Kans.....Sept. 3, 4
Topeka. Kans....... “	0, G
Kansas City, Mo. ...	7, 8
Jncksonx iPe, Ill...Sept.	10
Teno Haute, I ml..... “	11,12
Columbus, Ohio ...... ’*	1120
A. 8. WRIGHT
Marianna. Ark......Sept. 1
Memphis, Tenn...... ••	2-5
Mounds, Ill.......Sept.
Round Knob, III... “
7	Shawneetown, III....Sept. 9
8	Exansville, Ind..... “ 10, 11
Seymour. Ind ......Sept. 12
Columbus, Ohio .... “	14 2o
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President	W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with nil power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORG ANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus aro children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and aro his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind ns expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Hatan from heaven and is proceeding to tho establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all tboso who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people
of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It docs not indulge m controversy, and its columns arc not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, S1.00; Can vim and Miscellaneous Foreign, 5150; Great Britain, austualasia, ani> south Amici, 7s. Ainericati leiuittanecs should ho made by Postal or express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian. British, South African and Au.stialasinn remittances should be made direct to the respective branch ollircs. Itcinittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn ollice, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British...............34	Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian...........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Austrafasian . . 7 Beresfoid Bond, Stiatliliclil, N. S, W„ Au-tralia South African ...... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of tho Bible who by reason of inflrniily, poverty or adversity are un ibio to pay the sub-crlption puce may have The IVutchtoucr free upon written application to tlio publi-bers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, lint the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may lie expected to nppenr on address label vvitliin one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will bo sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1S7H.
“KING OF KINGS"
Tho next testimony period, Octolx-r 2-10 inclusive, will be world wide, coextensive with the earthly realm of the King of kings, after whose title the period is named. The publication now of the book Etches in many languages makes it appropriate for this book to be concentrated on then, the same to be offered together with a self-eovered booklet. Other details of the service are due to be published in tho Informant, which please consult. Let your preparations and arrangements begin at once, as unto the King of kings. Your prompt report, from whatever part of the earth you inhabit, will be awaited at this office.
VACATION
The office and factory at 117 Adams Street will suspend operations from September 11 to 20 inclusive. This will permit the members of the Bethel family to attend and serve at tho Columbus convention and also to enjoy a few extra days in field service or otherwise before resuming regular work at Brooklyn.
All kingdom publishers will therefore anticipate their needs of literature to last until the end of September and should piomptly send in their orders to this office so as to insure filling and shipping before the close on September 10. No mail will receive attention or bo dispatched from here during the above period.
COLUMBUS CONVENTION
The Watchtower further announces the convention for Jehovah’s witnesses and companions at Columbus, Ohio, September 15 20 inclusive, wluch will serve the United States, Canada, and others vvl.o may bo able to attend.
The president of the Society expects to be present at this convention. Make your ai rangeinents for vacation during this period. Let all of his people ask Jehovah to make this convention a great witness to the honor of His name.
See information in July 15 issue of The Watchtower.
IMPOSTORS
Persons going about the country, and claiming to be in the truth and Jehovah’s witnesses, present themselves at different places and collect money and get other favors of the brethren. Wo warn the brethren everywhere to have nothing to do with these impostors.____________________
ANNOUNCING COMPANY MEETINGS
Many bearers of radio transcription lectures have the desire to meet with Jehovah’s witnesses and to study his Word with them. Hence wherever the kingdom message is radiocast, the time and place of meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses should bo announced after the transcription. The time on the air being paid for, tho station manager should readily grant your request to make such announcement.
Vol. LVIII
SEPTEMsnt 1, 1937
No. 17
HIS "WORK” AND HIS “ACT”
“As I have done to Shiloh.”—Jer. 7:14.
PAST 1
JEHOVAH declares his purpose to do his specific work, which he designates as “his strange work’’; that to then be followed by his bringing to pass his specific act, which he designates his “strange act”. (Isa. 28:21) What Jehovah did to his typical covenant people at Shiloh appears to foreshadow and foretell what his purpose is to do to the professed Christian people, that is, the religionists who have taken the name of Jehovah Cod and Christ Jesus and who have been unfaithful to the Lord and have defamed his holy name. By taking Jehovah’s name and assuming to serve him through Christ Jesus those people are in an implied covenant with the Lord to do his will. The arrogant Catholic Hierarchy organization assumes that position, claiming to be the true church and the covenant people of God; and that organization takes the lead in organized religion, which is by them, and others, wrongfully called “the Christian religion”. In this latter day the so-called “Protestants”, and even the Jews, co-operate with and support the Roman Catholic organization, all practicing their religion together. What came to pass typically at Shiloh is now of peculiar interest to those who are really devoted to Jehovah God when it is understood that God thus foreshadows and foretells his purpose toward organized religion.
* Jehovah sent Jeremiah to give warning to the Israelites at Jerusalem; which message proclaimed by Jeremiah at the command of Jehovah was a “strange work” to those who regarded themselves as God’s favored people. Corresponding thereto, the Lord sends his servants in this day, whom he has made his witnesses, to declare his message of warning to professed Christians, otherwise called “Christendom”, and to make known God’s purpose to punish that unfaithful people at Armageddon. The work thus being done by Jehovah’s witnesses in the name of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus appears to the religionists as a “strange work”, and is to them strange. Jehovah made good his warning message by destroying his professed covenant people at Jerusalem, and that was his act foreshadowing his “strange act” at the end of Satan’s rule. Having given warn
239
ing to “Christendom”, which organized body claims to practice the “Christian religion”, Jehovah will make good his warning by destroying that hypocritical organization; and such will appear to most people to be a “strange act”, and will be strange to all persons except those who arc wholly devoted to Jehovah God. Jehovah’s “strange work”, therefore, may be briefly stated as his message of warning; and his “strange act” may be briefly described as his work of execution at Armageddon, in which all religious organizations, and other ungodly organizations of the world, which have Satan for their god, will be destroyed.
3 The Watchtower now attempts to arrange a study of certain parts of the prophecies of Jehovah uttered by Jeremiah at God’s command, that the same may be of aid and comfort to the people of God who are faithfully endeavoring to maintain their integrity toward him. This study embraces particularly chapters seven, twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven and twenty-eight of the prophecy of Jeremiah. It is believed that a detailed consideration of this particular prophecy will enable the student of God’s Word ,o more fully appreciate the duties and obligations which the Lord places upon his covenant people now on earth and enable them to better sec their privileges of faithfully serving him. In this study the inspired words written by the apostle should always be kept in mind, to wit: “For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.” (Rom. 15:4) The mere casual reader will find this study irksome, but those really devoted to God and his King will find the same “meat in due season” and that it is from the Lord, and they will profit thereby and rejoice. Studies of the prophecies published in The Watchtower arc for the purpose of enabling the remnant, first, to get a better understanding of their true relationship to the Almighty, and then to use the knowledge gained to enlighten those of good will who are seeking to know God and Christ Jesus. The covenant people of Jehovah are now being put to a real test to determine their integ
260
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
rity, and it is apparent that Jehovah is giving to them an understanding of his prophecy that they may be strengthened and that their hope may be clear.
ANATHOTH
*In the territory of Benjamin was one of the cities assigned to the priests, and it is therefore called a ‘priest’s city’. (Josh. 21:18; 1 Chron. 6: 60) Hilkiah, one of the priests who resided there, had a son named Jeremiah. The meaning of the name of that son is, “raised up of Jehovah,” or, “Jehovah establishes,” or, “exalted by Jehovah.” When he was quite a young man Jehovah appointed Jeremiah to a responsible position, and as Jehovah’s servant he was commanded to go and do a specific work. That Jehovah selected and ordained Jeremiah from the beginning of his existence is shown by the following statement of prophecy: “Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou earnest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee; and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations.” (Jcr. 1:5) Jeremiah was modest and mock, and from the beginning he had a proper estimate of the duties assigned to him.
’“Meekness” does not mean to be cowed in the presence of others. “Meekness” means a willingness to learn, and an alertness, that one may learn what is the will of God. Many who have made a consecration to do G'od’s will appear to have great difficulty in learning what meekness means. Only the meek will properly sec and appreciate the instructions coming from God’s organization and will be on the alert to perform them.
6	When Jeremiah told the Lord that he was ‘but a child’, it may mean that before he became of age to serve in the priest’s office Jehovah had assigned Jeremiah to some minor service about the temple, and he considered himself not qualified to undertake more responsible duties. But Jehovah’s time had come for Jeremiah to begin his specific and prophetic work, and Jehovah would therefore have him forget his youth and bear in mind that he was the servant of the Most High who must trust in God and do as he was commanded. “But the Lord said unto me, Say not, 1 am a child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak.” (Jer. 1:7) At this point the meekness of Jeremiah is demonstrated; that is, he was willing to learn and anxious to know what to do and then do it. Manifestly Jehovah informed his young servant at the time that he would be bitterly opposed by the religionists, because the Lord said to him: “Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 1:8) The Lord gave Jeremiah assurance, and Jeremiah meekly received the instruction and relied upon the Most High. “Then the Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.” (Jcr. 1:9) He went forth in the strength
of the Lord. The Israelites at Jerusalem had at that time departed from the commandments of Jehovah and were following after the teachings of men, and their leaders in particular were very religious or superstitious. The conditions existing in Jeremiah’s day exactly correspond with the conditions at the present time. Jeremiah, being a faithful servant of Jehovah, pictured those who are now of the remnant or “faithful servant” class and who continue faithful even unto death. As Jeremiah had much opposition from the religionists then, even so now the “faithful servant” class of Jehovah is greatly opposed by the religionists of “Christendom”. This means that men, as seiwants of the Devil, are fighting against God by bitterly opposing God’s “faithful servant” company on earth.
7	Jeremiah was sent forth to do, not his own work, but the work of the Lord. To Jeremiah Jehovah said: “Sec, I have this day set thee over the nations, and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant.” (Jer. 1:10) The work in which Jehovah’s witnesses are now engaged is not their work, but is the Lord’s work, the witnesses performing service assigned to them, and without any credit due to them whatsoever. The commission given to Jeremiah was a broad one, commanding him to “root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant”. Likewise Jehovah sends forth his servant class today and commissions them to declare “the day of vengeance of our God”, and “to comfort all that mourn”. (Isa. 61:2) In doing this work they are not to engage in physical combat. Their duty is defined by the apostle, who under inspiration wrote: “For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds.” (2 Cor. 10:4) The proclaiming of the Word of Jehovah today as he has commanded operates to root out, pull down, throw down and destroy the stronghold that the Devil has erected by religion and religionists; and at the same time the work performed by them brings comfort and aid to those that mourn and builds up that sincere class of persons who arc seeking after God and his kingdom. The work of Jeremiah foreshadowed and foretold the work of Jehovah’s servant class now on earth; and, knowing this fact, those who engage in the service of Jehovah do so with a zeal and joy peculiar to the Lord’s house. The striking similarity of the commission to and the work of Jeremiah, to that of Jehovah’s witnesses, will appear from a detailed study of the prophecy, and is therefore encouraging and helpful to the servant class, because it is God’s “meat in due season” for them.
COMMAND
8	The young prophet received his orders from Jehovah, and he must obey them regardless of all
September 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
261
opposition. As a faithful servant he must be blind to everything else than Jehovah’s commandments. The religionists would fight against Jeremiah because he represented Jehovah and they represented the Devil, having turned to Devil worship. To Jeremiah Jehovah said: “And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken roe, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.” (Jer. 1:16) God’s time had come to inform those religionists who had agreed to do his will, but had been unfaithful, what was about to befall them; and likewise Jehovah’s due time has now come to inform the religionists, who claim to represent God and Christ, as to what arc God’s judgments against them and w’hen they will be executed. Jeremiah must not falter, but must go in the strength of the Lord; and therefore the Lord God said to him: “Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them.”— Jer. 1:17.
* Jeremiah, trusting in and faithfully obeying Jehovah, was certain to receive his protection. “For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron pillar and brazen walls against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land.” (Jer. 1:18) Likewise today, Jehovah’s witnesses must not falter or compromise because of opposition manifested against them by Satan’s representatives, but they must go forth in the strength of the Lord, relying wholly upon him. This is God’s day of judgment, and his faithful witnesses must with full confidence in God and with boldness declare his judgments.—1 John 4:17,18.
10	Jeremiah was informed that he would have to fight, but that the enemy should not prevail against him: “And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.” (Jer. 1:19) Likewise today, Jehovah’s witnesses know that they must fight, and therefore God has commanded them, saying: “Arise . . . against her in battle.” (Obadiah 1) And at the same time Jehovah gives assurance to his faithful ones that they shall not be overwhelmed by the enemy, because they are led by Christ Jesus, the victorious Warrior, and are fully backed up by the Most High. Let the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their cohorts and religious supporters do what they will in opposition to Jehovah’s work now being performed by his faithful servants. In due time God will sec to it that the enemy shall suffer complete defeat; and therefore he says to his servants: “Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.” —Eph. 6:10,12.
11	With these preliminary observations we begin with the study of the prophecy appearing at the
seventh chapter. Jeremiah, teachable and ready to obey, gave heed to the Lord’s command. “The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Stand in the gate of the Lord’s house, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the Lord, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the Lord.”—Jer. 7:1,2.
” Jeremiah was not commanded to go to the houses or church buildings and there nail his message on the door of the house, but was commanded to take his stand at the gate, where he could speak his message to the people going in and out of the temple. It was during the reign of the wicked king Jehoiakim, and therefore the “house” mentioned was the house of the Lord in name only, due to the fact that the Jews had abandoned the commandments of Jehovah God and had become religionists and continued in the temple house to carry on their religious ceremonies. There they engaged in a form of worship contrary to the commandment of the Lord. The “Lord’s house” mentioned in the prophecy pictures the religionists and their places of operation of the present time, organized and carrying on their ceremonies in Ilic name of the Lord God, and which are contrary to his commandments. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their supporting clergy take the lead in indulging in forms of worship and religious ceremonies, in which many people participate, and all of which is an abomination to the Lord God.
13	Jeremiah was commanded to take his position or stand, and that stand foretells that Jehovah’s witnesses must come forth in the open, and within the hearing and sight of the religionists, and fearlessly proclaim the message of Jehovah as he has commanded; and that they are not to take credit therefor, but to say: “Hear the word of the Lord.” No one is to say: ‘Hear the words uttered by man,’ but, ‘Hear what God’s Word has to say.’ This is Jehovah’s work, and it is a “strange work” to those religionists who call themselves “Christians”.
14	Furthermore, Jeremiah must make proclamation of the message without first asking permission from the priests of the temple. Likewise Jehovah’s witnesses must now make proclamation of God’s message of truth concerning his name and his kingdom and must do so without first asking permission from the clergy or for a license from the police authorities so to do. If any of those going in or out of the temple were the Lord’s true people, they would hear and recognize the message proclaimed by Jeremiah as the truth. Likewise today, if among those who are held in the religious organizations any of them are truly seeking after God and his truth, they will hear and give heed to the message of warning that comes to them from Jehovah God and that is delivered by his witnesses, and they will recognize and accept it as the truth, and will flee from the religious organiza
262
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tions, and thereby receive comfort, and they will find the place of safety.
15	Years before the proclamation of Jeremiah was made the ten tribes of Israel had been carried away into captivity. Judah was the tribe that remained in Palestine, and continued to carry on a form of worship at the temple. The tribe of Levi was serving, and there were some of all the tribes that came to the temple; but Judah was the predominating tribe. Jeremiah was commanded to say: “Hear the word of the Lord, all ye of Judah.” And thus were pictured the religionists in the present day, who falsely call themselves teachers of the “Christian religion” or “Christendom”, and who claim to occupy their present position and rule “by the grace of God”. Such are given the opportunity to hear the warning of the Lord.
’•The Itoman Catholic Hierarchy take the lead in the practice of religion, and other religionists follow after them. “Christendom” consists of those peoples claiming to follow Christ Jesus but who do not and, on the contrary, practice a religion or formalism which is of the Devil and which they wrongfully call the “Christian religion”. Such are the ones that must be warned and that receive the warning.
” Israel was the chosen nation of the Lord. The practitioners of so-eallcd “Christian religion” claim to be the chosen people of God, because they have taken his name. Jeremiah was commanded to say to those addressed: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.” (Jcr. 7: 3) Uis words apply to typical Israel or Judeans, and to those of “Christendom”. Having taken the name of the Lord, they must now prove that they had not taken the name in vain. They were warned that, if they had taken God’s name in vain, their time was short to when they would cease to occupy the land God had assigned to them, and that only those who would obey his command to “amend your ways” would be permitted to dwell in the land assigned to them. The carrying away of the ten tribes to Assyria should have served as a warning to Judah; but, instead, the Judeans said: “It cannot happen to us.” Judah had hypocritically, that is, “feigncdly,” assumed to amend her ways, but she had not. “And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery [with the Devil’s organization], I had put her away [out of the land, by exiling her], and given her a bill of divorce [no longer acknowledged her as my people] ; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also. And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom, that she defiled the land, and committed adultery with stones and with stocks. And yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feiguedly, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 3:8-10) The
warning must now be proclaimed to those remaining at Jerusalem, and Jeremiah was commanded to mako the proclamation. Likewise today, the warning must be proclaimed to “Christendom”, which “fcignedly” or hypocritically is on the Lord’s side, but which in fact is on the Devil’s side; and those who do not give heed to the warning shall suffer the judgments of Jehovah executed by Christ Jesus.
18	The religious leaders of Israel, the typical people, had led the people into a trap, causing them to rely upon the religious formalism and traditions taught by men and to disregard God’s commandment. Therefore the prophet, in obedience to God’s commandment, said to them: “Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, are these.” (Jcr. 7:4) It was the scribes and “Pharisees”, the clergy or religious leaders, that were lying to the people. The people attended the formalistic doings at the temple, and the “Pharisees” falsely told them that their coming into the building was thereby drawing near to the Lord and worshiping him. It was a lie to call the place “the temple of Jehovah” when such material building was now used as a place of reproach to the name of God. Not even representatively or typically could Jehovah dwell in the defiled place. At the dedication of the temple building by Solomon under the Lord’s directions, Solomon said: “But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have budded?” (1 Ki. 8:27) The dwelling-place of Jehovah is in heaven. lie had put his name at the temple at Jerusalem, to be honored by the true and faithful worship of him by the people; but a place used contrary thereto could not be called “the temple of God”. Concerning this the apostle wrote: “God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwcllcth not in temples made with hands [men’s hands] ; neither is worshipped with men’s hands [by going through motions and signs and uttering senseless words], as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things.”—Acts 17: 24, 25.
19	Religionists in this present day do exactly as the religionists did at Jerusalem. They erect buildings or cathedrals, where they meet, and they call them by the name of “the church of God”, and as men pass by these buildings they tip their hats to the building because, they say, “the host’s bread is inside thereof.” The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims its buildings or cathedrals arc the church of God, that they themselves are the holy church. In these buildings they go through their various motions and pronounce incantations; and this they eall “worship” or “drawing nigh to God”. All these things are “lying words”, which the credulous people have been induced to rely upon. The credulous Catholic population, following
SErroiBEK 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
263
their leaders, make the form of the cross upon the breast when approaching the meeting-house, showing that they rely upon it. The Lord says to all that such are “lying words” spoken by the religious leaders, and that the Catholic population, or children of the church, or other church-goers, must not rely upon such words. Those lying words are in no wise a safeguard or guarantee against calamity or disaster to such church-goers or to anyone else. The people are led to foolishly claim to thereby be leaning upon the Lord, while at the same time they are relying upon the works of men’s hands. To all such Jehovah says: “The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money; yet will they lean [presumably] upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.”—Mic. 3:11.
28	The Israelites were in the wrong way, and the Lord was so informing them, that those of good will might take the right way; and this is shown by his words: “If ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt: then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.” (Jer. 7:6,7) Likewise today, all religionists are in the wrong way, some willingly and some unwillingly. This is particularly true with reference to those wno practice what they call “the Christian religion”. Many of the clergy, particularly the principal ones of the Hierarchy, are willingly in the wrong way, while the parishioners are wrongfully induced to take the wrong way. Jehovah gave the people at Jerusalem warning. Today Jehovah sends forth his witnesses to give bis warning to “Christendom”, which warning must be sounded before the day of his great wrath is expressed against “Christendom”. The zealous religionists among the Israelites were at the time oppressing the strangers and their own brethren. Likewise today, the zealous and unreasonable religionists, who claim to be followers of Christ Jesus, oppress Jehovah’s witnesses who truly serve God, and they also oppress the “strangers”, that is, those of the Jonadab class, by attempting to keep them from knowing the truth. There are still a few men among the so-called “Protestants” that make an effort to serve God by publicly quoting the inspired Word of the Scriptures, and even such men the Roman Catholic Hierarchy persecutes, and it uses its influence to prevent the Scriptures’ being proclaimed, which Scriptures they fear might expose the fraudulent religionists. An instance of this appears in the public press. In Canada a Protestant preacher filed his manuscript with the radio station, which speech he expected shortly to broadcast, and in which manuscript he quoted the scripture at 1 Timothy 2: 5. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy caused the radio censors to strike out that scripture from his speech for the manifest
reason that such inspired word of God shows that the Catholic priests cannot act as a mediator between God and man, and that their claim so to act is false; and the Hierarchy would have the people kept in ignorance of what the Scriptures say. Such is the policy pursued by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy everywhere. They withhold from the honest and sincere people the Bible and any explanation of the Scriptures, because they fear the Bible truths will so expose the Hierarchy that the honest people will break away from them. The religionists at Jerusalem, while acting contrary to the commandments of God, had the gall to come to the house called by the name of the Lord and by coming thus pretend to give their undivided devotion and worship to God. Likewise today, the religionists persecute real woi’shipcrs of God and at the same time bow down before images which they have made, and thus pretend to worship God. While thus indulging in a formalism contrary to God’s Word, these religionists claim to worship God as though there could be any agreement between idolaters and the true worship of the Most High.—2 Cor. 6:16.
21	By giving the people at Jerusalem warning Jehovah was keeping the way open for them to reform in their ways and, thus reforming, the privilege of continuing to live in the land which he had given them. If they would amend their ways, “then will I eause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.” (Jer. 7:7) Had they given heed to such warning and followed the Lord’s commandment, they would be the true people of God and continue in that condition. God gave his “holy land” only to those who would continue to be faithfully obedient to his commandments. He did not give it to covenant-breakers that they might dwell there indefinitely. Likewise God has given the place in his kingdom with Christ Jesus only to those who keep their covenant to faithfully do and obey his commandments. He gives warning to the pretenders, that is, the hypocritical religionists who claim to have his favor, and he tells them that unless they amend their ways he will completely cast them away and destroy them. Today Jehovah is giving his final warning to “Christendom”, and this fact alone shows that there must still be some who are held in bondage to the professed hypocritical religionists who, upon hearing the truth, give heed to the commandments of God and withdraw from the religious organizations and serve and worship God in truth and in spirit. Those who do not thus change their course will suffer destruction. Claiming to worship God and being in an implied covenant to at least obey him, the covenant-breakers are worthy of death. (Rom. 1:31,32) Manifestly one purpose of sounding the warning is to awaken the gullible ones and give them an opportunity to seek the place of safety. “Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.” (Jer. 7:8) The clergy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy,
264
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
in particular, lie to the people, telling them that the Bible is proper for study only when the priests use it, and tell the people what they shall read, and tell the people what they shall do. Otherwise stated, the Hierarchy tells the people that they must obey man’s word and not God’s. They induce the people to believe all kinds of lying doctrines, and say to them that if they attend the so-called “church services” and pay their money over to the priests, and indulge in formalism, praying with their beads and bowing before images and making signs of the cross upon themselves, thus they will find protection and be guaranteed against calamity. The Lord says that that kind of foolishness will profit nothing. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy continue to say, as God through his prophet foretold they would say: “We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves”; and concerning these things the Lord says that all such arc entirely in vain. Claims founded upon lies will profit nothing. Those who hold to and rely upon the religious organizations and follow the lead of the clergy arc certain to come to great sorrow in the day of God’s wrath expressed at Armageddon.
22	The Israelites were bound by the promise of the everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of human life. (Gen. 9:3-10; Isa. 24:5) They were bound by the terms of the law covenant to obey God and to serve him, and not to practice the Devil religion. (Ex. 19:3-8) They were Itound to be governed and controlled by Jehovah’s commandments. Instead of obeying, they broke the terms of their covenant time and time again. Jehovah then commanded Jeremiah to say to them: “Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not; and come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, We arc delivered to do all these abominations?” (Jer. 7: 9,10) That was a warning that they could not continue to break their covenant and still expect to stand before the Lord and receive his approval. Likewise today, those who profess and who practice what is called the “Christian religion” are bound by the terms of the everlasting covenant, are bound by the terms of the implied covenant to do the will of God, and hence are bound to be governed by and obey the commandments of God as written. In the face of these covenants and the commandments of God the religionists have broken their covenant with God and every part thereof. They literally steal material things and steal the people away from God. They literally commit murder by carrying on wars and wickedly shedding human blood. They commit murder by pretending to enforce the law of the land; they commit adultery literally and, worse, by claiming to represent God and at the same time participating in and co-operating with all manner of wicked political schemes, working together with other worldly and wicked men. (Jas. 4:4)
They lie and swear to lies in order to bring about the punishment of innocent persons; and they do burn incense unto the Devil, and the Devil’s images. To them says the Lord: ‘And after doing all these wicked things, then you come [brazenly] and stand before me, and say, We have set ourselves free, for the purpose of committing all these abominations.’ (Rotherham) “We arc delivered; that ye may do all these abominations.” (R.V.; Leeser) The clergy perform what they call “absolution” or forgiveness of the wrongdoer, provided the wrongdoer has a sufficient amount of money to contribute. One of the religious practitioners commits all manner of crime and then goes to the priest and deposits his money in the receptacle provided for that purpose, and the Catholic priest says in substance: “Now I absolve thee”; meaning that the priest forgives the wrongdoer and justifies his wicked action. After some formalism performed in the church buildings, such as sprinkling the culprit with so-ealled “holy water”, the wrongdoer is then informed that he is free and he can go about his business, to again commit some crimes. The priests or other clergymen induce those of the Catholic population who commit crimes to believe that after going through certain religious formalism in the church building the offender has thereby rendered unto God the things that arc God’s, and now he is free from all guilt, and all the rest of his time he may render unto Caesar (the political gangsters) the things that arc Caesar’s. (Luke 20:25) Outside of the church building these “church-goers” who seek absolution dismiss all thought of God and feel free to lead a course reproachful to the name of God, whom they profess to serve. When they get into the church building they appear very penitent, act solemn, and perform certain senseless ceremonies, which they call worship, such as kneeling while the clergyman drops some water on their head, cro'-s themselves, and say a few unmeaning words while dropping money in the collection basket. The entire performance is formalism and is hypocritical and profits nothing whatsoever to anyone.
23	The Israelites, having become religionists, turned the house called by the name of God into a place of merchandise for unjust dealings. Here is further proof that the Devil at all times has used religion for political and commercial purposes, and by those three things, to wit, religion, politics and commerce, the Devil turns the people away from Jehovah. The Israelites appeared to be blind to the fact that they had committed and were continuing to commit such great wrong, and the Lord said to them: “Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 7:11) Those religionists, led by the clergy, were still in this condition when Jesus was on the earth. Seeing that the Pharisees or clergy were leading the people into Devil worship and practice
September 1, 1907
THE WATCHTOWER.
265
of "the Jews’ religion”, and that they were using the temple to carry on their wrongful business, Jesus said to them: “Take these things hence; make not my Father’s house an house of merchandise.” (John 2:13-16) Jesus openly and publicly rebuked those religionists. “And Jesus went into the temple of God, and east out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves; and said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.” (Matt. 21:12,13) The very next day after uttering the foregoing words Jesus foretold the destruction of that house or temple building, which had been built by Herod. Compare the prophecy of Jesus, and that spoken by Jeremiah, with what is now practiced in “Christendom” in the buildings which arc called “the church of God”. In this day such buildings arc houses of merchandise and politics and unrighteous scheming.
’‘"Organized religion,” falsely called “Christianity” or “Christian religion”, has become a political and mercantile organization and a veritable den of robbers. The “principal of the Hoek” of those organizations rob the people, and in consideration of receiving absolution they give rich gifts to the so-called “church” and to its clergy, and thus stop the mouths of the clergy and keep them silent concerning their crookedness. Furthermore, the “principal of the flock” work together with the clergy to rob the people of opportunities to receive the truth, by preventing the people from hearing it. The clergy also “rob God”, as stated in Malachi 3: 8. The clergy stand by and see robbery going on, and they connive at such wrongdoing: “When thou sawest a thief, then thou conscnt-cdst with him.” (Ps. 50:18) They consent thereto by accepting gifts from the thieves, thereby tacitly agreeing not to expose the thieves. Also, the clergy rob the people, and particularly the Catholic population, by taking their money under the false pretenses and wicked lie of being able to render aid to their dead friends who it is claimed are in “purgatory”. Many a poor widow has been induced by the clergy to give up money which she sorely needed, upon the false representation made by the clergyman that such money so contributed would work beneficially to her dead loved ones. The priest receiving this money from the widow utters a “prayer”, which never gets above his head and by which he induces the i>oor widow to believe that he has done something for the man in “purgatory”. To such lying robbers Jesus says: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.”—Matt. 23:14.
** The clergy, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, proceed in their wicked work and induce even themselves to believe that no one sees them or knows
about them. But to such robbers Jehovah says, as stated by Jeremiah: “Behold, even I have seen it.” Supporting this prophecy it is written, in Isaiah 29:14,15: “Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?” Proverbs 15:3: “The eyes of the Lord arc in every place, beholding the evil and the good.” Psalm 11:4,5: “The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord’s throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men.” God also sent his prophet Ezekiel to give warning to the religionists that claimed to worship God. “Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients [the padres, so-called fathers, the clergy in the church organization] of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers [at their meeting-houses] of his imagery? for they say, The Lord seeth us not; the Lord hath forsaken the earth.” (Ezck. 8:12) All things done by the religionists the Lord sees, and he will cause the clergy to bear the burden of their wickedness in his own due time. The Roman Catholic clergy in particular think they are playing safe by saying to each other: ‘We are safe, and nothing can harm us, because we have made lies our refuge.’ (Isa. 28:15) The Lord gives those workers of iniquity all the rope they wish, to permit them for a time to go on in their wickedness, and they continue to grow bolder and more cruel and ruthless in their conduct toward others, assuming that they can commit any wrong and get away with it.
20 Because Jehovah is “slow to anger” and affords the wicked full opportunity to carry forward his wickedness, many become very bold and convince themselves that they can with impuni'.y continue in their wrongful course. For many years Jehovah has permitted Satan to carry on his wicked work, and probably Satan has for centuries considered himself immune from punishment. His servants arc in a like condition.
17 The Israelites had fallen into the way of Satan and had forgotten what had befallen that people on former occasions. Therefore Jehovah, through Jeremiah, said to them: “But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the firet, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.” (Jer. 7:12) It was at Shiloh that God for a time permitted his typical people to carry on their worship. “And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before them.” (Josh. 18:1) Jehovah set his name there first in the land of Canaan. The religionists afterwards set up images: ‘ ‘ And they
266
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
set them up Micah’s graven image, which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.” —Judg. 18: 31.
28 The Lord then compelled the Israelites to recall what had come upon Shiloh. Just because his typical tabernacle was erected there and that was the place where he put his name, was no guarantee that God would shield wrongdoers at Shiloh. Although dutybound by their covenant to worship Jehovah God alone, and none other, the Israelites fell away to the Devil religion, and then God forsook them. ‘‘So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men.” (Ps. 78:60) How did God show that he had forsaken the tabernacle at Shiloh? “And [he] delivered his strength [the ark of the covenant, which symbolized bis presence in the tabernacle] into captivity, and his glory [the ark of gold, whereon the glorious light shone] into the enemy’s [Philistines’] hand. lie gave his people over also unto the sword; and was wroth with his inheritance. The fire consumed their young men; and their maidens were not given to marriage. Theii- priests fell by the sword; and their widows made no lamentation.” —Ps. 78: 61-64.
” God permitted the Philistines to give battle to his typical people, and in this God used the Philistines to inflict punishment upon the religionists who had broken their covenant with him. Then the religionists began to wake up and to try to get protection by possessing the ark of the covenant, which was at •Shiloh, and bring it into the camp of the Israelites as a means of protection to them. They did not find protection, because God had forsaken them. “And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel said, Wherefore hath the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of the hand of our enemies. So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts, which dwellcth between the cherubims; and the two sons of Eli, Ilophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.”—1 Sam. 4:3,4.
30The battle took place. “And the Philistines fought; and Israel was smitten, and they fled every man into his tent; and there was a very great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.” (1 Sam. 4:10) In that battle the Israelites suffered a great defeat: “And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Ilophni and Phinehas, were slain. And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the same day, with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head. And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the way side, watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out. . . . And the messenger answered
and said, Israel is fled before the Philistines; and there hath been also a great slaughter among the people: and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken. And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that he fell from off the scat backward, by the side of the gate; and his neck brake, and he died; for he was an old man, and heavy: and he had judged Israel forty years.”—1 Sam. 4:11-18.
31	Learning of this great disaster, the daughter-inlaw of Eli, under the great strain, gave birth to a child and died, and as she was dying she cried out: “The glory is departed from Israel; for the ark of God is taken.” (1 Sam. 4:22) Concerning this same disaster that fell upon the Israelites it is further written: “And all the house of Israel lamented.” (1 Sam. 7:2) “And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only; and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.” (1 Sam. 7:3) That terrible disaster that befell the Israelites was very strange to them, seeing that God had permitted the enemies of his typical people to prevail and the ark to be taken by the enemy. It was not strange to the prophet Samuel, however, because Samuel was faithful to the Lord. That disaster marked the end of Eli’s line of the priesthood, which had served at the tabernacle at Shiloh. (1 Sam. 2:27-36) “So Solomon thrust out Abiathar [of Eli’s line] from being priest unto the Lord; that he might fulfil the word of the Lord, which he spake concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.” (1 Ki. 2:27) The ark of the covenant was never brought back to Shiloh, and even the tabernacle and the altar were later removed from Shiloh and sent to Gibcon.—1 Chron. 16:39,40.
32	Why did Jehovah thus afflict the Israelites with such a great disaster? and why did the same appear to them to be so very strange? The Lord’s answer is found in these words: “For the wickedness of my people.” (Jer. 7 :12) Furthermore the answer is given by the psalmist: “Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies; but turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceitful bow. For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images. When God heard this, lie was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel: so that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men.” —Ps. 78:56-60.
33	The question may here be properly propounded: Why did God permit the record of that strange act concerning the affliction of his covenant people to be made? The Scriptures answer in 1 Corinthians 10:11: “Now all these things happened unto them for cu-samples: and they are written for our admonition,
September 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
267
upon whom the ends of the world are come.” The Israelites were Jehovah’s covenant and typical people, and today “Christendom” assumes to be the people of God and boastfully claims to represent God on earth; and therefore what befell the Israelites, the typical people, foretells what shall befall “Christendom”, the latter being the counterpart of the former. Having brought to the attention of the Israelites what befell Shiloh, and citing that as a warning, God said to them: ‘I will do unto this house what I have done unto Shiloh.’ The words of warning apply with greater force and effect to the professed followers of Christ Jesus who today practice what they call the “Christian religion”. “And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the Lord, and I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not; therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.”—Jcr. 7:13,14.
31 By his manner of dealing with the unfaithful people at Jerusalem Jehovah makes known his fixed rule that covenant-breakers shall certainly suffer punishment at his hands. What is today called “Christendom” consists of those nations that wrongfully claim to be Christians and that practice what is improperly called the “Christian religion”. All the wicked works mentioned by the Lord at the mouth of his prophet, and, furthermore, the wicked works of the Israelites done up to the time that Shiloh fell, have boon done and are now being done by the practitioners of so-called “Christian religion” and by the people, and particularly the clergy, who use the name of Jehovah and his King for selfish and wrongful purposes. It is certain therefore that what befell Shiloh is but a sample of what shall befall “Christendom” in the very near future.
“Jehovah spoke to the people by his prophets, (and he says) “rising up early and speaking.” It was early in the day of his dealing with his covenant j>eople that God began to instruct them. His prophets rose up early in the day and there began to preach to tire people, and there was much complaint against his prophets for so doing. Even today complaint is made by the religionists against Jehovah’s witnesses, objection being made that these witnesses come early and ring their doorbells and wake them up and speak to them about the Lord; and then the clergy induces the officers to arrest them and hail them into court. Jehovah caused his message of warning to be given a sufficient length of time before the day of his wrath in order to give ample time to have it heard.
“Jeremiah was ordered and was sent to deliver the warning to Jerusalem forty years before its destruction. Ezekiel was sent forth to preach the warning seven years before Jerusalem fell. Says the Lord:
“I called you, but ye answered not.” Now mark that the Lord came to his temple in 1918, and for forty years prior to that date the Lord caused the Elijah work to be done amongst the people. The Watchtower, first published in 1879, from the very first issue called attention to the “last days”, and the time of trouble with which the world would pass away. This work was foreshadowed by the work of Elijah and also the work of John the Baptist, and which work failed to ‘turn the hearts of God’s typical people back to him’. (Mal. 4:5,6; Luke 1:13-17) Likewise the Elijah work failed to turn “Christendom” to the right way. It was the religionists calling themselves “Christians” or “organized Christian religion” that assaulted God’s faithful servants in 1918, because those servants were engaged in the Elijah work. They killed the Elijah work and brought about its end. Since that time the religionists, instead of reforming and doing what is right, continue to persecute the faithful witnesses of Jehovah whom he has sent forth to give warning to the people and a witness to his name. What, therefore, is to be expected in the line of such conduct?
3T Jehovah by his prophet answers the foregoing question in these words: “Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.” (Jcr. 7:14) The material temple built during the reign of King Solomon and dedicated to the worship of Jehovah God had, in Jeremiah’s day, become defiled and been made “a den of robbers”. The leaders in Israel, the clergy, had forsaken the commandment of God and followed the traditions of men, teaching the doctrines of Satan which were proclaimed by men. The common people of Israel concluded that because “the house” had been built by the commandment of Almighty God and his name had been put there, and such was the place of worship, therefore God would never permit the enemy to destroy that house or the city of Jerusalem, the place where the temple stood, even though the clergy and the people broke God’s covenant, of which covenant the temple was a symbol. Because they believed that the temple was invulnerable to the attacks of any foe, that was their ground for making and believing in a “covenant with death” and an “agreement with hell”, as though the material temple was a charm against all evil. The temple had been built, and their faith was in it and not in God.
38 What came to pass upon Jerusalem is duplicated by and upon “Christendom”, except, as to “Christendom”, upon a far greater scale. In these “last days” the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, being the chief-est among all organized religionists and being the leaders of organized religion called “Christendom”, assume the name of God and presumptuously claim to be the visible representatives of God on earth. Thereby they have created the impression and belief
268
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
amongst the common people, and particularly the “Catholic population”, that ‘the Catholic church is invulnerable to the attacks of any opponents’. The Catholic clergy have for centuries boldly said before all the people words to this effect: “The Catholic church is the church of God, and the gates of hell shall never prevail against it, come what may.” Jehovah’s prophet, furthermore, foretold that they would say (and they do say) : “We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement ; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come [nigh] unto us.” (Isa. 28: 15) Many sincere persons have been induced to believe that the Catholic church, composed of and ruled by a few men, is a charm against all ills and therefore that to be in the Catholic organization means to be safe. Those religious leaders have defamed the name of Jehovah God and have made void his Word by teaching and inducing the people to believe the traditions of men and to give honor and glory to men, and have thus turned them away from God. Jehovah God therefore declares his purpose to destroy that religious organization completely. To hypocritical “Christendom”, and particularly to the clergy thereof, Jehovah says: “The hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, . . . .And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement w ith hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then yc shall be trodden down by it.”—Isa. 28:17,18.
” But before Jehovah executes his judgment against “Christendom” he calls out a “people for bis name” and sends that people as his witnesses amongst the nations to declare his name and to give a warning to “Christendom”. His witnesses collectively arc pictured under the symbol of the “man . . . clothed with linen, with a writer’s inkhorn by his side”. (Ezck. 9:2-11) This company of faithful witnesses receives from the Lord his command to go throughout “Christendom” and to put a mark on the forehead of the sincere ones in “Christendom” that sigh and cry because of the hypocritical practices and wickedness done in “Christendom” by the religionists. Thus the Lord by his witnesses puts the mark in the forehead of such by giving the people information from God’s Word, that they may intelligently get an understanding of Jehovah’s purposes, which will enable them to flee out of the wicked religious organization and find refuge under God’s King. The commission is given to Jehovah’s witnesses, and the duty and obligation is laid upon them; and they must, in order to maintain their integrity toward God, “rise up against her in battle,” that is, they must vigorously, boldly, and fearlessly declare the name and purpose of Jehovah God regardless of the opposition and attacks upon them by the enemy. It means a war, which is now in progress; and that is a war of righteousness carried on by proclaiming the truth against a crowd of wicked hypocrites, the truth exposing the
latter to the view of honest persons. In obedience to God’s commandment his witnesses engage in this work, and the work seems very strange to professed Christian people, because God’s witnesses speak the truth and the clergy say to the people: “What these Jehovah’s witnesses say shocks our religious susceptibilities, and that should not be permitted.” The work of Jehovah is not strange, however, to those who love and serve God, because God has commanded them to declare the day of his vengeance, and this they must do and will do. That “strange work” is now in progress, and those who love the Lord are having a part in it. When that strange work is done, will “Christendom” fall never to rise again?
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
7 1. To whom will Jehovah do ‘as he did to Shiloh’, and why? Why is what came to pass at Shiloh now of peculiar interest to those who are devoted to Jehovah God J
fl 2. lion is it shown, that the message of warning proclaimed by Jeremiah was from Jehovah, and that it foreshadowed a work now to be done before Armageddon?
fl 3. How and to whom is Jehovah now making available aa understanding of his prophecies? For what purpose is this done?
fl 4. 'What facts show that Jehovah selected and ordained Jeremiah to do a specific work?
If 5, 6. What is meant by ‘‘meekness”? Why is it so important? Show that Jeremiah in his course of action welt pictun d those who aro now of the remnant and continue faithful unto death.
If 7. How did the work committed to Jeremiah (1: 10) foreshadow and foretell the work of Jehovah's servant class now on earth?
$ 8-10. I’o.nt out the importance, (a) to Jeremiah, and (b) to those whom ho pictuicd, of Jehovah’s instiuetion recorded at Jeremiah 1: 1G, 17. At verso 18. At verse 19.
If 11,12. How did Jeremiah carry out the command of Jehovah, ‘‘Stand in the gate of the Lord’s house”?
If 13-15. Apply (a) the fact that Jeremiah was not instructed to first ask permission from the priests of the temple, (b) The command ‘‘Hear the word of the Lord”, (c) The designation ‘‘all ye of Judah”.
7 16,17. Of whom docs ‘‘Christendom” consist? To whom in Jeremiah's day was the message of warning to bo given, and for what purpose? Compare therewith the situation in ‘ ‘ Chi istendom ’ ’ today.
fl 18,19. Describe the occasion for the words of the prophet at Jeremiah 7:4, (a) as spoken to typical Israel, (b) As applied to the time of fulfillment thereof.
fl 20, 21. .Explain the conditional promise given to the Israelites by Jehovah through Ins prophet ns recorded at Jcicmiah 7: 6, 7. Show that this was prophetic. Justify the chaigo recorded at verse 8 as addressed to Israel. As addressed to ‘‘Christendom”.
fl 22. How had the Israelites done as indicated at verses 9, 10? Show that therein was foretold tho procedure of those today who profess and practice the so-called ‘‘Christian religion ’ ’.
fl 23,24. Compare the condition disclosed at Jeremiah 7:11, John 2: 13-16 and Matthew 21: 12,13 with that of ‘‘organized religion” today.
fl 25, 26. With scriptures, account for the apparently confident procedure of the elcigy in their wicked work, and for their having so long continued therein.
fl 27. How had God set his name at Shiloh? What wickedness did Israel commit there?
fl 28-31. How did God show that he had forsaken the tabernacle at Shiloh?
fl 32,33. Why did Jehovah thus afflict the Israelites with great disaster? Why did this appear to them .to be so strange! Why has Jehovah provided the record of that strange act?
fl 34-36. How did the Lord do ns declared at Jeremiah 7: 13, with the result as recorded? How does this have fulfillment?
September 1, 1937
fflfe WATCHT0WEFL
269
What is to be expected in line of such conduct!	f 39. How is the 'setting a mark’ accomplished as commanded
? 37,38. Compare the deflection by the leaders of Israel, and	at Ezekiel 9: 4f Why is this procedure also prophetically
the outcome thereof, with that of the leaders of "organized	referred to as ‘rising up against her in battle’! Who will
religion” in "Christendom”.	engage therein, and with what result!
THE GREATEST
ISAN was the beginning of months in the Jewish year, and corresponded to about the month of April. The fourteenth day of Nisan,
in the year A.D. 33, found Jesus of Nazareth dead and in the tomb. The hopes of his followers were dashed to the ground. Looking back to the promises made by Jehovah God to their forefather, faithful Abraham, the disciples and other associates had believed Jesus to be the promised Messiah and trusted that he would be the deliverer of the nation of Israel from Roman bondage, and that he would also be the instrument for the blessing, through Israel, of all the nations of the earth. But now he who they had hoped would redeem Israel (Luke 24:21) was dead. They were perplexed and overwhelmed. Seemingly they did not expect him to be raised from the dead, nor did they know at that time that Jehovah would not suffer the flesh of his Holy One to corrupt. The conduct of the disciples at that time, as well as that of those who were in full sympathy with them, shows that they did not expect his resurrection.
The body of Jesus had been carefully wrapped and placed in the tomb with myrrh, aloes, and spices, evidently to prevent decomposition. The subsequent great sorrow of the faithful Jewish women at the tomb and their belief that the body of Jesus had been wrongfully removed and hid elsewhere, also the perplexity of the disciples, all tend to show that they did not have any hope or expectation of the resurrection of Jesus. Then, also, we have the positive statement in John’s gospel, chapter twenty, verse nine: ‘‘For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.”
The disciples were Jews, and it might be supposed that they were somewhat acquainted with the Scriptures. We remember, however, that they were not learned men; and even if they had been acquainted with the text of the Scriptures they could not hare had a very clear understanding of them at that time; just as we now see there are many wonderful truths in the Bible which have been there for centuries and which Christians never understood until recently. Now as we look at the inspired Word of God we can see some texts in Hebrew prophecies which clearly refer to the resurrection of Jesus, and which texts must have been familiar to many Jews at the time Jesus was crucified. For information we note some of these texts here.
The prophet Job pointed to the time of redemption and deliverance when he said: “For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter
RESURRECTION
day upon the earth.’’ (Job .19:25) If the Redeemer was to stand at the latter day upon the earth, then he must be raised from the dead after he had provided the redemptive price by his death; hence this scripture must foreshadow his resurrection. The psalmist David wrote prophetically concerning Jesus’ resurrection, when he said: "For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Thou wilt shew me the path of life; in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.” (Ps. 16:10,11) We have the inspired testimony of the apostle Peter that the prophet David did there refer to the resurrection of Jesus.—Acts 2: 27-31; 13: 35-37.
Again, the prophet David wrote concerning Jesus, the Savior of the world, these words: "For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.” (Ps. 116:8,9) This deliverance clearly includes the awakening out of death. Jesus was awakened out of death in the express image of the Father, according to the third verse of the first chapter of the book of Hebrews. Again, the psalmist wrote these words: “Thou [Jesus] hast aseended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts for men.” (Ps. 68:18) Clearly the apostle Paul refers to this same scripture in his letter to the Ephesians, chapter four, verses 8-10, showing that the psalmist referred to the resurrection of Jesus.
The prophet Isaiah (9:6,7) wrote: “For unto us a child is bom, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever.” Here it is clearly stated that the One who would hold this exalted position, the Messiah or Christ, is to be the everlasting Father. The term “father” means life-giver, and it would be impossible for Jesus to be the great Life-giver to man unless he were raised from the dead.
Again, the prophet Isaiah described the sufferings of Jesus and his death and subsequent resurrection, when he wrote these words: “The Lord [Jehovah God] hath laid on him [Jesus] the iniquity of us all. ... He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, . . . He was taken from prison and from judgment: ... he was cut off out of the land of the
270
STie WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; . . . when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, ... He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many.” (Isa. 53:6-11) lie could not have poured out his soul unto death and afterward see the travail of his soul and be satisfied unless he should be raised from the dead.
These scriptures clearly foretell the resurrection of Jesus. Besides this, Jesus had told his disciples while in the land of Galilee that he would be put to death and would be raised from the dead. (Luke 24:6,7) The apostle Matthew (17:22,23) writes: “And while they abode in Galileo, Jesus said unto them, The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of mon; and they shall kill him, and the third daj' he shall be raised again. And they were exceeding sorry.” But it may not be expected of the disciples that they should understand the meaning of those ancient prophetic scriptures as referring to the resui-rection of the Lord. They were not men of great learning. They were poor and followed humble occupations. They had doubtless not had the advantage of a great amount of education; but a stronger reason why they did not understand is that the holy spirit had not then been given and their minds had not been illuminated, and it is not to be expected that they would understand then the ‘‘deep things” of God’s Word. (1 Cor. 2:14) Nor is it at all surprising that they had forgotten some of the sayings of Jesus concerning his betrayal, his death and resurrection. Wc must remember that they loved Jesus very devotedly; and uppermost in their minds was the hope that he would be the deliverer of Israel. Only five days before his death they had joined in his triumphant entry into Jerusalem, when the common people hailed him with gladness and joy. (Matt. 21:1-11) Ilis death was so sudden, so cruel, the shock from it so terrible, that the minds of these faithful disciples and others who loved him dearly were stunned. They were truly overwhelmed with sorrow and grief. He had been rudely snatched from them; unjustly tried, brutally condemned, and then subjected to the most ignominious death known to man, the death of the accursed tree.
Clearly in fulfillment of the prophecy of Isaiah aforementioned, Jesus was put to death as a wicked one, thereby making his grave with the wicked; and he was laid in the sepulchre of a rich man of Ari-mathca, named Joseph.—Matt. 27: 57.
Little is said as to the doings of the disciples and their associates immediately following the killing of Jesus when he was laid away in the tomb. The good women went and ‘‘beheld where he was laid”. No doubt little else was done at the time of the burial.. After six o’clock in the evening of that day was the
beginning of the Jewish sabbath day, and under the law the Jews must rest; hence wc are not to expect that they did much of anything. Nor could it have been a day of much rest to them. It was a day of great sorrow. They could not do any work to divert their minds from the terrible shock caused by the hanging of the Lord on the tree. The rest period must have been one merely of cessation from labor. Surely they had little rest of body or peace of mind. For them it was a day of sorrowful waiting, because tomorrow they would go to the tomb. The sabbath ended at six o’clock that evening, but the night followed, which prevented them from visiting the tomb then.
The morning following was the first day of the week; and early that morning, before it became very light, Mary Magdalene and other good women who had followed Jesus from Galilee and had ministered unto him hastened to the Savior’s tomb. When they reached there the angel of the Lord appeared unto them, saying: ‘‘Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here; for he is risen, as he said. Come, sec the place where the Lord lay. And go quickly, and tell his diseiplcs that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye sec him: lo, I have told you. And they departed quickly from the sepulchre, with fear and great joy, and did run to bring his disciples word.” (Matt. 28:5-8) This news to these faithful women sounded too good to be true. They were dazed and bewildered; yet with joy they hurried away to deliver the message to others who loved the Lord.
Here we have the proof that the resurrection of Jesus is one of the strings upon the doctrinal harp of God, yielding great joy to those who hear its blessed sound. The first human creature who heard of the resurrection rejoiced. How much more joy there must have been in heaven at that hour!
The term ‘‘angel” means ‘‘messenger”; that is, one who is sent on a mission as a representative or deputy, or messenger of God. These holy messengers or angels always have access to the Father, Jehovah God. (Matt. 18:10) We should expect, of course, that these holy ones of the heavenly host would sing praise and give utterance to joy before the Lord God at every progressive step of the outworking of his purpose. These angels inhabit the heavens, the high place. And so the psalmist writes of them: ‘‘Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the heights. Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts.”—Ps. 148:1,2.
There can be no question that these beloved angels rejoiced greatly at the marvelous demonstration of Jehovah God’s almighty power in raising up his only-begotten Son from the dead and clothing him upon with the divine life and immortality. That was and is the greatest resurrection.
ABOMINATIONS
JEHOVAH’S servant Ezekiel began to prophesy in the fifth year of King Jehoiachin’s captivity, which corresponded with A.D. 1919, the fifth year from 1914. It was one year and two months later that the events in the eighth chapter of Ezekiel’s prophecy came to pass. This marks the beginning of a new vision and scries of prophecies by Ezekiel. At the time when this prophecy began to have its fulfillment the Lord Jesus Christ was in the temple of Jehovah. He inspects the defiled “organized Christianity”, so called, and points out to the “faithful servant” class of today (pictured by Ezekiel) the conditions there found, and the “servant” class is enabled to understand and appreciate the same as never before. As the vision appeared to Ezekiel, so the “faithful servant” class in every instance has seen that there is and has been the worship of the creature rather than the Creator. Such is Devil worship, the Devil’s method of fraudulently claiming to worship God, the purpose being to turn man away from Jehovah.
A spirit, an officer of Jehovah, appeared in the name and by the power of Jehovah God and lifted Ezekiel up and showed him how the temple at Jerusalem had been defiled. The fulfillment of this is that God through his duly constituted officers lifted up the “faithful servant” class, and showed that class how Satan had reproached and defamed God’s name. “And he [Jehovah’s officer] put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of mine head; and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate that looketh toward the north, where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy. And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain. Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north, and behold, northward at the gate of the altar, this image of jealousy in the entry.” (Ezek. 8:3-5) Thus the Lord lifted up the faithful anointed “servant” class between earth and heaven and brought them in vision to Jerusalem, the heavenly organization, to the door of the inner gate of the temple that looks toward the north, from which divine authority and judgment proceed; and there appeared the image of jealousy.
The Devil is the very image or personification of jealousy and envy. He was jealous and envious of the worship given by man to Jehovah and coveted the same. Therefore Satan said: “I will be like the Most High.” Everything that God has done for human salvation the Devil has tried to imitate, out of jealousy and for the purpose of deceit, to draw men away from Jehovah God. The Devil is the mimic god and vigorously endeavors to turn all creatures away from Jehovah and from the truth. This mimic, or “image”, provokes to jealousy. In giving his law to Israel God
said: ‘ ‘ Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, ... I the Lord thy God am a jealous God.” (Ex. 20:3-5) That law was not given for Jehovah’s benefit, but was declared for the benefit of Israel and all who thereafter should come to a knowledge of God.
All life proceeds from Jehovah; whereas Satan is the one who has unrighteously taken life. Envying the honor and glory that is properly bestowed upon Jehovah by his creatures, and coveting that honor and glory for himself, Satan has resorted to all manner of crime to turn creatures away from God. For the benefit of creation and for his own honor and glory, and that his creatures might know him and live, Jehovah God must in his own due time vindicate his name against this jealous one. All the images that have been reared up for the purpose of being worshiped were reared up by the Devil, and therefore the Devil is “the image of jealousy”. The truth discloses the true situation that man may have the opportunity to know God and to know the way to life.
As the image of jealousy seen by Ezekiel depicted the Devil, so the organization of the Devil on the earth is the true image of the Devil, morally, mentally, and in practice. Today God’s “faithful servant” class secs “the abomination that maketh desolate”, spoken of by Daniel the prophet and by the Lord Jesus Christ, standing in the holy place. (Matt. 24:15) It is the Devil’s product, his organization, and it is “the image of the beast”, the League of Nations. It has its scat in the ‘holy place’ of “organized religion”, which calls itself by the holy name of God and which claims to be the favored one of Jehovah God; and thus the name of Jehovah is reproached and desecrated. Its prime promoters and chief supporters arc the nations which eall themselves “Christian nations”. “The image of jealousy” and the League of Nations, the product and offspring of the Devil, is anti-kingdom-of-God. All who support it, cither actively or passively, put themselves in a position antagonistic to the kingdom of God.
Those who profess to be consecrated to God and who hold that “the higher powers” (Rom. 13:1) means the ruling powers of this world deceive themselves and deceive others. Many of the former ciders of the ccclcsias or Bible classes insist that “the higher power’s”, described by the apostle in Romans thirteen, means the ruling powers of this world. Being selfish, they have become blind to the revelation of God’s truth. “God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie.” (2 Thess. 2:11) These also fail to see the organization of Jehovah, and therefore fail to appreciate the fact that the kingdom is at hand. They do not see the kingdom of God, and therefore refuse to take a stand for it. They insist on treading softly so far as the Devil and his organization are concerned, and are led in the way of outer darkness; and, as the Scriptures declare, the same fate awaits
272
tffe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
them as God has provided for the Devil. They are anti-kingdom-of-God.
The elders, leaders, or clergymen of “Christendom”, practically as a unit support the League of Nations and falsely claim that the abominable thing is ‘the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth’, and these likewise insist that “the powers that be” are the kingdoms of this world, which the Lord plainly declares constitute the visible organization of the Devil. Anyone who is devoted to the Lord and who receives the Lord’s approval must take his stand unequivocally on Jehovah’s side and speak the truth concerning Satan’s organization and Jehovah’s organization, to the end that he may have some part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
Then the officer of the Lord in charge of Ezekiel continues the inspection, and Ezekiel sees more abominations. “And he brought me to the door of the court [of the temple J; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall. Then sjiid he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall; and when I had digged in the wall, behold a door. And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here. So I went in and saw ; and behold, every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, pourtrayed upon the wall round about. And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients [elders] of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up.” (Ezek. 8: 7-11) The abominable beasts and idols portrayed upon the wall of the house or temple of the Israelites foreshadowed the abominable things that have been brought into professed “Christianity” which claims to be the temple of the Lord.
The modernist clergy, while claiming to be ministers of God, are the leaders and teachers of evolution and are guilty of ancestor worship, in this, that they claim that “every form of creeping things” or “abominable beasts” preceded man on earth and that these are man’s ancestors or blood relatives. These clergy
men hold on to their jobs and draw their pay from the people on the pretext of being interpreters of the Word of God. and they occupy so-called “Christian pulpits”. In their discourses they take a Bible text as a pretext to teach evolution. They read their text and get away from it immediately. These elders or leaders, otherwise called “clergymen” of “organized Christianity”, burn incense in the house which they call the house of the Lord, their church, while they busy themselves in turning the people away from God and from the Bible. Therefore in the picture each one is shown with a censer in his hand with incense round about. They deny the existence of the supreme, all-wise God, the Creator of heaven and earth. They arc so wise in their own conceits that they believe they can teach what they will, and that the people will not understand them and that ‘no one will sec them’. Therefore says the Lord to Ezekiel: “Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients [elders] of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, The Lord seeth us not; the Lord hath forsaken the earth.”—Ezek. 8:12.
These distinguished clergymen, wise in their own conceits, arc, in the language of God’s Word, fools. They say, ‘There is nothing to show that God made the earth and its creatures,’ and they tell the people that the Bible account thereof is mere nonsense and imaginations of unlearned men. They laugh at the statement, ‘Your Father in heaven seeth in secret.’ (Matt. 6:6,18) They arc hypocrites of the worst kind, because they claim to represent God and yet they deny God, and in fact represent the Devil and defame and desecrate God’s name.
Anyone who is a child of the Lord and in the covenant for the kingdom, and who would put on the “soft pedal” concerning such men and fail to point out that they arc the Devil’s servants, would be unfaithful to God and to his covenant. The “faithful servant” class, each one of which will do his duty, will tell the truth, that God’s truth may sweep away these hiding places of lies, that the glory of the Lord may be seen by those who love righteousness.
JEHOVAH’S PROVISION TIMELY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Pardon llit encroachment tiorn a heart overflowing with un-restrainable expression of appreciation to Jehovah for an appreciation and understanding of his explanation of Proverbs 4: 7 (May 15 Watchtower), the repeated study of which bows one’s head in awe and humility as we realize, vividly, our relationship as children and the accrued icsponsibility connected therewith.
The explanation of how one may know, if of the family of God (paragraphs 1G-19), suiely should enable all to ascertain their icspective relationship, Ilovv timely is our God! With brethren hero and thcie asking just such questions in an effort to learn their relative positions and responsibilities, Jehovah, providing timely “food convenient’’, makes it possible that none need be in ignorance or doubt.
How can anyone question the guidance, care and supervision of His people through the Society and its authorized publications. The fact that the procedure of the Society for years relative to the selection of servants for positions of responsibility has been identical with that outlined in Deuteronomy
1:12,13, as explained in May 15 Watchtower (paragraphs 7,8), reveals clearly that although companies recommend, Jehoiah appoints.
That one tact alone should cause the cessation of all murmuring, strife, contention and selfishness; and it does in tho mind and heait of all faithfully maintaining their integrity. Surely the infamous attempt of'Satan through fake brethren (high or low in previous positions of service) will only entrench the faithful in lenewed activity as commanded by Jehovah and directed through His authorized and manifested media, viz., the Society and its publications.
Please be assuied, dear brother, that, although loving you dearly and delighting in working with you in obedience to the ‘commandments of our Father and the law of our mother’, all honor and praise must and does go to Jehovah and Chrkt Jesus. .	His blessing upon you in your position of responsibility, I hope to remain
Your brother and servant,
D. W. Alden, Kansas.
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE €> TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Kutheefokd President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary •'And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:I3‘
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in tie creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ m glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, membeis of Jehovah’s organization, and are hia witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declaro his puiposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, nnd to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon bis throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT HIE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by nnd through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all thoso who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his puiposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio bioadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Uanvda and Miscellaneous Fobeicn, $1.50; Cheat Britain, Al.strai.asia, and Sot/in Africa. 7-,. American remittances should bo m.ide by Postal of l.’vprc-s Monc-v Order or by Bank limit. Canadian, British, South Alimin and Australasian remittances should be made dnect to the ie.|ici'lue branch ofhees. L'emittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn ollice, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, Loudon, W. 2, England Canadian.........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Itoad, Strathfield, N. S. IV., Australia South African........Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the Mills, i iptlon price may have The Hatchtouer free upon written application to the publishers, made once ench year, stating tlic reison lor so ic Guesting it. We are glad to thus aid the need;, hut the written application once each year is icqulred by ti e postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of n now or n renewal subscription will be sent only when icqtioslcd. Change of addiC'S. when leqnested, may he expected io appear on address Libel within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice ot cvpli.ition) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N.
under the Act of March 3, 1S79.
“KING OF KINGS”
The next testimony period, October 2-10 inclusive, will be world-wide, coextensive with the earthly realm of the King of kings, after whose title the period is named. The publication now of the book filches in many languages makes it appioptiato for this book to be coneentiated on thru, the same to be offered together with a self covered booklet. Ollier details of the service are duo to be published in the Informant, which please consult. Let your preparations and arrangements begin at once, as unto the King of kings. Your prompt report, from whatever part of the earth you inhabit, will be awaited at this office.
PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manufactures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph, which is 14 by 13 by 5 indies in size, and eoveicd with brown cloth and having rounded corners. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces. With the three phonograph discs which can be carried in it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound is strong, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out from our factory, the phonograph is tuned properly, at 78 r.p.in., and should be cheeked from time to time. This model, including three discs, is offered on a contribution of $10.00; without the thieo discs, $8.00. Remittances should accompany orders. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract .Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will b? held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock a.m., Monday, November 1, 1937, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
HELP RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION WITHOUT BELAY
For the'convenience of the subscriber, a renewal blank is sent with The Jl'atchtouer one month before expiration (on foreign subscriptions, two months). Renew your subseiiption promptly and fill in the renewal blank which is mailed to you with your IKatchtower. Sign your name uniformly; give street and number, erty and state; date jour renewal blank, and piearc use the blanks sent to you enclosed in The li'atchtoirer. These subscription blanks tell us winch numbers will be necessary with your renewal order. Always read carefully the reverse side of the renewal blank. When you change j'our address alwavs give the old as well as the new address, two weeks before jou move.
Vol. LVIII
September 15, 1937
No. 18
HIS "WORK” AND HIS "ACT”
"As I have done to Shiloh.”—Jcr. 7:14.
PART 2
JEHOVAH will not permit wickedness to continue for ever. Regardless of how much good and righteous work any people may do, if they afterwards turn to wickedness their previous righteous work will avail them nothing. The Israelites were God’s typical people, organized in righteousness, and for a time doing a righteous work. That nation was destroyed. (Ezek. 33; 12,13) Let it be conceded, for the sake of the argument, that the Roman Catholic organization and the Protestant organizations began with good and righteous intentions and that they did some good work; yet it is now certain that those organizations are entirely religious and therefore devilish and arc in no wise true followers of Christ Jesus, and hence not Christians. They have worked and have claimed to have done so much in the name of the Lord, and many people in those organizations have been sincere. They have had a zeal for their work, but that zeal has been exercised entirely in the wrong way. They are the ones to whom the words of Jesus apply: “Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven ; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have east out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unlo them, 1 ne\er knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.”—Matt. 7:21-23.
1	Let the honest and sincere people now take warning that God will destroy “Christendom”, regardless of the boast of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to the contrary. The big clergy will not believe what is here said. They do not believe the Bible, but rely upon the traditions of men and upon their own righteousness. Jesus told the clergy of the Jews that God would destroy the temple because that people had broken their covenant. (Matt. 24:1,2) But the Jews did not believe it. (John 2:20) Even the disciples of Jesus greatly admired the temple building built by Herod and where the Jews then resorted to practice their religious worship. Standing near that house, and directing their attention to it, Jesus said to his disciples: “There shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down.” (Hatt. 24:2) The people of Palestine, and particularly those of Jerusalem, turned their eyes to the temple and trusted in it as a safeguard against harm. They could not believe that it would ever fall.
’ Today millions of people within the borders of “Christendom” look to the religious organizations, and particularly to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their buildings, as a place of safety. The politicians, the commercial great men, and the common people of the credulous kind, trust in the religious organization. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy now sings the song of the harlot (Isa. 23: 1G) by which she has enticed the political and commercial elements to occupy her secret chambers and fall under her seductive influence. They trust in the power of this organization to save them. They will all fail and go down in Armageddon. Jehovah establishes his faithful people and gives them the truth and has commissioned them to do his service. “Organized religion,” falsely called “Christianity”, steps forward and boldly claims to occupy the position of representatives of God on earth, and the clergy claim that sueh places they inherited from the “fathers” or elders of the church. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims to have received its authority direct from the Lord, and that the head thereof is the successor of the apostle Peter, and that Peter was the first pope or “holy father”. That wicked religious organization, among the many nations, exercises a dominating influence and control, and those countries wherein she rules arc “Christendom”; and “Christendom” is certain to go down.
* Jehovah commanded Jeremiah to say to his typical people: “For among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as he that setteth snares: they set a trap, they catch men. As a cage is full of birds, so arc their houses full of deceit; therefore they ate become great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deeds of the. wicked-: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatheih ss, yet they prosper: and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
275
276
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. y.
as this? A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?” —Jer. 5:26-31.
* Those words of the prophet apply specifically to the religious leaders of ‘‘Christendom” today, who have committed the same abominable things. They ‘‘lay wait” and ‘set snares’ for the people, and use all manner of fraudulent schemes to entrap them. The clergymen of the Hierarchy have become great and wax rich. They are “fat”, and “shine”. They give absolution to those who commit wicked deeds. They arc very prosperous, and they oppress those who serve God. Those religious prognosticators falsely represent to the people that the Homan Catholic organization shall stand for ever and that the hope of the people is in that organization; the priests of the Hierarchy bear rule or control over the people by such false means, and the gullible ones who claim to be God’s people “love to have it so”. It is only the sincere and honest ones of “Christendom” that will now hear and give heed to the message of truth, which Jehovah commands shall be proclaimed by his witnesses to them. (Isa. 62:10) The witnesses for Jehovah must be diligent now to obey his commandments and to carry his message to all who have the hearing car. Their work of declaring the vengeance of God upon “Christendom” appears to the religionists as a very strange work, but there is to follow shortly that which will seem even more strange.
“HIS STRANGE ACT"
•By his prophet Jehovah has declared that he will rise up “and bring to pass his act, his strange aet”. (Isa. 28:21) Furthermore he says: “I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46:11) And what will Jehovah do? He answers: “As I have done to Shiloh.” Likewise he will do unto “Christendom”. God's covenant people were at Shiloh. There they had the tabernacle and the ark of the covenant, and it was the appointed place of worship of Almighty God. But that people had become unfaithful to God and had turned from his commandments to religion, and therefore they had turned against God and to the Devil. Then Jehovah at Shiloh permitted the godless Philistine crowd to sweep the religionists of Israel out and whip them to a standstill. Because the Israelites had become unfaithful God permitted even the ark of the covenant to be captured by the enemy and carried away. There God rejected the priesthood of Israel under Eli and permitted the death of the acting priests, and then had everything pertaining to his name and his worship removed from Shiloh. It is certain that such was typical or prophetic, foretelling the complete destruction of “Christendom”, because God says so and directs his prophets to so state. The destruction of what is now known as “Christendom”
or “the Christian religious organization”, and of its religion practiced by men, will be the aet of Almighty God, he having decreed that it shall be. That aet will be “his strange act”, that is, it will appear strange to all except those who have the ‘mark in their foreheads’ and those who render themselves in full obedience to God’s commandments.—Ezek. 9:4.
T The destruction of the religious systems by Jehovah will mark the beginning of Armageddon. What agency that is visible will the Lord use to overthrow hypocritical religion, wrongfully called “Christian religion”? The Scriptures clearly show that God will use a visible, godless element to do the destructive work against the religionists, a crowd that has been hoodwinked by the religionists, and particularly by the Homan Catholic Hierarchy. That old “whore” is now riding on the back of the beastly, political rulers, and in God’s due time that same clement will destroy the Itoman Catholic Hierarchy and all associated religions. (Hev. 17:16,17) They will act as God’s executioners in this behalf because, says his Word, “God hath put [it] in their hearts to fulfil his will.” That “strange act” will witness the downfall completely of so-called “Christian religion” or “Christendom”, its clergy, and all of its so-called “sacred” articles of worship, such as buildings, images, altars, shrines, holy water, vessels, hatcheries for the clergy, nunneries, and all like fraudulent and ungodly things that defame the name of Almighty God. By so doing Jehovah God shows that he never recognized “religion” of any kind, but that the same is of the Devil, and that the clergy practicing religion are the instruments of Satan used to defame the name of Almighty God, whether the clergy have done so willingly or unwillingly. Eventually all those willful defamers will be destroyed, never to rise again. As Jehovah removed everything from Shiloh that pertained to his worship, so he will remove from “Christendom” everything that might betoken the divine presence and place of worship, and will thereby disclose to all that the so-called “Christian religion” is a fraud and a snare employed by the Devil to carry out his boastful threat to turn the people away from Jehovah God. lie will show that none shall survive for long save those who worship Jehovah in spirit and in truth by joyfully obeying his commandments.
8 Jehovah’s witnesses have no part in the destructive work that shall be done upon “Christendom” at Armageddon. The work of Jehovah’s witnesses is to bear testimony to the people in obedience to God’s commandment, even as Jeremiah carried God’s message to the people. The weapons used by Jehovah’s witnesses are not carnal, but they are mighty to cause the turning away of honest people from the religious organizations. (2 Cor. 10: 4) Jehovah uses any element that it pleases him to carry out his will. But that does not mean that Jehovah approves such wicked creatures in their wickedness. He used the king of Babylon to
September 15, 1N7
Tfie WATCHTOWER.
277
do his service. (Jer. 25:9) It should always be kept in mind that what God did with the Israelites and those connected with them was a picture of what he will later bring to pass upon his pretended people, God permits some of the Devil’s own crowd to inflict punishment upon those who have become unfaithful to God, and who have turned against Jehovah. It is here well to take note of what God did to the Philistines after they smote the Israelites and carried off the ark of the covenant. The Philistines did not serve and worship God. Concerning the ark of the covenant, w’hich represented God and his presence, the rulers of the Philistines commanded that it be carried away to the Philistine city. “Therefore they sent the ark of [the covenant] to Ekron,” and there followed a “deadly destruction throughout all the city”, and “the hand of God was very heavy there. And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the cry of the city went up to heaven.” (1 Sam. 5:10-12) The Philistines therefore had no reason to boast against Jehovah that they had prevailed against the Most High. Those events pictured what God will do to the godless element of the earth that take part in the destruction of the religionists.—Rev. 17:17.
“Jehovah did cast away from him the Israelites, who were his typical people. Through Jeremiah he said to the people of Jerusalem: “And I will east you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim.” (Jer. 7:15) Thus he fulfilled his word against Israel, and thus he foretells that at the beginning of Armageddon “organized Christian religion”, so called, and everything connected therewith, will be violently cast out, together with all her claims, professions, pretenses and positions occupied by her clergy. Jehovah will cause all such to be completely cast away from him, and the Lord Jesus will do that work of execution.—Matt. 7 :23.
10	The northern kingdom of the ten tribes of the nation of Israel, headed by the tribe of Ephraim, was overthrown and carried away from the promised land to the heathen land of Assyria some years before the prophecy was uttered by Jeremiah. In due time came the warning from Jehovah to those remaining at Jerusalem, and then God cast all of them away from him. Likewise Jehovah declares his purpose to cast out and he will cast out all “Christendom”, and particularly its head organization, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. It is the Hierarchy that is filled with pride and the men thereof are the ‘scornful men that rule the people of “Christendom” Concerning that hypocritical religious organization, that unholy crowd that have so many years played the harlot and defamed God’s holy name, it is written: “Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower, which arc on the head of the fat valleys of them that are overcome with wine! Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which, as a tempest of hail, and a destroying
storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand. The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet: and the glorious beauty which is on the head of the fat valley shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the summer; which, when he that looketh upon it sccth, while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.”—Isa. 28:1-4.
11	Jehovah sends his witnesses to warn that crooked crowd that call themselves God’s representatives on earth; yet the rulers thereof, in particular, scorn everything, and everybody, that docs not conform to their own ideas. To that scornful and wicked organization Jehovah now says: “Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem: Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell arc we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: for wc have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have wc hid ourselves. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that bclicvcth shall not make haste. Judgment also will I lay to the lino, and righteousness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place. And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then yc shall be trodden down by it.” (Isa. 28:14-18) Jehovah’s judgment against the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is written and will be executed to the letter by Christ Jesus, the great Executive Officer of the Most High,
12	Those who are faithful to God have nothing in common with religion or religionists, who indulge in fraudulent practices in the name of the Lord. Jeremiah stood as the representative of Jehovah God, and represents and pictures the faithful people of God now on earth; and God directed Jeremiah to say: “Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me: for I will not hear thee.” (Jer. 7:16) The head of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy declared 1933 as a “holy year” and called upon all the people to pray for prosperity during that year. Their united prayers availed nothing, and then the pope extended the so-called “holy year” until April 1935. The religionists, Catholic and Protestant and Jewish, all continued to pray as requested, but their prayers were not heard by Jehovah God. Doubtless the pope and his cohorts heard Jehovah’s witnesses proclaiming the truth concerning the fall of “Christendom” at Armageddon. Then the pope issued a command to all of “Christendom” to join him in prayer that Armageddon might be averted; and that prayer is certain to avail nothing to “Christendom”. Armageddon is certain, and nothing can prevent it. God has declared it,
278
THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and God will do it. Jehovah’s witnesses properly refused to join with the religionists in observing the so-called “holy year”, because they knew such to be a hypocritical fraud upon the people and a defamation of God’s name. They refused to pray for prosperity to come as the pope requested, because those who love God pray according to his will. (John 15:7) For like reasons Jehovah’s witnesses refuse to salute flags of “Christendom” and thereby to impute salvation to that which the flag represents. They know that protection and salvation proceed from Jehovah God, and not from any man-made institution. The doom of “Christendom” and of all religious organizations is certain and is duly certified to by Jehovah, and therefore it is contrary to his will to pray that such doom be averted. Those who truly love and serve Jehovah God will pray for nothing that is contrary to God’s will, but they pray as Jesus commanded them: “Thy will be done.”
WHY ARMAGEDDON
ia Jehovah then points out the acts and conduct of religious “.Christendom”, showing that such are his reason for bringing about Armageddon and performing his “strange act”: “Secst thou not what they do in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem? The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make eakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to anger.” —Jcr. 7:17,18.
14	The ruling elements of “Christendom” are today commandeering every visible thing to be used to carry out their unholy purpose. In every land they arc strenuously pushing the organization of the youth or children and forming them into groups for military purposes, or purposes in connection with arbitrary rule. Young children in the schools arc compelled to salute the national flag and thereby to declare that their trust is in the visible ruling powers, that they arc recognized as “the higher powers”, and that their protection and salvation come from these so-eallcd “higher powers”. The purpose of this whole matter proceeds from the Devil and is to turn the youth against God, and thus to carry out the Devil’s wicked challenge to Jehovah. The children and fathers arc required to work to the same end of being required to participate in some Devil worship in violation of God’s law. So-called “patriotic” organizations are formed, into which young and old arc pushed and compelled to join, and these organizations arc used to oppress those who believe and serve Jehovah God in truth and in spirit. Says the prophet: “The women knead their dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven [ (margin) frame, workmanship of heaven].” Cakes of this kind were, in ancient times, eaten to the honor of the goddess Astarte. Cakes for the worship of the queen of heaven, as stated by Jeremiah in another plaee (Jer. 44:19), refer to the things prepared for Satan’s or
ganization, which is pictured by a woman. The Devil’s “queen” is his organization. Hence “eakes” thus prepared are an offering unto Satan’s representatives that visibly rule the nations of the earth, made up of religious, political and commercial elements (of any and all religious) which today demand that they be recognized as the “higher powers”. (Rom. 13:1) For this reason the ruling powers, led and urged on by the chief religionists, frame mischief by law, thus legalizing compulsory flag-saluting by school children, as well as by adults (Ps. 94:20); require of teachers that they subscribe to certain oaths; and require of the people that they hail dictators as their deliverers and saviors. Therefore men, women and children, schoolteachers, professors, school organizations and church organizations, and political and commercial organizations, all have a part in giving honor to the Devil’s organization by ‘worshiping the creature more than the Creator’.—Rom. 1: 25.
15	They “pour out drink offerings [of wine] unto other gods”, that is, to the Devil and the wicked spirits; and the wicked representatives on earth are looked upon as mighty men, and this is for the purpose of pleasing and giving good cheer to the visible ruling clement, and not to Jehovah and to his King. Thus they defile the earth. That is all done at the instigation of the Devil and carried on by his visible religious representatives, and, as the fjord says, “that they may provoke me to anger.” Therefore in due time Jehovah, as he declares, shall rise up and “shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may . . . bring to pass his act, his strange act”.—Isa. 28:21.
RIGHTEOUS ANGER
’“Jehovah is long-suffering (Ps. 86:15); but he has fixed a limit, and the religionists, without doubt, have reached that limit. To his typical people, foreshadowing the professed people of God now on the earth, Jehovah said: “Do they provoke me to anger? saith the Lord: do they not provoke themselves, to the confusion of their own faces?” (Jer. 7:19) Those words apply with greater force and meaning to the religionists that improperly call themselves “Christian” and practice their religion to the defamation of God’s holy name. It is bad enough to practice the Devil religion, but to do so in the name of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, thereby deceiving many sincere persons and defaming the name of God and Christ, is provoking to the superlative degree. The religionists, who improperly call themselves “Christian”, have commercialized the names of Almighty God and Christ Jesus, using the same blasphemously that men may acquire material things to be applied to their own personal use. All their doctrines are based upon tradition; and such organizations, while differing in many things, are all at unity in being against God and his truth, and which religionists have thereby produced such confusion of and among themselves
Sectembeb 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
279
that soon they will hang their heads in shame. Those who have supported these religions will see Jehovah’s “strange aet”. Then there will be for them nothing about which to boast. There will be no brazen, oily-going, self-confident air of security on their part, but, on the contrary, there will be complete confusion, they not knowing which way to turn. God's righteous indignation against those hypocrites will be expressed in the most emphatic manner: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched.”—Jcr. 7:20.
17 In a miniature way this part of the prophecy was fulfilled upon Jerusalem, and soon it will be fulfilled completely upon “Christendom”, which claims to be the people of God but is not. The fury of Jehovah expressed at Armageddon will be upon human creatures, both sexes, young and old, and upon their material wealth. For seventy years Jerusalem was desolated of man and beast. The number seventy, being a multiple of seven and ten, that is, two numbers denoting completeness, invisible and visible, clearly means that the religionists, their organizations, and practices, and all things jwrtaining thereto, both invisible and visible, will be completely destroyed. God’s anger will be expressed by Christ Jesus, “and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched” until his “strange act” is performed and Jehovah’s name fully vindicated.
*• Obedience is better than sacrifice, as the Lord declares. (1 Sam. 15:22) That is an unchangeable rule given by the Lord to those who claim to serve hi4.i. Speaking to the Israelites by his prophet Jehovah tells them that their sacrifices without obedience avail them nothing. (Sec Jeremiah 7:21-27.) He says to them: “Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people; . . . Yet they hearkened not unto me.” Jesus told the clergy of the Jews, who practiced religion, practically the same thing, when he said to them: “Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. . . . teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.” (Matt. 15:1-9) That exactly describes what the religious leaders in “Christendom” have done and arc now doing. The Boman Catholic Hierarchy and the under-clergy pretend to offer sacrifices unto the Lord, but they utterly ignore the commandments of God, refusing to obey him, and they teaeh for doctrines the commandments of men. They hesitate not to do this, but brazenly use their influence to censor the speech of honest men, removing therefrom quotations from the Bible in order that the people may be kept in ignorance.
12 The same message that was declared to typical Israel Jehovah commands shall be declared unto “Christendom”. The Lord now sends his witnesses to “Christendom” to speak his message and say: “But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth
not the voice of the Lord their God, nor rccciveth correction: truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth.”—Jer. 7:28.
20	The religionists have made lies their stronghold, preferring a lie to the truth. To the same class Jesus addressed his words of condemnation, saying: “Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell?” (Matt. 23:33) The Scriptures leave no room for doubt as to what God will do to the hypocritical religionists who defame his name. The Homan Catholic Hierarchy, and all who hang on to or support that organization after having been warned, shall suffer the extreme wrath of Almighty God.
21	As Jehovah’s witnesses arc now subjected to all manner of ill-treatment and persecution by the so-called “higher powers” of this world, and particularly by the religionists, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, let them take courage and rejoice in the fact that they arc privileged today to stand in a place similar to that occupied by Jeremiah and to declare a message similar to what he declared. Let them take courage, having in mind that Jehovah God is backing them up and that they arc doing his will and as long as faithfully doing this no evil shall befall them. His faithful witnesses are now in God’s secret place, and for their help and comfort it is written: “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge, and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.”— Ps. 91:1-4.
22	The nation of Israel was in a covenant with God. “Christendom” professes to be the children of God and therefore in an implied covenant with him to do God’s will. Cutting off the hair and appearing bald symbolized that Israel was rejected by the Lord. Therefore Jehovah commanded Jeremiah to say to the people of Jerusalem: “Cut off thine hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the Lord hath rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath.”—Jcr. 7 : 29.
23	To the natural descendants of Abraham that ^as a “strange” command. No doubt it made Jeremiah appear very foolish in the eyes of the Israelites to proclaim such a message. Now God commands his faithful witnesses to give warning to “Christendom”, the religionists, that they may not be ignorant that they arc rejected by the Lord. For Jehovah’s witnesses to now say that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is at enmity with God and shall by him be destroyed sounds like foolishness to the religionists. At this time the Roman Catholic newspapers call attention to the testimony of Jehovah’s witnesses concerning the approach of Armageddon and the destruction of religionists and
280
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
refer to the same as nonsense and an unbelievable declaration. The work in which Jehovah’s witnesses are engaged under God’s commandment is therefore a “strange work”, and it is Jehovah’s “strange work” because it is being done by him. It is Jehovah that is giving warning of the approaching destruction of “Christendom”. That “strange work” must be done and will be done and, when completed, will be followed immediately by “his act, his strange act”.
“Jehovah gave his promise that “the sceptre shall not depart from Judah, . . . until Shiloh come”. (Gen. 49:10) The interim would be a time of testing as to who would maintain his integrity and be obedient to the covenant. Israel had become religious, and therefore in Jeremiah’s time they were unfaithful to God; and hence God warned them through his prophet: “For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the Lord: they have set their abominations in the house which Is called by my name, to pollute it.” (Jcr. 7:30) For a similar sin Jehovah killed Na dab and Abihu. (Lev. 10:1-7) Phinehas, the grandson of Aaron, took strenuous action against the polluters of God’s people. (Num. 25:6-15) Why did the priestly Levites, who policed the temple, permit abominations to be committed in the house of the Lord? and why did God permit it? That was a test upon the priestly class, and God permitted it to determine whether they would show a zeal for the Lord or not, or whether they would be indifferent to God’s commandments and follow their own selfish impulses. That particularly foreshadowed a like test that would come, and that is come, upon “Christendom”, who claim to follow Christ but who arc in fact religionists under the dominating control of God’s enemy. The religionists have completely failed to show any zeal for God and his kingdom, but, on the contrary, have clearly demonstrated that they are worthy of destruction. They oppose and persecute everyone who declares God’s kingdom under Christ as the only hope of the human raee.
15	Further the Lord calls attention to the abominable conduct of the covenant-breakers: “And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Ilinnom [that is, Gehenna], to bum their sons and their daughters in the fire ; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart.” —Jer. 7:31.
“ The conduct of the Israelites, as described in this part of the prophecy, was a flagrant violation of God’s commandment. Such Devil religious practices and Jehovah’s temple could not be consistently assoeialed together. The practitioners of “the Jews’ religion” assumed that there is a God of goodness and an equally powerful god of wickedness, and that they had to recognize both that they might be assured of being spared by one and aided by the other. Thus they denied the Word of God and denied him as the only true and mighty God, upon whom they must rely. Likewise
the religionists of “Christendom” today, who improperly call themselves “Christians”, have committed abominations in God’s sight. They have made God appear as a fiend, ‘punishing creatures that arc alive and conscious in a place of eternal fire’; keeping many others for a long term of years in so-called “purgatory” undergoing constant punishment and torture. They have commercialized the name of Jehovah God by teaching that he will hear the prayers of sinful men who, for a money consideration, niter such so-called “prayers” in behalf of those supposed to be suffering in “purgatory”. Such wicked thing was never in the mind or heart of Jehovah God, and therefore such doctrine is a cruel defamation of his holy name. The doctrines of “eternal torture” and “purgatory” are devilish doctrines, originating with the Devil and taught by men to the dishonor of Almighty God.
27	It appears that Ilinnom was a name of some Jebusitc that resided at Jerusalem before the Jeus came there, and which name was probably that also of someone of the Devil’s angels. (Judg. 1:21) The names of Tophct and Ilinnom commemorated the power and deeds of Satan and his angels; all of which ultimately perished. “Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more bo calle 1 Tophct, nor, The valley of the son of Ilinnom, but, The valley of slaughter.- for they shall bury in Tophet till there be no place.” (Jcr. 7:32) Jehovah’s judgment shall be executed, and thereby he will annihilate all detainers of his name. “Tophet” shall be a graveyard for Satan’s crowd, memorializing the disastrous end of all those who worship Satan or willingly practice his religion. As Jehovah ‘did to Shiloh’, so he will do to “Christendom”, and he will not permit the further existence of the place for the practice of hypocritical religion. Jehovah will show his strength over Satan and all his places of worship.
28	That the Devil religion and the willful practitioners thereof shall be completely wiped out is further made certain by the words uttered bj the prophet: “And the carcases of this people shall be moat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the cartli; and none shall fray them away.” (Jcr. 7:33) Tophct, thereafter bearing the name “The valley of slaughter”, shall be filled so full that there will bo no room to bury more and none will survive that will give them a burial. Jehovah’s executioner is in full harmony with Jehovah and his expressed Word, and will show no respect to the religious hypocrites, even to the dead, but will leave them as dung upon the ground to be fed upon by carrion fowls. They shall be as the beasts of the field. This fact is further emphasized by the prophet, to wit: “And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.”—Jer. 25:33.
September 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
281
20	The religionists celebrate various feasts in the name of the Lord and which are contrary to God’s Word and a dishonor to his holy name. Selfishly and for commercial purposes the feasts called “Christmas” and “Easter” are celebrated by the religionists of the land of “Christendom”. The clergy use these occasions to collect money for themselves and their organization, and the mercantile crowd take advantage of that occasion to sell a mass of worthless junk to the people, and together they all get drunk on the Devil’s “wine” and all defame the name of God and of Christ. All such abominations will cease in due time: “Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride; for the land shall be desolate.” (Jer. 7:34) The voice of hilarity being generalljr heard on occasions of weddings of the religionists of “Christendom” will also cease. The hilarious voice heard on church holidays will cease. The only joy that will survive will be the “joy of the Lord”, the joy of. the bride and the Bridegroom, of those who praise the name of Jehovah God. (John 3:29) The Lord Jesus states that up to the time of the occasion of Jehovah’s expressed wrath, that is, “his strange act,” there will be marrying and giving in marriage in “Christendom”, with no heed being given on the part of religionists to the Word of God. (Matt. 24:38,39) The facts today fully corroborate these prophetic words. At Armageddon “Christendom” will become a waste and totally joyless. Jehovah has no pleasure in “Christendom”, because it is on the side of Satan and turns the people away from God and his gracious provision for them.
30	Jehovah used Jeremiah to do a prophetic work and to deliver a prophetic message foretelling what he would bring to pass in the far distant future upon the people who were pictured by the unfaithful Israelites. The Israelites, led by the priests or clergy of that day, had forsaken the commandments of God and adopted the practice of religion based upon the teachings of selfish men and originating with the Devil. Those clergymen were followed by many others who also had become religionists. Did the preaching of the Lord’s message by Jeremiah appear to those religionists as a “strange work”? Did the future calamity that came upon Jerusalem at the hand of Almighty God, and which Jeremiah had prophesied, appear as a “strange act”? Both the work and the act foretold applied to the religionists and to those religionists appeared as so fanciful and far-fetched, so strange, as to be unworthy of serious consideration. It is the same with reference to “Christendom”. Note now what followed, in support of this conclusion.
WARNING TO THE PEOPLE
31	At this point it appears to be entirety appropriate to give attention to what appears at the 26th chapter
of Jeremiah’s prophecy, which prophecy should be earcfulty read and considered. Some historical facts are here appropriate to be recounted. The time is fixed by the date of the reign of the king. “In the beginning of the reign of Jchoiakim, the son of Josiah king of Judah, came this word from the Lord, saying.” (Jer. 26:1) Referring now to the historical record, note this: “And Pharaoh-neehoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the room [place or stead) of Josiah his father, and turned his name to Jehoiakim, and took Jchoahaz [the wicked brother whom Pharaoh put down and replaced with Jehoiakim] away: and he [Jehoahaz] came to Egypt and died there. And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh: he exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation, to give it unto Pharaoh-neehoh. Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and his mother’s name was Zcbudah, tlie daughter of Pcdaiah of Rumah. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his fathers had done.”—2 Ki. 23:34-37.
32	It was at that time that Jehovah gave to Jeremiah a specific message to deliver to the religionists of Jerusalem. That was before Nebuchadnezzar went up against Jehoiakim (which was in his eighth year) and made him tributary. After three years of being tributary Jchoiakim rebelled. (2 Ki. 24:1) But Jehoiakim became king of Israel when Jeremiah had been preaching eighteen years, which was during the last years of the reign of Josiah the king who served Jehovah. In order that the grave danger with which Jeremiah found himself confronted may be seen and appreciated, note some of the historical facts recorded in the 26th chapter: “And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt [to which Jehoiakim was then tributary or subordinate], namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him into Egypt: and they fetched forth Urijah [the prophet] out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jchoiakim the king, who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people. ”—Jer. 26:22,23.
33	It appeal’s this historical fact was brought to the attention of others and publicly announced, and therefore must have come to the attention of Jeremiah, lie would know that to deliver the message now received by him from the Lord would put his life in jeopardy. But did that deter Jeremiah from obeying the Lord?
34	All of the Israelites were admitted to the outer court of the temple; and it was there Jeremiah was directed to stand and speak: “Thus saith the Lord, Stand in the court of the Lord’s house, and speak unto all [the people who there appeared, from] the cities of Judah, which come to worship in the Lord’s house, all the words that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a word.”—Jer. 26:2.
282
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
** Before taking his stand in that place and delivering the message of the Lord, did Jeremiah first apply to the king or his officers for a permit to go and thus testify? He did not, because the Lord had not so instructed him and he was there to obey the Lord. God sent his prophet to do what he was told to do. For a like “offense” of delivering a message the king had caused Urijah to be killed, because that prophet in speaking had “shocked the religious susceptibilities” of the big religious leaders among the Jews. A definite precedent for Jehovah’s witnesses is here fixed by the positive course taken by Jeremiah. In the days of the apostles they followed the same precedent when they said to the officer's of the law: “We ought to obey God rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) Jehovah did not direct Jeremiah to go inside the temple and harangue the people there, but He told him to stand in the court where all the people would come and pass, going in and coining out. This shows that Jehovah’s witnesses are not to go into the house of the religionists and there to argue with them, but they are to go out among the people that attend such religious meetings and that support organized religion, and inform them of Jehovah's purpose, warning them of his impending “strange act”. Today the religionists harangue the people by using the radio, and it is presumed that some of the religions practitioners hear the radio in their home. It is right and proper that Jehovah’s witnesses use the radio to transmit the message of God to the jieople, although the Hierarchy vigorously opposes them in the use thereof. It is in harmony with The Lord’s commandment that Jehovah’s witnesses call at the homes of those who support the religious organizations as well as those who attend, and there present the message of Jehovah. Jesus and his apostles followed this course (Acts 20:20), and that of itself fixes the proper rule by which the servants of God arc to be guided at the present time.
“Jehovah commanded Jeremiah to “speak unto all” the people of the various towns or cities that came to worship at the temple. Originally that was the Lord’s bouse, but in Jeremiah’s time had been made a house of merchandise, and therefore it was, at the time Jeremiah testified, the house of the Lord in name only, but not in truth and in fact. The Judeans looked upon that house or temple as the bulwark or guarantee to them against all national calamities. In this day the politicians and the merchants and militarists look upon “the church”, and particularly the Vatican, as a guarantee of safety to them and as a warrant to carry on their cruel work. All the nations of “Christendom”.have their chaplains, who are the religionists hired to serve with the armies and navies. The ruling powers and their supporters look to their religious organizations and religious practitioners for some benefit and as a safeguard against evil. The church organizations, that is, the religious practitioners, all claim to be patriotic and to faithfully support
the respective nations. They participate in the politics of the nations and meddle in the political affairs, and they use religion and their “church” houses as a certain kind of hoodoo-chaser, but none of them truly wish for the kingdom of Christ. On the contrary, they fight against the kingdom or anything that pertains to the rule of the world by Christ Jesus. They go through forms of worship in a house which they call “the house of God”, that men may see their apparent devoutness, and thereby others are attracted to such places of assembly, hoping they also may get some of the benefit.
87	God’s instruction to Jeremiah was mandatory, and the prophet had no alternative. Says the Lord: “Speak ... all the words that I command thee to speak unto them.” Jeremiah would have been disobedient to God had he gone to the king or to the court officers or the priests in charge of the temple, or to anyone else, and asked for a permit or license to preaeh or deliver the message which the Almighty God had commanded him to deliver. For the same reason Jehovah’s witnesses today would bo disobedient to God and to his great prophet, Christ Jesus, by applying for a permit or license to preach the gospel of the kingdom by going from house to house and delivering the message. The Lord has given his positixe commandment that his v.itnesses shall thus preach and shall obey him, and a failure to obex'- his commandments means their complete destruction,—Acts 3:23.
88	Furthermore God said to Jeremiah: “Speak,” and “diminish not a word”; that is, do not deliver a censored message. According to Lccscr the text reads: “Omit not a word (thereof).” Jeremiah xxas prohibited from leax'ing out a word or permitting anyone to censor his message. He was not to submit a copy of his speech to the temple board or to others to pass upon and censor it and cut out certain parts, which parts might hax'e a tendency to “shock the religious susceptibilities” of the clergy or which might appear “perverse and liable to cause riot”. For the same reason Jehovah’s witnesses, by the Lord’s commandments, are prohibited from submitting the message or speech to be delix’ered to radio censors, to commissions, to clergy or to anyone else that attempts to censor that message and to eliminate some parts of it that might be objectionable to religionists. Not even Jeremiah himself was to censor that message for any reason whatsoever. The Lord God has commanded Jehovah’s witnesses to speak and has put in his Word what they shall speak, and for them to ask for permission or to submit to censorship would be a direct violation of God’s commandment. Fear of bodily injury, or the desire for the admiration of men or a ‘good neighborly’ feeling, or ‘national patriotism’, so called, or anything else, must not be permitted to hinder the full obedience to God’s commandment. Nothing would be an excuse or justification for putting on the soft pedal or omitting certain parts of the message of truth.
September 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
2S3
Jehovah’s witnesses must understand that they have no right, power or authority to change or substitute anything of God's message. Whether the message offends or pleases men is not for them to consider. The message of truth is not the message of any man, but is God’s message, and it is entirely absurd to even think of refraining from doing what the Almighty God. has commanded in order to please men or institutions, or to ask selfish, imperfect men for a permit or a license to do what the Almighty God has commanded shall be done. Jehovah’s witnesses are not to act in a belligerent way. They should do nothing to unnecessarily provoke opposition, but they should with calmness, with sobriety, without fear, and with boldness, declare the message of truth, regardless of what any creature may say or do about it. The apostle Paul was a striking example of one who followed this rule. Everywhere Paul went the religionists opposed him and inflicted upon him bodily harm because of his faithfulness. Recounting the many persecutions which he had suffered Paul said: “I kept back nothing that was profitable . . . , but have shewed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house, . . . And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: . . . For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.” (Acts 20:20-27) Christ Jesus suffered for telling the truth. The prophets before him had thus suffered. The apostles, and especially Paul, suffered great indignities; and why should Jehovah’s witnesses expect to obey the Lord in this day without being subjected to a like unrighteous persecution? The duty of Jehovah’s witnesses is to obey him. lie will take care of the result.
*’ It is to be expected that religionists will continue to persecute the witnesses of the Lord. God will permit that, even as he has permitted the Devil to carry on his wicked work; but Jehovah clearly declares that when his “strange work” is done, in which work Jehovah’s witnesses now have a part, then he will execute his “strange act”, and that will be the end of religionists and all others that defame God’s name. Jehovah’s witnesses are therefore privileged to choose to avoid suffering now and be destroyed by Jehovah, or to be faithful to God at this time, suffer persecution at the hands of the enemy, and receive God’s everlasting blessing. It is easy to be seen, therefore, ‘the fear of man leadeth into a snare.’
48 Jehovah had purposed the destruction of the city of Jerusalem, but he would afford the way of escape to those individuals there who would repent, that is, who would change their course of action. “If so be they will hearken and turn every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them because of the evil of their doings.” (Jer. 26:3) Jehovah knew, of course, that the nation of Israel would not repent; but he gave notice to them r>f what he would do, and that afforded opportunity
for all of good will to repent and find preservation. The opportunity was open to every individual, from the king down to the most insignificant bondservant, and thus God put the responsibility for the destruction of the city upon those who had such opportunity to amend their ways and who refused to do so. In fulfillment of that prophetic picture today Jehovah sends his witnesses to serve a warning upon “Christendom”, knowing full well that “Christendom” as a whole will not change its course but that there are in “Christendom” some persons of sincerity and of good will toward God who will hear, change their course of action, take their stand on the side of God, and will escape the day of destruction which is just at hand.
41 The doom of Jerusalem and the temple was fixed and was certain to come. (Jer. 1:1-3; Ezek. 4:6-8; 2 Ki. 22:14-20; 23:26,27) For eighteen years Jeremiah had been preaching the truth to the people. By sending his prophet to the city and to the temple, there to testify, Jehovah was showing the Israelites or Jews who willfully, that is, intentionally and knowingly, defied God and supported the Devil that their destruction was certain unless they repented. Jehovah made those willful ones identify themselves as his enemies. Likewise Jehovah today gives warning and continues to warn “Christendom” that her doom is sealed, and he is showing up the responsible ones and compelling the hypocritical clergy and other religionists of “Christendom” to openly identify themselves as “goats” worthy of destruction. (Matt. 25:32,41-46) Particularly since 1922 Jehovah has sent forth his witnesses under the leadership of Christ Jesus and has given warning to “Christendom”, not that God expects the religionists, who knowingly defy his Word, to reform, but he affords them the opportunity that they may have no excuse; and by willfully rejecting his message of warning and by their willful opposition to the proclamation of his kingdom message, they have demonstrated clearly that they are willingly wicked and justly deserving destruction. Within the religious organizations of “Christendom” there are some mock ones who arc of sincere heart and who desire to be taught the right way, and these arc given the opportunity to hear the truth and to seek a place of safety. As the message delivered by Jeremiah shows the only way of safety, even so now Jehovah’s message sent by him through his faithful witnesses shows the only way to protection and safety.
42Jehovah sends his witnesses to the people of “Christendom”, not to convert the world, as the religionists claim they are commissioned to do. God’s witnesses are sent that they may be a witness unto his name and to his kingdom. Therefore Jehovah says: “Ye are my witnesses” (Isa. 43:10-12); ye arc commissioned and anointed to declare the day of the vengeance of God, that notice and warning may be had by those of “Christendom” wdio have hoard the name of God and of his Son. Christ Jesus, the Savior
284
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the world, that is, who have some knowledge of God and his Word and claim to serve him. The witnesses of Jehovah do not go about pleading with others to come and join some organization. They do not plead with and importune the people to do anything. With calm dignity and with fearlessness they declare unto the people the message of Jehovah God and point out, to those who desire to have life, that God has provided the way of safety and life through Christ Jesus and his kingdom. Jehovah’s witnesses make clear to the people that the message is not that of any man, but is God’s message, given as a witness to the nations and to the people, and that when this message is delivered, as commanded, the witnesses have discharged their responsibility and thereafter the responsibility rests upon those who have heard. What Jehovah directed Jeremiah to say, with stronger force applies to those witnesses whom Jeremiah pictured. Why must Jehovah’s witnesses declare to the people what shall soon come to pass?
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
U 1. With scriptures, explain whether past or present work sinceicly (lone in the name of the Lord will have Jehovah’s approval and blessing.
K 2,3. How did the Jews and their clergy regard the temple and their leligious worship practiced therein 1 What was their attitude toward Jesus’ warning concerning the coming destruction of the templet Why was that temple dcstioyedl Compare theiewith the situation in “Christendom”.
H 4,5. Show that Jeretniah 5: 20-31 was prophetic of “Christendom”.
f 6. What did Jehovah do to Shiloh, and whyf Of what was that typical or prophetic!
7. What will mark the beginning of Armageddon! How will this be accomplished7 Of what will that act be evidence!
8,9. How did Jehovah bring to pass the destruction concerning which he gave warning by his prophet Jeremiah! What was pictured therein!
10. Of whom is Isaiah 28: 1-4 prophetically declared, and why!
H 11. To whom is Isaiah 28:14-18 addressed! How and for what purpose is that message of forewarning delivered to them!
H 12. How has Jeremiah 7: 16 been having fulfillment!
K 13-15. By whom, and how, in the fulfillment of Jeremiah
7: 17,18, has Jehovah been provoked to anger! Why have they done this!
If 16,1". Wherein will the religionists find that they not only have provoked Jehovah to anger but have ‘provoked themselves, to the confusion of their own faces’! Of what prophetic significance is the fact that for seventy years Jerusalem was desolated of man and beast!
If 18. Show whether the religious leaders of “Christendom” are willfully disobedient to the commandments of God.
If 19,20. Account for “Christendom’s” conduct and condition as foretold at Jeremiah 7: 28. In this connection point out the importance of the message of warning which Jehovah’s witnesses now are commanded to deliver.
H 21. What important purpose is served by an understanding now of the prophetic position occupied by Jeremiah!
T 22,23. Why was Jeremiah to speak to Jerusalem the strange command and message as stated at verse 291
If 24. Why did the priestly Levites permit abominations to bo committed in the house of the Lord! and why did God permit it! What was foreshadowed thereby!
H 25, 26. To what does verse 31 refer! and how is this prophecy fulfilled in the course taken by the religionists of “Christendom” today!
If 27, 28. Explain and apply verses 32, 33.
If 29. How and why will Jehovah do to “the cities of Judah” as foretold at verse 34!
U 30. What was the nature of the message which Jehovah committed to Jeremiah! What was the reason for that message and work in his day!
If 31,32. What facts of importance, and purpose of the his-toiical record, are seen at Jeremiah 26: 1 and 2 Kings 23: 34-37! At Jeremiah 26: 22,23!
U 33,34. Show that obedience to Jehovah’s commandment (Jcr. 26: 2) required strong faith and courage.
Y 35,36. What important instruction for Jehovah’s witnesses is seen in the commandment to Jeremiah (26: 2) nnd the positive course taken by him! Cite further outstanding examples of record of faithfulness of God’s servants. What at the present time was pictured by “the Lord’s house” and Jeremiah’s being told to “stand in the comt” thereof. In his ‘speaking unto all the cities of Judah’!
If 37,38. Apply the Lord’s instruction there given to Jeremiah: “Speak ... all the words that 1 command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a word.” Cite other examples of faithful performance of duty under opposition and persecution, the record of which Jehovah has provided for his faithful servants now on earth.
H 39. What may God’s faithful servants now expect at the hands of the religionists, and why! What are Jehovah’s witnesses now privileged to choose!
H 40-42. What purpose is seen in Jehovah’s words at Jeremiah 26: 3, in view of the then already determined doom of Jerusalem! Compare the message dcliveted by Jeremiah, and the purpose for which it was given, with that proclaimed by those whom Jeremiah there pictured.
MONEY
JEHOVAH’S servant Ezekiel prophesied: “Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness; none of them shall remain, nor of their multitude, nor of any of theirs; neither shall there be wailing for them. The time is come, the day draweth near; let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.’’—Ezck. 7:11,12.
Never has the commerce of the world been so affected as in this present day. Particularly the small dealers are sorely oppressed, and their business is being wiped out; and the day of the larger ones is rapidly drawing on. It is the time when violence has risen up into a rod of wickedness that controls the peoples of the nations.
Existing conditions in “Christendom’’ today arc perplexing beyond measure to those who know not and who refuse to hear the Word of the Lord. These try to make themselves believe that their business will get better; but it will not. “For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they were yet alive; for the vision is touching the whole multitude thereof, which shall not return; neither shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.’’ (Ezek. 7:13) There is no advantage to the seller in again possessing that which is sold, in order that he might sell it again, because the people have nothing with which to buy. The commercial situation continues to grow worse, the suffering of the people increases, and the clergy falsely
September 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
285
tell the people that God is sending these calamities upon them because of their unfaithfulness to “organized Christianity”. Satan is the one chiefly responsible for the terrible conditions now existing, and he is causing his agents, the clergy, to falsely charge God therewith, in order that the people may be turned away from Jehovah. The commercial situation continues to grow worse and the people continue to suffer, and their suffering will increase.
“The principal of the flock,” meaning the rich and the mighty and the favored ones, have relied upon their wealth and power to protect and sustain them and to carry them through any trouble that might come, but they are doomed to complete disappointment. They have “heaped treasure together for the last days” and think thereby that they have a great advantage and are safe. Heretofore the mighty and the rieh have lieen able to buy their way through. When they get into a difficult situation money is freely used. It was Satan who invented the slogan-“Money talks”; and his agents use this slogan and prove its effectiveness. They have freely resorted to briberies and have been able to buy their way through times of distress, but the wrath of Jehovah God will not be placated nor his hand lie held back by their filthy lucre.
Now the ultrarich control the money and the food supply, and they control the governments. The cries of the starving ones, who have really produced the wealth of the world, are heard throughout the land, and many are begging for bread. Big Business, working behind the throne of visible power, commands that the starving shall not be fed from the exchequer of the government. Democracy has ceased to exist, and governments are in fact paternalistic so far as they oppress and rob the children thereof.
Just at this time there are millions of people in America, the land of plenty, who arc starving for food and who will continue to starve unless charitably inclined people will relieve them. The cries of the suffering, laboring ones, however, have reached the ears of the God of war, and he is not unmindful of these cries; and now he bares his arm for battle and, when it comes to the money of Big Business, that will avail them nothing. The oppressors of the people God will wipe out. “All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water. They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed ; their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord; they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels; because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.” (Ezekiel 7:17-19) “The love of money is the root of all evil” and is a stumblingblock to all who have set their affections thereon. The terrible day is advancing to a climax, and there is no escape therefrom.
The statesmen, otherwise called “political rulers”, are even now at their wits’ end. They cast about for some means of saving the ship of state, but their actions are those of a drowning man. Says Jehovah by his prophet: “The king [the chief ones among the rulers] shall mourn, and the prince [the lesser ones among the ruling powers] shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people [that support these ruling powers] shall be troubled: I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts will 1 judge them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.” (7:27) Armageddon is Jehovah’s fight; he will give no quarter to the enemy and his supporters.
Those who have been the favored ones among the governments of “Christendom” will seek in vain for shelter and protection. “In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and bis idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, 1o the moles, and to the bats; to go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.”—Isa. 2: 20, 21.
Even at the present time, and before the clergy completely disappear, some still rely upon them and seek a word of consolation from them, but find none, because the clergy have nothing for the perplexed, and no consolation to give them. The clergymen know not God and his Word; and if they ever knew his Word, they have gone too far now in their course of wickedness, and they will not seek to understand and cannot understand it. “Then shall they seek a vision of the prophet [clergy] : but The law [Word of God] shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients [elders].” (Ezek. 7:26) That means that those who now hypocritically claim to represent the Lord will find no words of consolation for suffering humankind.
God’s law be caused to be written by Moses. “Christendom” boastfully claims to have fashioned her laws after’ the law of Moses, and she points with pride to her “splendid” laws. The everlasting covenant of God, made with Noah (Gen. 9:1-6), declares the sacredncss of human life and is embodied in the law of God written by Moses. This covenant all “Christendom” has broken and trampled under foot, and has spit upon it with contempt. Says God’s prophet: “Make a chain [that is to say, bind yourselves together in leagues and compacts, chain stores, chain banks, and other organizations by which the people arc oppressed and exploited] : for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.” (Ezek. 7:23) The “chain” or combines between the ecclesiastics, Big Business and bootleggers will avail them nothing. Their combined effort to enforce the Prohibition law failed in the land of America and has filled the land with all manner of crime and violence. JI fllions of money were spent in the abortive attempt to enforce this unholy law, while the political powers that manipulated the machinery refused to appro
286
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
priate one dollar for feeding the starving people. Such a course of action drives men to desperation and increases crime and violence in the land, and it is ever on the increase.
In 1928 the clergy of America, by and through the public press, cried ont: 'Give the world the Kellogg Peace Pact for Christmas.’ They continue to cry, "Peace, peace: when there is no peace.” Says Jehovah : "Though they ery in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.” (Ezck. 8:18) Jehovah will declare no truce with the Devil’s organization. He is marching to war and will not back down. "Destruction cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be none.”—Ezck. 7: 25.
Jesus prophesied that Armageddon will be the worst tribulation that ever came upon the world, and that it shall completely wreck the hypocritical organization that Satan has builded up. The prophecy of Ezekiel reads: "Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen [nations], and they shall possess their houses; I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be defiled.” (Ezck. 7:24) This cannot refer to the nations called "heathen”, such as the Hindus, and Chinese, and Mohammedans. These are not the worst of the nations, because God declares that hypocritical "Christendom” is the worst of all.
The word here translated "heathen” means nations. God’s organization is his chosen nation. When -Armageddon is over, it will be recognized that the organization of Jehovah is the "worst” thing that ever came against Satan’s organization, and therefore they will realize that God has sent against them that which is the very worst for them. The Lord by his organization will make a clean sweep of hypocritical "Christendom”, and the frightfulncss of the military forces of Satan’s organization will be nothing compared to the fright that Jehovah’s organization will give the Devil’s crowd. "They shall know that I am
the Lord.” Jehovah will make his name to be feared in all the earth, and all shall come to know that Jehovah is the God eternal, the God almighty, whose power is irresistible.
Jehovah has favored his covenant people with a knowledge of his purposes and has laid upon the elders (that is, the mature ones in Christ) the obligation of feeding and instructing others in his Word. (1 Pet. 5:2) The Lord is using and has used The Watchtower from its foundation as his channel of communication to and between his people; and during the past few years The Watchtower has repeatedly called attention to Satan’s wicked organization. In the face of all this, however, there have been certain so-called "elders”, wise in their own minds, who have not been persuaded that the Devil has an organization at all. ‘At least,’ say they, ‘we should go easy and say nothing about the clergy and their allies in the organization that controls the world.’ The policy of these "elders” is to speak softly, ‘that even the clergy might be won over to the Lord’s side.’ Some of the weaker ones who desire to hear nothing against the clergy say, in substance: ‘Our oldest elders, who are most fully developed in the Lord, say nothing about the Devil’s organization; then why should these younger ones, who have recently been brought to a knowledge of the truth, say anything against them and others of the organization of this world?’
The Society has been severely criticized because of the plain statements made in The Watchtower and in its other publications concerning Satan’s organization. These publications, however, must tell the truth, or else they will cease to be used by the Lord. Let those who have objected to any speech or publication about Satan’s organization and the various elements thereof give consideration to the eighth chapter of Ezekiel’s prophecy. If they believe what the Scriptures say, and if they understand the commission God has given to his covenant people, then let them take the proper attitude toward Satan’s organization.
RESURRECTION FROM HELL
IN THE English translation of the Greek manuscript of the Bible, "hell” is used to translate three Greek words, each having a different meaning. These words are gehenna, hades, and tartaroo. The Greek word gehenna is found in this statement by Jesus, namely: “If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than, having two eyes, to be east into hell fire [gehenna]: where their worm dicth not, and the fire is not quenched.”—Mark 9:47,48.
Again Jesus used the same word gehenna, in this text: "And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell [gehenna].”
(Matt. 10:28) Here he plainly says that gehenna, translated "hell”, means destruction. One man might kill another one, and the one killed would be resurrected in due time; but if God destroys him He would destroy his very right to existence, and then there would be for him no resurrection.
The Greek word hades, translated "hell”, means the condition of death from which there shall be a resurrection. Gehenna means a condition of death from which there shall be no resurrection.
In Jesus’ day the clergy were his real enemies, although they claimed to represent Jehovah God. They were hypocrites, misrepresenting Jehovah and misleading the people. He plainly told them that they
September 15, 1937
SFfie WATCHTOWER.
287
were the servants of the Devil. (John 8: 44) After be had entered the temple and driven out the money changers, he delivered a discourse to the Pharisees and others of the clergy of that time, and in that connection he said to them: “Ye serpents, yc generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?” (Matt. 23:33) The word gehenna is the Greek word here used, and translated “hell”. These men had sinned against light. They knew that Jesus was the Messiah, and yet they persecuted him and sought to kill him. Because they had this light, and persisted in sin, he was asking them the question, How is it possible for you to escape eternal destruction?— lleb. C: 4-6.
The Greek word tartaroo is rendered in the English Bible by the words “cast down to hell”. There is no reason why this should be construed as meaning a place of conscious torment. The scripture refers to the abased condition of the wicked angels who had rebelled with »Satan and who materialized as giants on earth in Noah’s day. The offending angels were abased and sent into the condition represented by “chains of darkness”.
The apostle Peter (2:2:4) writes: “God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.” The apostle Jude writes: “And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.” (Jude 6) The thought conveyed is that they were abased before all the heavenly creation and were sent into that condition there to await final disposition in the judgment. Undoubtedly the expression “chains of darkness” has reference to the restrained condition without light on God’s purpose or light of his favor.—Matt. 22:13; 25:30; Ps. 30: 5.
Jehovah God declares that he will punish the wicked, and that the punishment shall be eternal. The clergy try to make it appear that eternal punishment and eternal torture are one and the same thing. They are not. Death is the highest penalty known to the law of any land. No punishment could be greater than complete destruction. Such is the punishment that God will inflict upon the willfully wicked. It is written (Ps. 145:20): “All the wicked will he destroy.” He will punish the wicked with everlasting destruction.—2 Thcss. 1: 9.
The Devil is the chief one amongst the wicked. God will ultimately destroy the Devil, (lleb. 2:14) Destruction of the willfully wicked is not fiendish, but is an act of justice and love on the part of Jehovah. The wicked, if permitted to exist forever, would be a dishonor to God’s name and a menace to creatures who love Jehovah, and would be of no value to themselves; therefore their destruction is in harmony with
and consistent with Jehovah. Such is punishment, but is not torment.
There are degrees of punishment. If a man robs a house and is convicted he suffers punishment by imprisonment for a stated period of time. If he murders a man his punishment is death. In the one case his punishment is for a stated period; in the other case it is lasting or everlasting. When God destroys the wicked it will be everlasting destruction, from which there is no resurrection. It is therefore eternal or “everlasting destruction”.
The Scriptures therefore establish beyond a question of doubt that the billions of people who have died from Adam until now are dead, unconscious, and therefore know not anything. Is there hope that they shall live again? Yes. To provide for their living again is the very purpose of God’s arrangement concerning man, and to give them hope is his purpose in bringing them to a knowledge of the truth. In his due time God will open the way for these billions of dead to live again.
It is illuminating to take note of some Scriptural texts proving that God speaks of the dead as though they were asleep. Moses was faithful as a servant of God. “And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thou sbalt sleep with thy fathers.” Adam was the father of the human race and therefore one of Moses’ fathers. If Adam went to eternal torment, then Moses did also.
The Lord told David what was to take place with reference to him, and then said: “And when thy days be fulfilled, . . . thou shalt sleep with thy fathers.” (2 Sam. 7:12) Again it is written concerning David: “For David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption.” (Acts 13:36) When David was in great distress he feared lest he should die, and in his sorrow he prayed unto God: “Consider and hear me, 0 Lord my God ; lighten mine eyes, lest. I sleep the sleep of death.”—I’s. 13:3.
Lazarus of Bethany, a brother of Mary and Martha, with whom Jesus had often visited and whom he loved, became sick and died. Jesus knew that Lazarus was dead, but his disciples did not know it. Jesus, speaking of his death, said to them: “Our friend Lazarus slccp-cth; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep.” Not understanding at the time what he meant, his disciples said: “Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. Howbeit Jesus spake of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of taking of rest in sleep. Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead.”—John 11:11-14.	'
Jesus and his disciples then proceeded to Bethany, where Lazarus had died. Arriving there they found his sisters weeping for sorrow. At that time Lazarus had been dead four days and buried in the grave, bound with graveclothes, as was the custom then. Lazarus was a good man; but he was not in heaven, as the preachers would make it appear. Nor was he in
288
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
a place of torment or in “purgatory”. He was in the grave, in the condition of death, or in hell, as the Bible uses that word. Jesus went to the tomb, which was closed with a large stone; and causing the stone to be rolled away, he called to Lazarus and awakened him out of death. “And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him, and let.him go.”—John 11:44.
It was on that occasion that Jesus said to Martha: “I am the resurrection, and the life: he that hclievcth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?” (John 11:25,26) Jesus was here stating the great truth that into his hands Jehovah God had committed all power to awaken the dead and that in due time God would bring forth the dead by him. The awakening of Lazarus was but a sample of what God through Christ Jesus in due time will do. Concerning this Jesus testified, saying: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God ; and they that hear shall live. Marvel not at this: for the hour cometh in which all that arc in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment. ”—John 5:25,28, 29, II. V.
These scriptures arc conclusive in proving that the dead are wholly unconscious, and that in Gods due time through Christ the dead shall be awakened.
Resurrection means a standing up again unto life. The awakening of the dead is but the beginning of the resurrection. Those who will compose the new creation
will experience an instantaneous resurrection, being changed to life and immortality. The billions of people who are dead and in their tombs will be awakened out of death for trial and judgment, and therefore the resurrection or bringing up of the people to life in its fullness will be a gradual work.
Without the resurrection of the dead the ransom sacrifice of Jesus would be of no avail. Having in mind that four thousand years prior to his death and resurrection men had been going into the grave, it is manifest that the ransom sacrifice provided by Jesus’ death could be of no benefit to those who were then dead unless they should be awakened out of death. The awakening of all such out of the sleep of death, and giving them a fair trial for life, is consistent with every other part of the divine purpose, and is just what should be expected of the great loving Jehovah.
If the clergymen were right in their conclusions that the destiny of everyone is fixed at death, that the good go to heaven and that the evil go to “purgatory” or to torment, then why should there he a resurrection at all? All the scriptures that speak of the awakening of the dead are meaningless if the dead are already conscious in heaven, “purgatory” or hell. The Scriptures therefore flatly contradict the theory of the clergy. The strange thing is that the Devil has so long succeeded in blinding the people to the truth and in inducing them to accept the false clergy teachings.
There is nothing more wonderfully and beautifully taught in the Bible than the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. It shows a reason for the death of Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God, and why God raised him out of death. It is a manifestation of God's loving-kindness toward the human family.
Rochester, X. Y....-..Oct. 10, 11
Oakfield. X. Y. ....- -	12
Medina, X.Y.........13
Lockport, X. Y....... "	14
Niagara Faits. N. Y. „ “	15
Tonawanda. N.Y.______“	1<»
Butalo, X.Y...........“	17,18
R. H. BARBER
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
Fiedonln, N Y..........Oct.	19
W<-.t;.el<l, N. Y........“	20
Janiestow n. N.Y.........“	21
Onor Hie. N.Y............"	22
Franklinville, N. Y......“	24
Perry, N. Y............. "	26
Auburn, N. Y.............“	31
Indianapolis, Ind. ... Sept. 26-28 1‘e.ina. 111.....Sept ...........
Clinton, Iowa .........i
G. Y. M’CORMICK
0, Oct. 1
•Oct. 3 5
J. C. BOOTH
Tipton, Iowa ..........“	7
Linn County, Iowa .... “ S, 9 Cedar R.ipnis, Iowa .... “ 10, 11 Iowa Citv, Iowa .......“	13,14
Davenport, low.i ......“	15,16
Muscatine, Iowa .......“	17
Burlington, Iowa ......“	19,20
Fort Madison, Iowa . Oct.
Keokuk, Iowa .	.
Keosauqua, lowti .... “
Ottumwa, low.i ......“
Baines (itv, low.i ...••
Albia, Iowa .	 *■
Cbautoti, Iowa ......“
Leon, Iowa...........“
Indianola, Iowa ......“
lies Moines, Iowa ...Nov.
21
23
24
26
27
2.S, 29
30
31
2,3
Fort Wayne. Ind. .. Sept. 27. 28 Chicago, IB. _____Sept. 30-OU. 3
Stevens Poiat, Wis.	-Oct.	5. 6
Minneapolis Minn.......“	9, 10
St. Paul, Minn. _______“	12,13
Medfonl, Minn. -.......“	14.15
Fargo, N. Kak. ........ ** 17,18
Steele, X. Dak. _______“	20
Glendhe, Mont.........Oct.	22
Mlle, Citv, Mont........“	23
.’’cut.........“	24
Medicine 1 r:ke. Mont. “	20,27
Glasgow, Mont...........“	2S
Turnci, Mont............“	29
Havre, Mont.............“	30,51
Valier, Mont..........Nov.	2, 3
A. H. MACMILLAN
Brandonville. W.Va. Sept	26	Hopewell, Va		...Oct.	14
Hagerstown. Md	“	28. 29	Petersburg, Va. . .		“	15.16
Winchester. Va. 		“	30	Newport News, Va.	.... “	17,18
Gore, Va. _	 ..Oct.	1	Hampton, Va		.... ••	20
Front Royal. Va. .„ “	2	Norfolk. Va		.... “	21-24
Mt. Crawford. Va	“	5	Suffolk, Va 		<<	26
Waynesboro. Va	“	6	Capion, Va		It	27
Charlottesville, Va	“	7.8	South Boston, Va.	. **	28
Green Spring. Va.	“	9	Chatham. Va		.... “	29
Richmond, Va.	“	10, 11	Danville, Va		....	30. 31
Ruther Glen, Va.	“	13	Clarkton, Va			..Nov.	2
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Louisville, Ky..Sept. 26, 27	Brownwood, Tex.	...
Paducah, Tex..........“	29	Priddy, Tex.......
Little Kock, Ark.....Oct. 13 Lamkin, Tex.............
Foil Worth, Tex.......“	5,6	Dublin, Tex. .	..
Dowie, 'lex..........."	7,8	Do Leon, Tex......
Mineral Wells, Tex....“	9	Ranger, Tex.	.	.
Breckenridge, Ter.....“	10,11	Ginnburv, Tex.	.	.
Abilene, Tex-.........“	13,11	Gatesville, Tex.	.	..
Cljde, Tex............“	15	Temple, 'J ex.....
Coleman, Tex..........«	16,17	Rosebud, Tex......
...Oct. 19, 20 . . - 21. 22
.. ..	23
..... "	24
. •'	26
,,
.. “	28
.... "	2'1
... " 30. Bl
.Nov. 2
A. S. WRIGHT
Richmond, Ind ......Sept. 26. 27
Brookville. Ind.......“	29
Green-bui;:.' Ind.- ...	. . “	30
Lawrenceburg. Ind.	..Oct. 1
Madison, Ind 			.... "	2, 3
Sejinour, Ind		.... “	5
Bedford. IniJ		... “	6, 7
Salem, Ind		.... “	’ 8
Dexter, Ind		... "	9
Cannelton, Ind		.... “ 10,11
Evansville, Ind.	...	Oct.	13	11
I'ctiisburg, Ii <1......-	15
Vimcuncs, Ind...........“	i<;
Linton, Ind ............“	17. Ls
Dugger, Ind ............“	2(1,2 1
Jasonville, Ind ........“	22,2 1
Tei i<. Danie, Ind .....“	2 1 2.5
Biazil, Ind.............“	27.2 1
Bloomington, Ind	“	2'i. ,;<)
Nashville, Ind....Oct. 31, Nov. 1
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE O TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:I3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and Without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty ami privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of nuthoiity, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the I,ord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and tho establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
BIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in tho Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and all people
of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authoiity for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites caicful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It docs not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1,00; Canvda and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Au.siraiasiv, and Sonit Africa. 7-,. American remittance', should ho made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Han't Draft. Can.ulmu, BntiJi, South African end Australasian remittance-, should be made direct to the rtspective branch olliees. Remittances from countriot other limn llio-m mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn olhee, but by Intel national Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..............34	Craven Terraco, London, W. 2, England
Canadian.........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Outturn, Canada
Australasian , . 7 Beresford Hoad, Strathllcld, N. S. W., Austinlia South Afi icon........Boston House, Cape Town, .South Af.iea
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear tn several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity aio unable to pay tho sub-ci iplion pn.o may have The Watchto-irrr fieo upon wiitten application to the publishers, mode once each year, stating the le.isoii for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the wntfe-i application once each year is requited by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent onlv when requested. Change of address, when requested, rani bo expected to appear on addn'ss label wlllun one month. A renewal blank (entiying notice <d iwinlmn)  wll be sent with the journal one month before the subscription e-vplics.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y, under the Act of Match S, mrt).
"KING OF KINGS"
The next testimony peiiud, October 2-10 inclusive, will be world wide, coextensive with the earthly realm of the King of kings, after whose title the period is named. The publication now of the book litchis in many languages makes it appiopriate for this book to be concentrated on then, the same to be offered together with a seli covered booklet. Other details of the service have been published in the Informant, which please consult. Your propitiations and arrangements completed, then carry on as to the King of kings. Your prompt report will be uvvaitcd.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, notice is hereby given that tho annual business meeting of the said Society will he held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock u.m., Monday, November 1, 1937, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH
The Society now manutaetures and has to offer a light-weight phonograph, which is 14 by 13 by 5 inches in size, and covered with brown cloth and having rounded coiners. It weighs 9 pounds 13 ounces. With the three phonogiaph discs which can be carried tn it, it weighs 12 pounds 6 ounces. The volume of sound is Strong, and the tone is of the best quality. As shipped out trom
our factory, the phonograph is timed propet ly, at 78 r.p.m., and should be checked from tune to time. This model, including three discs, is otfeied on a contribution of $10 00; without the three dises, &8.00. Remittances should uccompany ordeis. Also specify the particular discs wanted.
REMITTANCES
Enclosing coin or currency with an order for books or other publications often results in disappointment when the sender is notified that neither order nor remittance has been received by us. In this day of disturbed financial conditions oven the use of cheeks involves a needless risk. We suggest that every one use the money order (cither postal or cxpiess). Keep each money order receipt for reference. For all remittances the money order should he made payable to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, v. ith a memorandum attached ns to how much h di-Mii’d for The ITatchtower, for The (le’Arn Age, or for anything eke. Do not remit to Intel national Bible Students Association.
CONCERNING MAIL
All mail pertaining to matteis of the Society should be addic<scd to tho Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, not to individuals. This insuies proper handling and atten'ion. .Some of the brethren think that because they speak a foicign tongue they must address their Ictteis to some individual at the oliie;-. This should never be done. The Society will give attention in due course to all letters addressed to it, regardless of language.
Vol. LVIII	October 1, 1937	No. 10
HIS "WORK” AND HIS “ACT”
“As I have done to Shiloh.”—Jer. 7:1-1.
PART 3
JEHOVAH announced his ultimatum to the people of Jerusalem, sending it by his servant Jeremiah. He gave that people time to amend their ways and to respond properly to his ultimatum. He had tolerated that unfaithful nation for a long while. The time had now come when there must be a showdown for Jerusalem. That was a prophetic picture of "Christendom”, the unfaithful crowd that claims to be the people of God; and to "Christendom” now is sent the ultimatum of Jehovah God, and what Jeremiah declared applies more particularly to "Christendom”. "And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord, If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you, to hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent unto you, both rising up early, and sending them, but ye have not hearkened; then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.”—Jer. 2G:4-G.
2 Let the present-day servants of Jehovah take note of this fact, that Jeremiah was not to utter his own opinion as to what should come to pass; nor was lie to volunteer his advice as to what the Israelites should do. He was to deliver God’s message and give the people to understand that the only way of escape was the way which the Lord had pointed out to them through his Word. A self-important man, ambitious to shine in the eyes of others, either of that day or of the present time, would attempt to convey to the people the conclusion that he, the man, was or is “a wise one”, giving infallible advice to the people. Today some who profess to be the followers of Christ Jesus assume that very attitude, that they may appear important. Jehovah’s witnesses arc not to add to nor to delete any part of God’s message. It is his ultimatum, and not the ultimatum of man. Do not go to some individual and tell him that he is of the Devil and is going to be destroyed. Say that Jehovah announces his purpose and that purpose is, as set forth in his Word, to soon destroy all religionists, all hypocrites, and all who remain on the side of the Devil, and that He has provided a way of escape and that way is for each individual to seek God and his righteousness,
291
which is administered through Christ Jesus the Redeemer. Each individual must measure for himself and determine for himself whether he is on the side of God or the side of the Devil. To condemn the people is not the purpose of Jehovah’s witnesses. Their duty is to declare God’s message, and that only. A debate or argument with some false prophet would not be out of the way, when this is done publicly for the purpose of enabling the people to see the truth; but singling out individuals, and saying to them what shall be their end, is an improper thing to do.
•The religionists of Jerusalem attending and supporting the temple service, being self-righteous, would appear to be very indignant by reason of being told by Jeremiah in the presence of others that God’s judgment was about to be executed upon them. No doubt those practitioners of the Jews’ religion, the clergy in particular, concluded that the message delivered by Jeremiah was likely to cause a riot and for that reason was subversive and should not be heard, and hence Jeremiah must be silenced. They would reason: "Why should we, who arc the leaders and teachers of Israel, be disturbed and have our people disturbed by this man Jeremiah?” It is exactly so today, that the clergy and the principal ones of their Hock, who practice religion for personal gain, become very indignant because of the message of God’s Word that is now delivered by his witnesses. The indignant clergy induce the courts to 1’ulc that the message delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses is subversive and tends to disturb the peace and quietude of the nation and is seditious, and that those witnesses who utter the message should be punished and the publication of the message prohibited. It is the will of God that the religionists should have no reason to plead ignorance or lack of knowledge of his coming wrath upon his cnemie>. Therefore he commands his witnesses to say to them as did Jeremiah: ‘If you will not hearken unto the Lord, and walk in his ways which he has set before you, then God will take action, as he has declared. The responsibility rests upon you.’ The religionists of today have the Bible, which is the Word of God, and now they arc reminded that the Bible is the only
292
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
proper guide and that their refusal to hear and to obey God’s law, as set forth in Ilis Word, the Bible, estops them from ever thereafter pleading ignorance of what God will do to them, especially when their attention is directly called to the prophecies. Several years previous to the coming of Jeremiah to Jerusalem with the message of Jehovah, God had caused the book of the law to be found and brought to light, and the king caused it to be read in the hearing of the people, and the people agreed to obey. (2 Ki. 22:3-20; 23:1-3) Likewise for forty years prior to 1918 God caused the “Elijah work” to be done by his servants by bearing the message of Ilis kingdom to the people. For years “Christendom” has had the Bible, and, in the past fifty years and more, millions of Bibles and books and tracts have been published and distributed, calling attention to the Bible prophecies, which announce God’s purpose toward the pimples of earth. Since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple in 1918 hundreds of millions of books and tracts have been distributed amongst the people, specifically calling attention of the religionists of “Christendom” to Jehovah’s declared purpose by and through Christ Jesus to destroy all opposition to his kingdom. “Christendom,” therefore, has received the ultimatum and is still receiving the message declaring the same.
4	The Israelites were a typical people, and the prophecy was written and uttered really to be applied to “Christendom”, the antitypical people who claim to be God’s people on the earth. Jehovah says to them now: ‘If j’ou will not hear me, your punishment shall follow.’ Why does God give them such an emphatic warning, seeing, as he states, “ye have not hearkened” ? The reason is that they may be duly informed and may therefore bear their own iniquity. Their coming destruction is nobody’s fault but their own, and the only way for the servants of God to relieve themselves of responsibility is to deliver to “Christendom” the message of God’s warning as commanded. (Ezek. 33: 8-12) No one could have any reasonable excuse to say that God has taken snap judgment of them. They cannot say that God is not long-suffering. Jehovah gives them ample warning and ample time to repent, and for that reason the “strange work”, the witness work, goes on and will continue until God's time to begin the destruction.
5	The religionists at Jerusalem took great pride in the temple. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their religious supporters take great pride in the so-called “Catholic church” and in their hideously constructed cathedrals. God established the Israelites as his people. The Roman Catholic church has voluntarily assumed to be the people of God on earth, posing as such. Both the Israelites and the Catholic Hierarchy point with pride to the material so-called “church” building. This is further shown by the words of the prophet Ezekiel, who wrote: “Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will pro
fane my sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left shall fall by the sword. . . . And when this cometh, ye shall know that I am the Lord God.” (Ezek. 24:21-24) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization occupies a position exactly similar to that occupied by the religionists of Jerusalem. Jehovah gives them an ultimatum and declares: “If ye will not hearken to me, . . . then will I make this house like Shiloh.” That declaration of truth sounded so strange to the religionists of Jerusalem that it was beyond belief. They would reason like this: “Our temple is not a mere tent or temporary residence, such as our fathers had at Shiloh. Now for God to let that temple, which bears his name, to be wrecked, would be to let his name be reproached, and such a thing is preposterous. It is too strange to be worthy of belief, and this man Jeremiah, who thus states, is not to be believed.” The religious leaders of “Christendom” today reason in like manner. Their clergy pooh-pooh the idea of destruction coming upon them and say that Jehovah’s witnesses arc Communists operating under the cloak of religion. In this way the reproach that fell upon Christ Jesus and his disciples, tor delivering the truth, now falls upon Jehovah’s willing witnesses.
8 Jehovah further declared that he would ‘make Jerusalem a curse to all nations’. The religious Jews did not believe that declaration, but God afterwards performed exactly his purpose and as he had foretold. All nations have cursed Israel since, and at Armageddon all the nations will curse the religionists of “Christendom”. Now God’s “holy nation” and all people of good will who proclaim the truth pronounce God’s curse upon “Christendom” as commanded, and for doing this in obedience to God’s command the clergy and the principal of their flock denounce Jehovah’s witnesses. This was foreshadowed by what is recorded, to wit: “So the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the Lord.” (Jcr. 26:7) When the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their supporters hear the message of God delivered by his faithful witnesses today they say: “Our religious susceptibilities are greatly shocked and our religious pride is jarred by the utterance of these words of Jehovah’s witnesses against our time-honored and most holy and yencrablc institution; and their words are preposterous and are strange beyond belief.” That is what the Jews said; and that is what the Catholic and other religionists now say. The priests of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergy of the religionists, being so much concerned about their jobs and revenue arising therefrom, feel greatly outraged because of the message proclaimed by Jehovah’s witnesses, which tells of the disaster coming upon organized religion. Being made to appear as false prophets or preachers, such
October 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
293
religious leaders are very indignant, and they denounce Jehovah’s witnesses before the people, both by word of mouth and through the press. The supporters - of these religious institutions say: “How strange that any one should speak disparagingly of our great church and our great clergymen! Who is like the great Catholic church? Who are like our learned and great clergymen?” Today when Jehovah’s witnesses call on the ultrareligionists and tell them of God’s purpose, as expressed in his Word, they say: “It is strange that you would come to us. We are Christians and do not need to hear anything from you. Go to the heathen. Our church is all we need. We have the Bible in the house and our preacher tells us what it means. Strange that sueh persons as you would try to tell us anything.” On the contrary, those of good will receive Jehovah’s witnesses gladly and are anxious to learn; and thus the dividing of the people progresses.
T Was it a “strange work” in which the young prophet Jeremiah was engaged? Did it appear strange and absurd that God would send by the man Jeremiah such an “impossible” message as he was delivering? That was the effect upon the Jew religionists. They worked themselves up to a heated indignation, even as the clergy of this day do: “Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, took him, saying, Thou shalt surely die.” (Jer. 2G:8) The message which Jeremiah delivered was very unpopular, and he had not shunned to declare it because of its unpopularity, lie had not held back because of fear of bodily harm to himself. In Jehovah’s name, and in His strength, he delivered the message commanded, and that message was not censored nor did he ask permission or license to speak it. Note the order in which action was taken: first, by the priests, then by the false prophets; and then the common people were moved to act. It was the clergy of the Jews that provoked a riot, and no doubt they claimed that Jeremiah was the one to blame for the riot. It is so today. The message delivered first makes the priests mad, and then they go into court and testify that such a message, although it is in the Bible, when delivered to the people is likely to produce a riot. They well know that they are lying, but in order to justify themselves they seize the first opportunity to start a riot and lead a mob, and then blame Jehovah’s witnesses for the wrongful acts of the priests and clergymen.
8	The religious leaders amongst the Jews should properly have reasoned that if Jeremiah was delivering a false message in the name of Jehovah God, God would punish him for it. God did punish the false prophet llananiah with death because he “taught rebellion against the Lord”. (Jer. 28:16,17) The Jewish clergy by their action showed that they did not ex
pect God to kill Jeremiah as a false prophet and a blasphemer of God’s name, and therefore they concluded that they must take the matter into their own hands, and they induced the credulous people who supported them to join in the persecution, and they arranged for and expected to get a verdict and an execution of Jeremiah according to their own taste. Therefore they organized a mob and rushed upon Jeremiah and howled, saying to him: “Thou shalt surely die.”
’ Today the Homan Catholic priests and their supporters follow exactly a similar course. If those preachers believed for one moment that Jehovah’s witnesses deliver a false and blasphemous message against Almighty God, they would say: “Let God punish them, and surely he will do so.” Well knowing that Jehovah’s witnesses speak the truth, and that the clergy have no answer thereto, the clergymen take the matter into their own hands, incite the credulous people against Jehovah’s witnesses, and influence public officials to arrest and cruelly punish them; and then if occasion offers, the clergy start a riot and lead a mob to inflict further indignities upon those who represent the Lord. All religionists work along the same line in carrying out persecution of God's witnesses, because all religion emanates from the Devil. Today the Catholic priests induce the judges of the courts that claim to be descendants of Israel to inflict unjustly a cruel punishment upon Jehovah’s witnesses. Sueh cases are actually taking place in New Jersey and other parts of the earth. God caused the record to be made concerning Jeremiah, foretelling what is to conic to pass and is coming to pass today, and this record enables the ones devoted to Jehovah to understand and appreciate why they thus must suffer reproach at the hands of religionists.
10	The Jewish clergy denied that Jeremiah was God’s prophet, authorized to speak in his name: “Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the Lord.” (Jer. 26: 9) By their very words these Jew religionists admitted that they had received the message that the fate which had befallen Shiloh should come upon them; and that message made them very mad, because it made them appear in the eyes of the people as great sinners. They considered themselves very righteous, and in the eyes of the people they wished to appear righteous, and were indignant against anyone who would intimate otherwise. Those Pharisees were going through the motion of serving God in the temple. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other priests take exactly the same position today. They go through motions, in which they claim to be serving God. They put on flat hats, lace aprons, long robes, and have their bloated faces photographed and put upon the motion-picture screens, and people arc shown as kissing their toes or rings, in order to create
294
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
an air of superiority so far as they are concerned, and to show them as very righteous and holy. Then they publish in their newspapers that Jehovah’s witnesses claim that God is going to destroy all religion; and this message from God’s Word they denounce as absurd, impossible, blasphemous and unbelievable. But they are not willing to let God himself judge his own witnesses. They are concerned about keeping themselves in position that they can further exploit the people. The clergy say to each other and to their congregations: “Are not we the chosen of God? arc we not performing service in the house of God? Arc you not bringing your money here and having a part in this service of the house of God? Is it not absurdly strange that any person should go about and presume to say that God will destroy us?” They admit that they have received the notice of warning, and for that reason they cannot escape responsibility. Those religionists arc fulfilling prophecy long ago written; but they are too blindly prejudiced to hear the prophecy or to read what God put in his Word long ago. The Devil incites them to anger, hatred, and malice, and to the cruel punishment of the witnesses of the Lord.
11	The Jewish clergy, by haranguing the people, worked up great excitement and indignation against Jeremiah : “And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the Lord.” The Devil at all times has used his religious priests in the same manner. When Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God, he who was without sin or fault and who never did a wrong, stood before the court falsely accused of the high crimes of sedition and treason, it was the clergy who there demanded his conviction and his lifeblood: “And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed. And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.” (Luke 23:23,24) It was the religious priests who then and there persuaded the mob to demand the lifeblood of Jesus Christ in preference to that of a confessed murderer; “But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.”— Matt. 27:20.
11	The Devil’s religious agents never change, but act in a like manner, because they are all his sons and do the will of their father. (John 8:44) Today it is the clergy, and particularly those of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, who demand that Jehovah’s witnesses be cruelly punished for the alleged crimes of sedition, the distribution of so-called “perverse” literature, and other “offenses”, when in fact these witnesses of the Lord are guilty of doing nothing wrong. What they do is in obedience to God’s commandment to declare his message in order that the will of God may be done as he has purposed it. These truths are emphasized in order that those who are sincere, and who desire to know what is right and to understand what is going
on, may see and know and understand that the religionists arc instruments of the Devil, deceiving the people and defaming God’s holy name. It is for this reason the witnesses of Almighty God today suffer persecution. They are doing no wrong. On the contrary, they are doing exactly right, and the Devil hates that which is right and true, and seeks to destroy those who will obey God. Jehovah permits this in order that the enemy Satan may have full opportunity to attempt to make good his wicked challenge and that men being subjected to his persecution may have opportunity to maintain their integrity toward God. Ultimately the victory is with Jehovah completely, through Christ Jesus, and those who stand with the Lord will have part in that victory.
ia When Jeremiah was accused by the clergy he was at the temple. The politicians, who were also religionists and who appeared to be less zealous and pertinacious about religious matters, were not at the temple at that particular moment. Manifestly they were at the political headquarters, indulging in some game or some scheme to further their interests; and so the clergy saw to it that word was taken to the political and judicial element as quickly as possible; as the record states: “When the princes of Judah heard these things, then they came up from the king’s house unto the house of the Lord, and sat down in the entry of the new gate of the Lord’s house.” (Jcr. 2G:10) Those princes, rulers and judicial officers at this point of the drama arc seen seated at the new gate, which was the usual place for holding court and rendering judgment. The testimony against the offender was produced by the clergymen and such witnesses as the clergy might hire to testify. Now call to mind the many similar scenes that have been enacted in Germany, Quebec, New Jersey, and other places within the past few years; which events have been published in the Golden Age magazine. In every instance it is the religionists, desiring to further their own selfish interests, that instigate and carry on the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, wrongfully charging them with the violation of law. They induce men to falsely swear against Jehovah’s witnesses, that a conviction may be had. The witnesses of the Lord carry the message to the people, and then the clergy connive with certain ones of their flocks, who arc void of any sense of right and justice, and these are caused or induced to arrest and hale into court the witnesses of the Lord, and there testimony is wrongfully produced and the law improperly applied in order that a conviction may be had.
14	It is apparent from the record that Jeremiah now stood before the princes or the magistrates. And who arc his accusers demanding his death? True to the rule announced, the Devil had his clergymen there vehemently crying against Jeremiah and demanding his life: “Then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes, and to all the people, saying, This
October 1, 1937
ffKe WATCHTOWER
295
man is worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.”—J er. 26:11.
” Mark this, that those priests or prophets or preachers of Jerusalem did not charge Jeremiah with misrepresenting God. It was the duty of the priests, enjoined upon them by God’s law, to look after the things pertaining to God’s Word, and had they been sincere they would have done so, relied upon and stood by the Word of God. They well knew that they had nothing on Jeremiah, but they demanded his death for the reason assigned by them, that ‘Jeremiah had prophesied against the city’; whereas he had done nothing of the kind. He had pronounced Jehovah’s ultimatum against the wicked eity; and had that message been properly received, the clergymen would have been concerned with what they found in the prophecies and the manner in which they should obey God. They ignored God’s Word and, like the clergymen of the present day, they relied ujx>n the traditions of men. It is always the clergy of the religionists that demand the lifeblood of those who dare tell the truth as commanded by the Lord God. No moderate punishment for such offenders satisfies them. They desire to be rid of everyone who calls in question their acts and points out the crookedness of the clergy, as declared by God’s Word. (Matt. 27:20) Before that court the religious clergy assumed the responsibility of prosecutors. As such they put in their case against Jeremiah, and according to them Jeremiah was unpatriotic and a dangerous man and should not be allowed to speak, and the only way to silence him was to put him to death. The modern-day clergy’, particularly the Itoman Catholic Hierarchy crowd, accuse Jehovah’s witnesses and say of them that they are unpatriotic and are dangerous to the welfare of the people, that the literature they distribute is seditious, and that these witnesses should not be permitted to speak their piece lest the country all turn against the clergy and the politicians, and therefore they must be silenced and put out of the way. Jehovah’s witnesses are denounced as “reds”, because that is the worst name at the present time that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy could tack onto any man. The clergy publish in their own papers, and cause the political newspapers also to publish, that Jehovah’s witnesses are dangerous and should be destroyed. A propaganda dispatch of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, sent from Berlin, Germany, and published in the Catholic papers, also appeared in the New York Herald Tribune of January 11, 1937, and which press dispatch classes Jehovah’s witnesses as Communists and as gross criminals. From that dispatch the following is quoted:
“An illegal German section of the International Bible Students Association, an organization which has American and British sections, has developed in recent years, and especially in 193G, into a ‘serious menace’ to the Nazi state, Dr. Wilhelm Krohn, minis
terial director of the Ministry of Justice, declared in a review of criminal justice in Germany in 1936, just published. It was printed in the ‘Deutsche Justiz’, organ of the Ministry.
“The members of the association, whose American section is headed by Judge Joseph F. Rutherford, believe in verbal inspiration from the Bible, and seek to apply the prophecies of such books as Daniel and Revelation to current history. On the basis of Biblical passages the members of the German section, which was banned early in the Nazi regime, have predicted the collapse of the government of Chancellor Adolf Hitler.
“The body has now become the refuge, Krohn asserted, of ‘various elements hostile to the state, and, if not checked, will soon develop into a branch Communist institution’. Recent information concerning the activities of the association in this country has been turned over to public prosecutors, he said, with orders to use every means, under the emergency decrees of February 28, 1933, to bring the offending members to justice.”
16 The Roman Catholic papers spread such wicked and false reports throughout the world, and at the same time that hypocritical pries) ly crowd refuse to defend their own doctrines for fear the people will see the frauds of that institution and withdraw from it. Although millions of American citizens demanded such a debate and defense of the Roman Catholic doctrines, the Hierarchy absolutely refused to attempt to defend the same. One Catholic priest remarked to a party who was listening to him: “Why should we be fools enough to debate? If we do, we are sunk.” Why is the enmity of the Catholic organization so expressed against Jehovah’s witnesses? It is because they tell the truth; and for that same reason the religionists sought the death of Jeremiah.
JEREMIAH’S DEFENSE
” Jeremiah was set on doing one thing, to wit, faithfully obeying Jehovah in delivering the message he had been commanded and commissioned to deliver. He was blind to everything else. Having heard the testimony against him, he proceeded with his defense, and in doing so he did not try to hedge or compromise, lie made no apology for what he had been doing. He told the plain truth, and he told them so that the court and all the people present could hear it: “Then spake Jeremiah unto all the princes, and to all the people, saying, The Lord sent me to prophesy against this house, and against this city, all the words that ye have heard.”—Jer. 26:12.
18 He had no hope of doing the priests or the preachers any good by what he had done or was doing; but that he might accomplish some good in behalf of the common people that were sincere he did have hope. He explained to his accusers and other hearers that he was under strict command from Almighty God to deliver
296
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the specific message that he had delivered against the religionists, including their house and city. He made no claim or pretense that it was his own message, based upon his own opinion, but told them plainly that the message came from the Most High. He freely admitted that he had prophesied publicly to the people. He made a brief and succinct statement of the message, which God had commanded him to deliver, and this he did in order that the court might be fully advised of the facts and that those of the people who were present and desiring to hear the truth might hear, see and understand that he was the representative of Almighty God, as he stated. By making his defense in this manner Jeremiah performed his duty and obligation, and thereafter the responsibility was upon those who heard him speak. They must be answerable to and answer Almighty God. Otherwise stated, God had chosen a faithful man to deliver his message, and that man, Jeremiah, had delivered it strictly in accordance with the command. This sets a precedent for Jehovah’s witnesses, whom Jeremiah at that time pictured. The witnesses arc not to act arrogantly nor express hatred or ill will, but they are to tell the truth and tell it plainly, without fear, therefore with boldness, trusting wholly in Jehovah God, and then let the responsibility rest where it belongs, to wit, upon those who hear.
*• Jeremiah then told the court and the audience what would be the result if they gave heed to Jehovah’s warning: “Therefore now amend your ways, and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God ; and the Lord will repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you.” (Jer. 26:13) By this means Jeremiah gave the message of Jehovah to the judicial and political elements, as well as to the preachers and the common people. His prophetic words were in fact a friendly warning to those who would “hear” He was sounding the alarm of the impending danger, which could be averted in only one way, and that was by obedience to Almighty God. Those who heard him speak should have been thankful to be thus warned. Jeremiah stuck to the point, that evil and disaster were just ahead and would fall upon both the temple and the city unless God’s message was heeded. The chief purpose of this prophetic drama at this point was to foreshadow what should come to pass in the time in which we are now living. Under Jehovah’s direction Jeremiah thereby announced the precedent by which all the servants of Jehovah are to be guided, and that is, a full determination to speak the message as God has commanded it to be spoken, and not attempt to take an independent course based upon one's own conclusion, but to proceed to obey God’s instructions implicitly.
*° When Jehovah’s witnesses are arrested in this day and brought before the courts, they should speak frankly, telling the courts and the hearers, religionists or uon-religionists, of the divine commission and com
mand to them to speak God’s message of warning to the people; that they are not attempting to deliver the message of any man, and that they are not responsible for what is to follow, but that the message proceeds from the Almighty God and they are merely instruments and servants to do his will and are doing it only as they are commanded; that it is not the prerogative of Jehovah’s witnesses to inflict punishment upon the people or to do harm to anyone; that they arc only the messengers to make known the truth, that those who hear may take whatsoever course they desire. The witness of the Lord is not to stop and consider what worldly courts might do to them. As the commissioned servants of Jehovah they are in his hands, and nothing can befall them except by his permission as long as the witnesses remain faithful and true to Almighty God.
21	The testimony in defense being admitted before the court, Jeremiah then made a brief argument, showing that he had violated no law and was not worthy of death. He fully realized that he was in the custody of the law, and therefore he said to the court: “As for me, behold, I am in your hand; do with me as secmcth good and meet unto you.” (Jer. 26:14) He put the responsibility right where God would have him do it. He was now speaking to the highest court of the land, and from the decision of that court Jeremiah had no appeal to any earthly court. lie told the court, in substance, that he was willing to take whatsoever God permitted them to inflict upon him as a punishment, because he was doing only what God had commissioned him to do. That court would have no power over Jeremiah if Jehovah should interfere and prevent them from exercising power against him. He was Jehovah’s servant; and the same rule applied to him as did to Jesus, who said before the court where he was tried: “Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above.” (John 19:11) The same rule applies to those who now arc in Christ and faithfully following in his footsteps and delivering the testimony as Almighty God has commanded. The remnant and the Jonadabs, that is, all who arc trusting in the Lord, must keep in mind at all times that their only place of safety is to remain true and faithful to Almighty God as Jesus and the other witnesses in the past have done. They are not to put their trust in princes or in any man. (Ps. 146:3) They arc not to attempt to compromise or soften Jehovah’s Word with the hope of being let off easier by the courts of the land. The remnant have consecrated their lives t<? be faithful unto the Lord God, even unto death, and it is to them that the Lord Jesus says: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.”—Rev. 2:10, A.A’.P.
22	Jeremiah did not hesitate to warn the court of the responsibility resting upon that distinguished body. “But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon
October J, 1927
WATCHTOWER.
297
yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the Lord hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears.” (Jer. 26:15) That was not a threat, but a friendly warning. He was not abashed because he was in the presence of high officials, nor did he act arrogantly or unreasonably. It was but fair for him to tell the court that the responsibility for the final judgment upon him rested with them. To punish Jeremiah would be fighting against God, and the members of the court must be responsible to God for their acts. The mere killing of Jeremiah would not end the matter. The Israelites had been willfully disobedient to Almighty God and must suffer the consequences, and Jeremiah was merely informing them of what was coming to pass. The clergy would argue, and, without doubt, did argue, that the claim of this man Jeremiah and the following of what he had advised would not save the city, and many of the people would follow the advice of the clergy, which was the worst that could be given to them, as the clergy’ usually give the very worst kind of adviec.
23	All faithful servants of Almighty God must and do take a course similar to that taken by Jeremiah and the apostles of Jesus Christ. When the apostles stood before the courts of the same city, accused of sedition by reason of preaching the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, they remained faithful and true according to the precedent announced in connection with Jeremiah. The court hearing Jeremiah’s case must decide, and so Jeremiah told them in effect: ‘You must determine whether I should obey God or these hypocritical clergymen.’ He left no doubt as to whom he would obey, and he told the court that if lie were put to death they would bring innocent blood upon themselves and upon the city, and upon the inhabitants thereof. Likewise the faithful apostles said to the court on a similar occasion: ‘‘Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:19,20) The true and correct way is thus marked out for Jehovah’s witnesses of the present time.
24	Without a question of doubt God caused the record to be made concerning faithful men who, in the past, served him to the end that the recorded facts might serve as a precedent and as aid and comfort to the faithful witnesses of the Lord now on the earth. In recent months many of God’s faithful servants have been arrested and brought before the courts at the instance of the ultrareligionists. These faithful witnesses of Jehovah, although innocent, have been convicted upon testimony that was either perjured or entirely immaterial and aside from the issue raised by the indictment. They have been convicted and imprisoned without any just cause or excuse. A number of them have been convicted without a word of testimony being heard. God has furnished the sure guide
for such faithful witnesses, and those who are following this divine guide are rejoicing, regardless of what the result in the courts may be. Let each one thus charged have in mind the course of conduct pursued by the prophet Jeremiah and later by the apostles John, Peter and others. Let the courts and all the audience hear that God has commanded his message to be delivered to the people, and with calmness and sobriety say, in substance: ‘‘My conviction and punishment, because of my obedience to the command of Almighty God, will be entirely wrong, unjust, and will constitute fighting against God. What I say and have said can do no harm to anyone; but to inflict punishment on me because I give you a friendly warning, as commanded by Almighty God, is thus taking a great responsibility upon yourselves, and you must account to God for your conduct, and his day of reckoning is near at hand. I am entirely innocent of any wrongdoing, and it is my duty to warn you that my punishment by you God will not permit to go unnoticed. You will suffer the consequences at his hand, because no one can successfully oppose the Almighty God.”
25	The case of Jeremiah, at this point, was before the court for decision. It appears that the people who stood by and heard Jeremiah also had something to say and that the court respectfully heard their say ; and after giving due consideration, the court agreed with the common people, and then addressed themselves to the clergy who stood by with malicious hearts, seeking the lifeblood of God’s faithful witness, and the court declared Jeremiah was not guilty: “Then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and to the prophets, This man is not worthy to die; for he hath spoken to us in the name of the Lord our God.”—Jer. 26:16.
24	The clergymen present were not yet satisfied. They would insist on the lifeblood of Jeremiah, and proceeded to use all influence they eotild bring to bear upon the court. Some members of that court weie still wavering in the balance, while others seemed to see more clearly the right of the matter. A prince named Ahikam was present, and may have been a member of the court before which Jeremiah was being tried. (Verse 24) He took the side of Jeremiah, and the final decision of the court was doubtless largely influenced by this man Ahikam. The court took into consideration that Jeremiah was serving God and had spoken in the name of God, and therefore they refused to give heed to the demands of the bloodthirsty clergy. For a certainty there is a reason for the divine record showing that the court gave due consideration to Jeremiah’s defense, and that reason sets a proper precedent for judges of courts of the present time to follow; and the fact that the present-day judges, many of them at least, do not follow that precedent makes them bloodguilty with the clergy. Such judges of courts as yield to the influence of the malicious
293
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
clergy are classed with those named by Jeremiah as “the principal of the flock” and shall suffer a fate similar to that of the clergy. (Jer. 25:36) A number of the magistrates of New Jersey, and some in other places, in order to hide, if possible, their own faces, refuse to permit Jehovah’s witnesses to show from the Scriptures that they are commanded by Almighty God to go from house to house and proclaim Jehovah’s message. Those magistrates insist that the only question of fact and of law before the court is, “Did the defendant fail or refuse to first obtain a policeman’s permit? and if so, then the defendant is guilty of violating the commercial laws of the land and must suffer punishment.” Not only do those magistrates go exactly contrary to the Bill of Rights, to the Constitution of the United States and to the Constitution of New Jersey, which guarantee freedom of worship of Almighty God, but they even place the law of man above the law of Almighty God and openly and flagrantly insult Jehovah's name. Let them take notice that God will not permit their conduct to pass without consideration and due recompense. Many of those magistrates profess to be Christians and that they follow after the Lord; and for that reason they arc bound to take notice of the prophecies which the Lord has caused to be recorded in his Word. Jehovah never changes a rule for any person, be that man clergyman, high judicial official, politician or ordinary man. Some of the magistrates even ask men high in the Catholic church if the punishment promised to be inflicted upon the defendant is sufficient. They should ask also of such religionists, who claim to serve God, What docs your Bible say should be done?
*’ Before final decision was rendered in Jeremiah’s case some of the older men of the community were permitted to speak before the court and before the people. Doubtless Jeremiah’s trial had attracted wide attention, and the result was a division of the people, to some degree, a few taking Jeremiah’s side. Some of the men of more mature years and sound mind are designated as “elders”, and, says the record, “then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to all the assembly of the people, saying.” (Jer. 26:17) Those men, being Jews, whose duty it was to know the Scriptures, evidently were familiar with the events of the past. Then the elders were divided in their stand, but one of them speaking called attention to what had come to pass in the days of Hezekiah, and amongst other things he said: “Micah [Micaiah (Zf.P.); meaning ‘who is like Jehovah’ and therefore a servant of God] the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Zion shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.” (Jer. 26:18) Micah, or Micaiah, had delivered a message of importance similar to the message brought to the people by Jeremiah:
“Therefore for your sake shall Zion be ploughed up as a field, and Jerusalem shall become ruinous heaps, and the mount of the house, forest-covered high-places.” (Mic. 3:12, Leescr) The elders speaking here were trying to show the court and the people that prophecy that came to them like that of Jeremiah should be heeded and the Lord be let take care as to who should be punished.
28 King Hezekiah had humbled himself before God when he heard the message delivered by Micaiah, and was for that reason saved from disaster. (2 Chron. 32:26) He had given consideration to the words of God’s prophet; and therefore this elder now arguing before the court said: “Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to death? did he not fear the Lord, and besought the Lord, and the Lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we procure great c\ 11 against our souls.”—Jer. 26:19.
20 Here is another precedent which Jehovah’s witnesses arc counseled that such accused witnesses might follow, to wit; To cite the court to the instance recorded in the Bible where men have shown wisdom by giving heed to God’s warning, such as the elder did on this occasion. With propriety counsel might, cite the Second Psalm, in which the Lord warns the rulers to give heed now, since Christ has been enthroned. Jehovah’s witnesses are not attempting to wrong anyone by obeying the command of the Almighty God or giving God’s warning to the people; and this fact should be plainly put before the court. If it was wise for Hezekiah to give heed to the personal warning, judges of this day would do well to take a like course and leave it to Jehovah to determine who is right and who is wrong in connection with the proclamation of the message recorded in the Bible. How unwise and foolish it is for men sitting upon the judicial bench, or elsewhere, to attempt to override and push aside the Word of Almighty God! All persons who claim to serve God should keep in mind that the Almighty is supreme. The clergy have no right to insist on the punishment of men because such men believe and speak what the clergy do not wish to hear. To lie sure, the clergy will suffer the greater condemnation, because they ought to know better, but the judges and the politicians should sec to it that their decisions are not influenced by a desire to please the clergymen. No doubt Jehovah is permitting the present conditions to exist in order that the truth may be brought to the attention of the courts as well as the people. Therefore Jehovah’s witnesses should always bring betorc the court the fact that the work that they arc carrying on by going from house to house to preach the gospel is the sounding of a warning and is being done in obedience to God’s commandment, and that everyone must decide for himself whether he will obey man or will obey Almighty God. To attempt to silence the witnesses of Jehovah will not alleviate in the slightest
October 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
299
the suffering that is coming upon humanity, but, on the contrary, puts those who do hinder in a position where they arc certain to suffer destruction unless they repent.
80	There were other and opposing arguments which appear to have been made at Jeremiah’s trial. An elder supporting the position of the clergy cited the case of Urijah the prophet, who delivered a message like to that delivered by Jeremiah. The two prophets were no doubt acquainted. There was a difference in their course of conduct, however. Urijah proved to be fearful, and was not protected by the Lord; but Jeremiah stood firm, and was protected by the Lord. The man now speaking against Jeremiah and supporting the clergymen said: “And there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the Lord, Urijah the son of Shemaiahof Kirjath-jcarim, who prophesied against this city, and against this land, according to all the words of Jeremiah: and when Jchoiakim the king, with all his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death; but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt, And Jchoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him into Egypt: and they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jchoiakim the king, who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.”—Jer. 26:20-23.
81	The Scriptural record shows that Jehovah had two witnesses at one and the same time in the land and that their testimony agreed. It was at the time Jchoiakim was beginning his reign, and it appears that he wished to make a record that would make him popular with the religionists and show his zeal for the nation. Even though Urijah displeased the Lord by fleeing to Egypt, that was no justification for Jchoiakim to bring him back and kill him. Urijah was outside the jurisdiction of the ruler of Jerusalem, but Jchoiakim the king found it very easy to extradite Urijah and bring him back, with the full consent of the ruler of Egypt, who was also the agent of the Devil. The clergy were then howling for the lifeblood of Jehovah’s two prophets, and Urijah concluded it was best for him to run away, and his fear brought him into the snare completely. Jeremiah delivered the message from the Lord, similar to that delivered by Urijah, and instead of showing fear he stood his ground and said to his accusers: ‘I have delivered the message God sent me to deliver; now do what seems good to you.’ Jeremiah showed faith in God, and therefore no fear of man. Taking refuge in another part of Satan’s organization furnished no protection whatsoever to Urijah. And it also showed a lack of faith in God. It appears that Jehovah removed his protection from Urijah because of his fear of man. “The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe.” —Prov. 29: 25.
82	Urijah would as well have stood his ground and died there. He would then have died for his faithfulness, if he died at all. Fleeing into Egypt resulted in no good to him. It might well here be considered that Urijah pictured also the Elijah work, which ended in the death of that work in 1918, while Jeremiah pictured the Elisha work, and those engaged in. it, and who show their love for God by fearlessly and with boldness giving testimony to the name of the Most High. As for the king, Jchoiakim, who showed contempt for Jehovah and those representing him, it is written: “Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Jchoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory! He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.” (Jcr. 22:18,19) Likewise it will do no good to the high men of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their tools to defy Jehovah God now; and those who do will have a fate similar to that of Jchoiakim.
81 If Jeremiah would be executed, as Urijah. was executed, that would please the priests, prophets and other clergymen, as well as the spineless politicians. But the record reads: “Nevertheless, the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death.” (Jcr. 26: 24) That man Ahikam was not such a rabid religionist as others who attended Jeremiah’s trial. He stood for freedom of speech. The people who stood by and heard the trial were not in favor of killing Jeremiah, and Ahikam stood with them. The gist of the argument in favor of Jeremiah was that he was speaking what he claimed to be the message from Almighty God and which he doubtless believed was from God, and therefore he should not be put to death, even though his speech did “shock the religious susceptibilities” of the clergy. Without a doubt the priests or clergymen would have then organized a mob, if they could induce the people to stand with them and do the killing, and they would have taken the law into their own hands and killed Jeremiah without further delay; but Ahikam was not to shun the responsibility by acting as Pontius Pilate did toward Jesus.
88 In this day there arc some reasonable men amongst the politicians and judicial officers who arc unwilling to yield to the bloodthirsty demands of the clergy to rid the land of Jehovah’s witnesses. Regardless of what men may do, there is but one guide for the time followers of Christ Jesus. These arc sent forth by the Almighty God, and protection and salvation is in the hand of Jehovah and can be given by none other. It is the duty of Jehovah’s witnesses to obey God and let men do what they will, having in mind the words of Christ Jesus: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.”—Rev. 2:10, A.Ii.F.
300
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
TO HEATHENDOM
” Consideration of Jeremiah the twenty-seventh chapter is next here undertaken, and that chapter should be carefully read. In the preceding chapters Jehovah addressed his message to organized religionists, which message applies to those operating under the name of “Christian religion”, the practitioners of which claim to believe on and worship God and Christ. It appears that Armageddon, which is Jehovah’s “strange act”, begins with “Christendom” or “organized religion” falsely called “Christianity”, and that Armageddon will continue to the grand finale. In other words, the beginning of Armageddon will witness the destruction of the professional religionists, to be followed by the destruction of the heathen. In the same way the events recorded in the twenty-sixth chapter appear to be quickly followed by those recorded in the twenty-seventh. It appears from extraneous evidence that the time of the delivery of God’s message as set forth in chapter twenty-seven was in the year 614 B.C. Says the prophecy: “In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, came this word unto Jeremiah from the Lord.” (Jcr. 27:1) The name “Jehoiakim”, as appearing in this verse of the Scriptures, is evidently an error of the scribe. According to Kothcrluim, marginal rendering, the name is properly Zedckiah, instead of Jehoiakim. (Sec also verses 3,12 and 20 of the same chapter, showing that the message was proclaimed in the fourth year of Zedckiah, king of Judah.) Zedckiah also was a son of Josiah, and a brother of Jehoiakim. lie was the uncle of Jehoiachin, son of Jehoiakim. (2 Ki. 24:17, 18; Jer. 37:1) The time therefore is the same as that in Jeremiah 28:1.
“Jehovah dictated to his prophet the message set forth in the order in which this series of events must occur: First, the message to “organized religion” or so-called “organized Christianity ”, or “Christendom”; and, second, to heathendom. “Thus saith the Lord to me, Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck.” (Jer. 27:2) At this point Jeremiah was commanded to act at or go through a performance illustrating what God would bring to pass upon those forces who hate anything and everything with which the name of God is associated, that is, those who are moved with malice against everything that represents Jehovah God or everything that claims to represent him, and therefore a godless class. That class of creatures will maliciously exult over the destruction of religious organizations that claim to represent God, and will also exult over any punishment inflicted against true Christians, who in truth and in fact represent God. There are certain organizations of men on the earth today who despise anything and everything and all persons that name Jehovah God and Christ. Jesus. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy designates the Communists as such malicious haters, and then, out of mere cruel, malicious wickedness, the
Hierarchy also places Jehovah’s witnesses in the class with the Communists. Of course, they are wrong in this, because Jehovah’s witnesses have no part with the Communists or any other organization. The Communists have nothing in common with Jehovah’s witnesses, but, on the contrary, many Communists hate them. As an illustration: Russia destroyed “organized religion”, meaning the religious church organizations of that country, and Russia has never permitted Jehovah’s witnesses to uninterruptedly work and preach the gospel in that country. Millions of persons do not understand or appreciate that Jehovah’s witnesses are commissioned, as Jeremiah was commissioned, to deliver God’s message, and that they have nothing in common with any person or organization that is antiGod and anti-kingdom under Christ. It is important to keep in mind always that Satan is now making his last stand and desperately trying to carry out his wicked challenge made to Jehovah that he could cause all men to curse Him to his face. Satan’s purpose is to rule the world or ruin it; and seeing that Christ Jesus has been enthroned by Jehovah God as King of the world, and that therefore Satan’s rule from henceforth is limited, Satan desperately attempts to ruin the entire race, and in carrying out his purpose he inaugurates schemes to put one class against another and to destroy all. Jehovah’s witnesses have no fight with any individuals or any class of individuals. Their fight is against a hypocritical religion that causes the name of Jehovah God and his King to be defamed, and which misleads the people. Their fight is to expose the wickedness of Satan by holding up the truth of Almighty God’s Word that the people may sec the way of escape. Also the purpose of the message is to give warning to the evildoers so that they will be without excuse. The warning goes to all to the end that those who are of good will may flee to God’s organization and find refuge. It appears from the Scriptures that the order of Armageddon will be, first, the destruction of religious systems, called “Christendom”; and that then will follow the destruction of every part of Satan’s organization; ami that before Armageddon begins God’s name and his kingdom must be proclaimed as he has commanded.
” The pantomime or dramatic performance which Jehovah directed Jeremiah to act was directed in the type, and is directed in the antitype, not to the professed religionists or practitioners of the “Christian religion”, but to the non-rcligious class. Jeremiah was therefore commanded to make bonds or yokes and send them to heathen kings: “And send them to tne king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, ami to the king of the Ammonites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers which come to Jerusalem unto Zedckiah king of Judah.”—Jer. 27: 3.
38 Doubtless those to whom the message was directed, such as Edom and other heathen, had heard of the
October 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
301
prophecy of Jeremiah concerning the destruction of the city’- and temple at Jerusiilem. The message was a public one, and the priests of Jerusalem would see to it that it was spread about within the hearing of all, that prejudice might be created against Jeremiah; and the nations named in this prophecy no doubt had representatives within the city of Jerusalem. As malicious haters of everything that named the name of Almighty God those men would rejoice in the fact that Jerusalem was to be destroyed, and would hope that it was to come to pass as prophesied. After the siege of Jerusalem had begun God declared his purpose to inflict punishment upon Edom and other nations: “Thus saith the Lord God, Because that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them; therefore thus saith the Lord God, I will also stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and boast from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword.’’ (Ezek. 25:12,13) “In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and east lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them. But thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in the day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of distress. Thou shouldest not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have looked on their affliction in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their substance in the day of their calamity ; neither shouldest thou have stood in the crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape; neither shouldest thou have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of distress. For the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen; as thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon thine own head.” (Obad. 11-15) This statement of the prophecy is to the effect that God will carry out his purpose without interference or aid from anyone, and that it is not the prerogative of any creature to take a hand therein unless directed or commanded by the Lord so to do.
*®Thc message of warning was delivered, not only to Edom, but to other nations: “Thus saith the Lord God. Because that Moab and Seir do say, Behold, the hon.se of Judah is like unto all the heathen; therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country, Bcth-jcshirnoth, Baal-mcon, and Kiriathaim, unto the men of the cast with the Ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the Ammonites may not be remembered among the nations. And I will execute judgments upon Moab; and they shall know that I am the Lord.” (Ezek. 25: 8-11)
The warning is also to the Ammonites: “Son of man, set thy face against the Ammonites, and prophesy against them; and say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord God; Thus saith the Lord God; Because thou saidst Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the land of Israel, when it was desolate; and against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity; behold, therefore, I will deliver thee to the men of the east for a possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee, and make their dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk. And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a eouehing place for flocks; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. For thus saith the Lord God, Because thou hast clapped thine hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy despite against the land of Israel; behold, therefore, I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the heathen; and I will cut thee off from the people, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries; I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord.” (Ezek. 25:2-7) (See also Jeremiah 49:1-6.) All the nations are included in this warning. (Ezek. 26: 2, 3, 21; 28: 21-26) Those prophecies were written for and apply to the day of the vengeance of our God, which comes to pass at Armageddon, that is, his “strange act”.
<0 The Lord Jesus is present, the day of judgment has come, and judgment is upon the nations, but which judgment first begins on Ihc religionists of the nations; as it is written: “And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?” (1 Pet. 4:18) Jeremiah’s message by prophetic emblems was delivered to the official representatives of the heathen, the haters and opposers of God. Such heathen representatives were in diplomatic relationship with the Israelites. So likewise today as the message of warning is being served upon “Christendom”, it also comes to non-religious leaders in so-called “Christendom”. It goes to those nations who are heathen but who are in contractual relationship or diplomatic relationship with so-called “Christian nations”.
“As an illustration: Japan is in an alliance with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and Japanese dupes oppose Jehovah’s witnesses because they arc proclaiming the name of Jehovah God and his King. The persecution and imprisonment of Jehovah’s witnesses by the Japanese government continues with increased fury and is without justification or excuse. It is done because the Roman Catholic Hierarchy demands that Jehovah’s witnesses shall be persecuted in every land.
“ The same year mentioned in this part of the prophecy Jeremiah, at the command of Jehovah, sent a written message against the king of Babylon by the hand of Seraiah, which message was to be read there: “The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded
302
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, K Y<
Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah into Babylon, in the fourth year of his reign. And this Seraiah was a quiet prince. So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written against Babylon. And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, "When thou comest to Babylon, and shalt see, and shalt read all these words; then shalt thou say, 0 Lord, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate for ever. ” —Jer. 51: 59-62.
48 This corroborates the other Scriptural statements showing that God will use the godless crowd, that is, the malicious haters, to destroy the hypocritical religious system, and then he will destroy the godless and everything and every person and part of Satan's organization. The end of Armageddon will mark the complete wiping out of everything pertaining to Satan and his wickedness.
** Jehovah would sec to it that his message of warning should reach the masters or rulers of the nations. Those diplomatic representatives that came to Jerusalem to hobnob with Zedekiah the king would certainty receive that message, which God had commanded Jeremiah to put in the hands of his messengers for delivery: "And command them to say unto their masters, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Thus shall ye say unto your masters.” (Jer. 27:4) Likewise the ambassadors of the nations that have and maintain relationship with "Christendom” and that therefore 'come to "Christendom” ’ shall know of God’s purpose to destroy Satan’s organization. Such notice has already been served upon many of the foreign diplomats, and they arc taking notice in practically all the nations. Manifestly Jehovah permits this to come to them that they shall be without excuse. They shall know that Jehovah is supreme: "I [Jehovah] have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power, and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me.” (Jer. 27:5) When the Israelites were marching to Canaan God would not let them destroy Edom, Moab and Ammon, because it was not his due time. (Dent. 2:1-19) In view of the conduct of the Israelites God permitted the Phoenicians to remain in the land, including Tyre and Zidon. Thus he foretold his permission for Satan and his organization to continue without interruption until the fixed time in God’s purpose. Prior to and until 1914 God permitted Satan to control the nations of the earth without interruption, and the God-haters and the hypocritical so-called "Christian religionists” have operated together, and continue to operate together, to control the nations. What message will Jehovah now have delivered to the nations of the earth! and upon whom docs he lay the obligation to deliver the same? Can the powers of earth prevent Jehovah's
message from being delivered within his appointed time?
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
T 1. What was the occasion, and the purpose, of the message which Jeremiah was to deliver to the people of Jerusalem ? Of what was Jerusalem here a prophetic picture?
H 2. That Jeremiah was to say ‘to the people of the cities of Judah’, “Thus saith the Lord,” is of what significance?
H 3. What was the nature of the message delivered by Jeremiah to the religionists of Jerusalem? How did they regard it? Compare therewith the message delivered today bv God’s witnesses, and the attitude of the religionists of “Christendom”. Justify the message of u-uming as delivered then, and that delivered by Jehovah’s servants today.
1f 4, 5. Why has Jehovah provided in the prophetic record such emphatic warning? What information as to the purpose of the message is seen at Ezekiel 24: 21-24?
U 6. Has Jehovah ‘made Jerusalem a curse to all nations’? How has Jeremiah 26: 7 been having fulfillment, and with what response by those who have ‘heard these words’?
If 7. What was the effect upon the Jew religionists of the message delivered by Jeremiah? Describe their procedure, and apply the prophetic picture.
H 8, 9. How should the religious leaders have reasoned and proceeded in regard to Jeremiah? Instead of that, what did they do? flow does this find fulfillment today?
T 10-12. Account for the Jewish clergy’s inciting the people to ‘gather against Jeremiah in the house of the Lord’. Point out similar procedure by the clergy in Jesus’ day, and today. Why are these truths so strongly emphasized at the present time?
13. Apply the, prophetic procedure recorded at veise 10.
U 14-16. Compare the action of the religionists, and their charge against Jeremiah, with the attitude and tactics of modernday religionists.
H 17,18. Point out tho important instruction contained in verse 12.
U 19. What was the purpose of the message recorded at verse 131 With what response should that message have been received, and why? What is the purpose of this part of the prophetic drama?
If 20. When Jehovah's witnesses are brought before courts today, what should be their altitude and the nature and purpose of their testimony?
If 21. Apply the rule seen in the record at verse 14 to those whom Jeremiah at that time pictured.
U 22,23. Show the propriety of Jeremiah’s words recorded at verse 15, as also confirmed, later, by the apostles of Jesus Christ.
U 24. Point out the timeliness of the truths now being brought to the attention of God’s faithful witnesses.
U 25. Describe the situation in which the matter recorded at verse 16 has its setting.
U 26-28. Relate the argument presented in behalf of Jeremiah by “certain of the elders of the land”. Account for this further argument in defense of Jeremiah. Point out the reason for this part of the divine record. Docs it serie the purpose for which the record has been provided, and why?
U 29. What helpful precedent is afforded heic which Jehovah’s witnesses, when accused, might well follow? Why do comparatively few judges now see and heed the counsel therein available for them?
V 30. By whom and for what purpose was the argument made as recorded at verses 20-23?
U 31,32. Account for Jchoiakim’s action in regard to Urijah, and ex-plain whether he was justified in so doing. What important difference is seen between the prophets Uiijnli and Jeremiah? What further is prophetically pictured by these two prophets? What is seen in the record at Jeie-miah 22: 18,19, concerning Jehoiakim?
U 33, 34. What was the gist of the argument in favor of Jeremiah? The record of this trial and tho outcome thereof bear what important instruction for Jehovah’s witnesses of today?
If 35. What in the prophetic record here considered seems shown to ba the order in which Armageddon will be brought to pass? When was the message delivered that is set forth
October 1, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER-
303
in Jeremiah chapter twenty-seven I Establish the identity of the king of Judah at the time of this prophecy.
If 36. In what order, according to the message, must this series of events occur? Describe the class concerning or against whom this message was recorded. Account for the misrepresentation and persecution of Jehovah’a witnesses on earth today. What is the fight in which these are engaged, and the purpose of the message committed to them and by them declared?
If 37-39. Why was Jeremiah commanded to make bonds or
yokes and send them to heathen kings? What was foretold thereby?
f 40,41. Account for the opposition to Jehovah’s witnesses, and their persecution and imprisonment, in heathen lands.
If 42, 43. What prophetic significance is seen in the record at Jeremiah 51: 59-62?
7 44. What is foreshown in the matter recorded at Jeremiah 27: 4? Cite examples showing that Jehovah ‘has given the earth unto whom it seemeth meet unto him’. Why have the enemies of righteousness so long continued to operate?
WATCHMAN
WHEN Ezekiel had eaten the roll of the book which the hand of the Lord extended to him, then the Lord gave command to him: “And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them. For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an hard language, but to the house of Israel.’’ (Ezek. 3:1-5) The prophet Ezekiel thus pictures God’s “servant” class of today who are sent to deliver a message to “Christendom”, because this people have professed to be acquainted with the Scriptures and the language thereof. So today the “servant” class carries the message of truth to so-called “organized Christianity”, or “Christendom”, not to a people of an unknown tongue; nor is it spoken in the terms of a heathen religion; but they inform “Christendom” in their own language as to what God’s Word has to say. If the anointed “servant” class does not now diligently engage in proclaiming the truth of God’s purposes, those so doing would quickly cease to be of the Lord’s servants and he would raise up others, because his time is here when his message must be delivered.
The purfwse of delivering the message of truth is not to convert the world, as many have foolishly thought; and this is proved by the words the Lord spoke to Ezekiel: “But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me; for all the house of Israel are impudent and hardhearted. Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. As an adamant, harder than flint, have I made thy forehead; fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.” (Ezek. 3: 7-9) Likewise the Lord tells the faithful “servant” class that he has made their heads harder than those of the rebellious ones and therefore they are not to fear those who are rebellious; hence they must go and speak the truth with plainness and the Lord himself will take care of the result.
Jehovah then tells Ezekiel, and therefore the “faithful servant” class, to receive his words in the heart and in the ears and then go and tell them to the people whether they hear or not. (Ezek. 3:10,11) God’s people could not today be faithful unless they respond gladly and eagerly in carrying the message of truth
to “Christendom”. This is being done vigorously and zealously by those who love the Lord.
Ezekiel then states that the spirit took him up and he heard behind him a voice of great rushing, saying; “Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.” (Ezek. 3:12) On the day of Pentecost, when the spirit was poured out upon the followers of Christ Jesus, there was the sound like the rushing of a mighty wind; and in like manner the spirit came upon Ezekiel, foreshadowing that the spirit of the Lord would come upon his people after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple of Jehovah. Ezekiel describes it, saying: “I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them, and a noise of a great rushing. So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the Lord was strong upon me.”—Ezek. 3:13,14.
This foreshadowed that the Lord puts his spirit upon his people and reveals to them a sufficient amount of the truth to enable them to discern God’s organization, and the wicked organization of Satan in opposition to the Lord, and the great privilege that they have of being in Jehovah’s organization and going into action against the enemy and his agencies. When they see the hideousness and wickedness of Satan’s organization these go in the heat of the spirit and with bitterness against the enemy, because the enemy is God’s enemy. Such is not a malicious hatred, of course, but a sincere and earnest desire to sec the enemy and his organization destroyed that God’s name might be exalted.
Ezekiel was then at Tcl-abib by the river Chebar (“extent of time”), which would indicate that the fullness of God’s time had come for a new era in his field of service. “Tcl-abib” means “hill of green growth” or “hill of Abib”. The first month of the Jewish year was Abib (the same as Nisan), that being the springtime, when the earth was covered with green growth. Even so it was ‘the springtime of the kingdom’, the “hill of green growth” marking the time of a new era. Many who had made a covenant to do God’s will and had been brought forth as his sons had turned away into Babylonish captivity. God’s covenant people must now have a watchman, and this was fore
304
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
shadowed by what the Lord said to Ezekiel: “And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.”—Ezek. 3:16,17.
The “watchman” is not one man, but is the entire tompany of anointed ones on earth making up the “faithful and wise servant” class. Some have advanced the thought that the “watchman” is an individual; but this is entirely wrong and contrary to the Scriptures. The anointed class constitute the “watchman”, and each member thereof watches for the other and watches out for the interests of the kingdom, all of which interests are now committed into the hands of the “servant” class. Concerning this same “watchman” Isaiah wrote: “Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion.” The faithful watchmen must give warning to all who claim to be the people of God. Therefore they say to each other: “Thy God reigneth!”—Isa. 52:7, 8.
The Ixjrd has laid great responsibility upon the watchmen, to wit, his “faithful servant” class. He makes it obligatory that such shall warn those who start in the way of wickedness. The wicked are not those who never knew the truth, but are those who, having once been enlightened, to some degree at least, concerning the truth of Gcal’s purposes, have then turned away therefrom and render service to the enemy. As Jehovah commanded Ezekiel, so he com mauds now the one whom Ezekiel foreshadowed, his watchmen, his “servant” class, saying: “When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity ; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.” (Ezek. 3:18-20) The “watchman” class could not perform its proper duty unless it sounded the warning to those who have once been connected with the Watch Tower Society; and this has been done, even though it has brought down upon the Society many harsh criticisms.
It is not the prerogative of The Watchtoiccr, nor of any forming a part of the “servant” class, to announce its judgment; hut it is the duty of such to call attention to God’s judgments as they are written, and this must be done as a warning. Also, it is the duty of such to call attention to God’s judgments as they are written against the “evil servant”, and this must be done as a warning. Also, it is the duty of the “servant” class, by any other means the Lord has provided, to give warning to all “Christendom” by calling attention to the judgments of the Lord as they are written.
This was foreshadowed by the words of the Lord to Ezekiel: “Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul.” (Ezek. 3:21) In harmony with this commandment given to Ezekiel God’s judgment is: “He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still.”—Ilev. 22:11.
Those of the temple class who bear the message of the Lord must be clean, and to this end must separate themselves from all who are out of harmony with God’s organization. (2 Cor. G: 15-17) In harmony with this plain statement of the Scriptures the Lord commanded Ezekiel to separate himself and go into the plain, that the Lord might talk with him there. “And the hand of the Lord was there upon me; and he sai l unto me, Arise, go fv.th into the plain, and I will there talk with thee. Then I arose, and went forth into the plain; and, behold, the glory of the Lord stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river of Che-bar; and I fell on my face.” (Ezek. 3:22,23) The “faithful servant” class must be separate from “Christendom”, from the “evil servant” class, and, in fact, from all not in complete harmony with God's organization. The “faithful servant” must stand out separate and alone as the target of the enemy and aa the witness for the Lord. These faithful ones gather themselves together unto the Lord in a condition of separateness, and the Lord’s glory appears unto them. The facts show that since 192'2 the Lord has illuminated his “servant” class and laden their table with an abundance of spiritual food and has illuminated their minds as it never came to pass before. The vision of God’s organization is there before them, because the spirit of the Lord is upon them even as it was upon Ezekiel.
“Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and spake with me, and,said unto me, Go, shut thyself within thine house.” (Ezek. 3:24) The “house” mentioned in this scripture is God’s place of security provided by him for the “faithful servant” class. It is “the secret place of the Most High” where the “servant” is pictured as being invulnerable to the assaults of the enemy.
The “faithful servant”, being separate from the enemy and under the hand of the Lord Jehovah, is in the place of security; but in this place of security the “servant” is not to be idle. He beholds the enemy and his activities and the enemy’s desire to slay the “servant”; yet he knows that he is secure, because the Lord has so promised him, and in this security the “servant” goes forth with a zeal to the work which the Lord has provided and put in his hands. (Ps. 91: 1-11) “For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a rock.”—Ps. 27: 5.
WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” * Isaiah 54:I3’
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom beforo all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of .Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom nil those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its loaders and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and sepaiate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Brice
United States, $1.00; Canada and Misceltaneous Fobeicn, $1.50; Great Britain, Acstbaiasia, and Sot th afihcv, 7-.. American i< nnttance- slioul.l be made by Postal or l.’xpie.s Morey Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, BiiliMi. South Ain. m .nd Australasian leinittanres should be made dncct to the . live branch olfices. Kemittances from countries other than llmse mi n-tioned may be made io the Brooklyn oilice, but by Intel national Postal .Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ,	. 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian............40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontauo, Can ida
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Bond, Stiathfield, N. S. W , Au-traha South African ...... Boston House, Cape Town, Soulli At. na
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poveily or adversity are unable to pay the subsi ription pine may have The IVati htiim r free upon vvntten application to the publishers, made once eaih year, stiitim; Hie reison lor so re-qii.-stiiiK It. We arc glad to thus aid the needy, but Ilie v.iilt.n application once each year is lequircd by the postal icaulabons.
Notice to Suhscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a rem wnl subscription will be sent only when requoMeil. Chance of nddu-s, when requested, may be expected to appear on addre-s label wilhin one month. A renewal blank (carrj mi; notice of evpnation) v. ill bo sent with the journal one month befoie the subscription evpiies.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brool.l:/n, N. Y., under the Act of Mai ch S, 1SE>.
“VINDICATOR”
The concluding united seiviee period of the year 1937, the nine days Deeemlier 4 to 12 inclusive, is called the “ Vindicator ’ ’ testimony period. The featuie oiler of this period will be the new book Emmies, to be placed on the usual contribution of 25c. All those desiring to be for a vindication of Jehovah’s name will aet upon this announcement and will at once begin making all due preparations for a vigorous part in this testimony. Consult the forthcoming issues of the Informant for additional details and instructions. Your prompt repoit at the close of the testimony will be appreciated by this office.
“ENEMIES”
This new hook, written by Brother Rutherford, and first announced and icleased at the recent general convention of Jehovah’s witnesses at Columbus, Ohio, is now available for all who are for Jehovah and his King and against his enemies. It is a gland work, of 384 pages, excellently bound, gold-stamped, with color illustrations and a comprehensive index. The initial edition is the autogiaphed edition and contains, in facsimile, a letter written by the hand of the author and addressed to all the Loid’s servants. Due to the limited quantity of this author's edition a contribution theiefor of 50c a copy is asked to onset the special expense of publishing this edition.
“SAFETY”
This is the new 64-page booklet, containing the two recent public addresses by Brother Kuthciford, that debveied at the lecent general convention of the Loid’s people m Pans and entitled “Comfort”, and that radiocast from the Coliseum at Columbus, Ohio, on the occasion of the international convention there and entitled “Safety”. The artistic cover design, nr color, gives it an attractive appearance. A contribution of Jc per < opy is asked therefor. You may older a supply for general distribution from house to house at once.
“MODEL STUDY”
This new 64-pnge booklet, though plainly bound, is of great value to all engaged in the service in conjunction with the latest pbonogiaph seiies of recorded speeches on “Jl.vpoenyy Exposed” and “Religion and Christianity”. The booklet <o,-i-tains specially prepaied questions and answers, in logiei'l ruder and based on the above-mentioned seiies of recorded spamhes, and is an indispensable aid to eveiyone who would conduit or paiticipate in a study of said senes at gatherings of newly interested people. The booklet is obtainable at 5c a copy.
“CONSOLATION”
This journal of fact, hope and couiage supersedes the former magazine, The Golden Age, the last edition of which appeared
(Continued on page SSO)
SEeMMTCHTOWER.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
Vol. LVIII	Octobeb 15, 1937	No. 20
HIS “WORK” AND HIS “ACT”
“As I have done to Shiloh.”—Jer. 7:14.
PART 4
JEHOVAH used Nebuchadnezzar as his “servant”, that is, Jehovah caused the heathen king to play a part in the great dramatic prophecy, and in the part he played Nebuchadnezzar pictured Christ Jesus, God’s 'elect servant’, the King of the world. Satan is the mimic god, whose purpose is to mock and discredit the Almighty God. At Salan’s command the people were led to build the tower of Bal/el, which name to those natives meant “the gate of god”. A “gate” means a way of entrance, and it is reasonable to conclude that the old Deceiver, the Serpent, Satan, the Devil, induced the people to believe that the way for them to reach heaven was through the tower of Babel, built by their own efforts; and that, of course, would be a mockery of Jehovah. Nimrod, whose name means ‘rebellious one that rules’, was therefore a fit person to represent the arch rebel, Satan, the mimic god, in that work of mockery. It is reasonable to conclude that the name Bab'cl, as used by the Devil and his representatives, is used in mockery or ridicule when in fact the name does mean “gate of god”. The name “Ba'bcl” (Hebrew) means “confusion”, because God there confused the multitudes. (Gen. 11:9) Babylon, the name of Satan’s organization, would be appropriated or adopted by Satan for the purpose of bringing reproach upon Jehovah’s name, since that is the course that Satan takes in everything. By his decree Jehovah has ordered the destruction of Babylon, Satan’s organization, and which decree would be executed in due time by Jehovah’s elect servant. In the meantime Jehovah uses Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, to play a part picturing the rightful king of the world, Christ Jesus. It may therefore properly be said that when the name Babylon is used as applied to the work done by Jehovah, it means the gate or way to God. Chris-t Jesus is the only way unto God. (John 14:6) The name Babylon, as used by Satan and which therefore is used for the purpose of mockery and reproach, applies to that which shall be destroyed by Jehovah. The course taken by Satan is one of suicide. (Ezek. 28:18) He builds up an organization and names it in mockery of Jehovah, and within that organization of the Devil destruction starts as an
307
internal-combustion consuming fire. It seems quite appropriate, therefore, that Jehovah would cause the king of Babylon to act as the executioner of the rebellious people of Judah and Jerusalem, the destruction of which foreshadows the destruction of “Christendom ’ ’.
2 The typical people of God had become unfaithful, and Jehovah directed his prophet Jeremiah to tell them that he had committed all things into the hand of his servant, the king of Babylon: “And now I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him.’’ (Jer. 27:6) In the year 1914 Jehovah, in fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama, gave all the world to Christ Jesus, the Conqueror and rightful King, whom Nebuchadnezzar pictured in the prophetic drama. (Ps. 2:6-9) Jehovah had appointed Christ Jesus to that high position when he raised him out of death, but Jesus must wait until God’s due time for him to begin his reign. (Ps. 110:1, 2) Now Christ Jesus is overlord of the earth, sent forth to displace the unfaithful Lucifer, who became Satan, the Devil, by reason of his rebellion. Thus Jehovah establishes his great “tree”, Christ Jesus, under which tree all of earth’s creatures who live shall dwell in safety.— Ezek. 17:22-24; see Vindication, Book One, page 232.
1 Referring now to the prophetic picture or type: Nebuchadnezzar was a great warrior, conquering the nations, and in this he pictured Christ Jesus, the Conqueror of the whole world. “And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son’s son, until the very time of his land come; and then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him.” (Jer. 27:7) In the type Nebuchadneizir made a conquest of the nations. Jerusalem was destroyed by the king of Babylon, and the Babylonish empire came into undisputed control over all nations round about. Babylon, under Nebuchadnezzar’s reign, became the world power of that time. It was provided in Jehovah’s decree that all nations were to serve not only Nebuchadnezzar, but his son and his grandson. Thus the empire foreshadowed by the rule of Nebuchadnezzar is shown
308
fffa WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to have complete mastery of the whole world, and that no rebellion could ever overthrow that rule. Since the beginning of the reign of Christ Jesus, in 1914, the people of good will, learning that fact, seek the Lord; and this is illustrated by the people of Gibeon seeking out Joshua and asking his protection. (Josh. 9:1-15) So now the people of good will gladly submit without resistance, and they come from all nations of the earth to place themselves under the protection and rule of Christ Jesus, whom Nebuchadnezzar foreshadowed. But all the other people of the nations, which hold to Satan’s organization, are angry at Christ Jesus, the rightful Ruler, and oppose his reign, and they will be compelled to be submissive to the Lord, and to this end they are completely debased and will be destroyed. The Lord Jesus Christ compels them to serve and be submissive, even to destruction, for the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
‘The name “Sheshaeh” applies to the Devil himself and to his organization and means the same thing as “Babylon” when that name is applied to Satan’s organization. (Jer. 51:41) The prophecy therefore reads: “Shall serve him . . . until the very time of his land [Sheshaeh] come.” The words “very time”, used in this prophecy, show the time of change of the application of the name Babylon. Two generations after Nebuchadnezzar’s death “the very time” mentioned in the prophecy came; hence at this point the picture changes and applies to Satan’s system, which is called Babylon. The latter part of Jeremiah’s prophecy conclusively proves this point. Nebuchadnezzar in person never lost his world-power rule, nor did he ever see “the very time of his land”, for the reason that he died before that time and hence was out of the picture; but'the king Nebuchadnezzar up to this time showed another very important part of what should come to pass. Christ Jesus lives for ever and will never see any ending of his world jxjwer. Christ will reign gloriously to the end of the thousand years assigned for that purpose, and will then turn the kingdom over to Jehovah God, his Father. —Kev. 20: 4-6; 1 Cor. 15: 24-28.
‘In the complete fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama “the very time of his land [Slie-shach] ” will come with the end of Armageddon, that is, following God’s “strange act”. It comes when Christ Jesus, the great Vindicator, destroys the political, commercial and military forces of Satan’s visible organization, and all the invisible forces, including Gog and Satan hl. zclf; as it is written: “And the king of Sheshaeh [Babylon, of which the Devil is the head and king] shall drink after them.” (Jer. 25:26) Satan’s organization is religious, and that includes the political, commercial, military and all other parts thereof. What, then, shall follow after the destruction of that wicked system? “Then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him,” says the prophet of Jehovah. (Jer. 27:7) The “great kings” here men
tioned are “the kings of the east”, pictured or foreshadowed by Darius the Mede and by Cyrus the Persian, that is, Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. (Sec The Watchtower 1934, page 347.) Darius and Cyrus came from the cast, leading their armies of Medes and Persians and of many allied nations against Babylon, which was then ruled bj' Belshazzar, the Devil’s visible representative.—Isa. 21:2; 22:6; Dan. 5:28,30,31; 6:28; Rev. 16:12.
‘Those who are allied with Jehovah and Christ Jesus or are in Jehovah’s organization, include all ‘the armies which arc in heaven’ (Rev. 19:14), and these “serve themselves” of Satan, the king of Babylon, pictured by Belshazzar, by the complete destruction thereof to the glorious vindication of Jehovah’s name. For just such “service” Jehovah has permitted Satan and his Babylon to remain and opeiate for these six thousand years, in order that Jehovah might give the Devil full opportunity and that then lie might cause his own great name to he testified to, and then completely sweep away the Devil’s organization by Jehovah’s “strange act”. Before that “strange act” of Jehovah he does his “strange work”, to wit, the world-wide proclamation against Satan’s religious system and his organization in general, and this is in fulfillment of his declaration long previously made: “That my name may be declared throughout all the earth.”—Ex. 9:16.
’Jehovah compels all nations, peoples and tongues to come under the rule of Christ Jesus, and those who refuse to do so shall he destroyed. This is foretold by the message God required Jeremiah to deliver: “And it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and that will not put their neek under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation will I punish, saith the Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.”—Jer. 27: 8.
’Jehovah knew the end from Ihc beginning, and therefore lie has abided his own good time to take action against the rebellious ones. He foreknew that none of the nations, not even “Christendom”, would willingly bow the neck to and consent to be governed by Christ, the rightful Ruler of the world. (Isa. 8:14; 1 Pet. 2:8) But he gives the nations warning that they must submit themselves to Christ or be destroyed, and this is done that they may hate no excuse to plead ignorance. The religionists who practice the so-called “Christian religion” have rejected Christ Jesus the King, and have consorted with the other elements of Satan’s organization to set up a rule of the earth according to their own ideas. (Ps. 2:6-12) All the nations, including all of “Christendom”, are against God and his kingdom under Christ; but “Christendom” is the worst because posing as Christian, thereby deceiving many people and bringing great reproach upon God’s holy name. In ancient times Je
Octosks 15, 1937
ffKe WATCH TOWER.
309
hovah used Nebuchadnezzar to punish the Israelites, who wero pledged to obey him. Now Jehovah will use the One whom Nebuchadnezzar foreshadowed, to wit, Christ Jesus, to bring punishment upon the nations, and particularly upon “Christendom”, who are in an implied covenant to obey the Lord. In what manner will he punish them? The prophet says, ‘with the sword, famine, and pestilence,' all of which are symbolic of destruction. This shows that Jehovah lays siege to the enemy’s stronghold by his great sen-ant, Christ, who secs to it that none shall escape. (Jcr. 25:35) The Lord has his enemy surrounded, and at Armageddon lie will fight and give no quarter. None can break through his battle lines, and all will be destroyed.
“God’s message of warning was first to the Israelites and then to the heathen, as appears in verse three of this chapter. The leaders, amongst both the Jews and the nations round about, had induced the people to follow their advice. When God sent a warning by Jeremiah, be told the people that they were not to give heed to the self-constituted wise ones amongst them.- “Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon.” (Jcr. 27:9) Jehoiakim, and after him Zcdekiah, and their Jewish supporters and religious leaders, were leaning on Egypt for help. They did not think it possible that Egypt would back down before Babylon, and therefore they did not expect themselves, the Jews, to ever have to wear the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar. These religious and political leaders so informed the people, because, as they told them and (he people believed, they could apply to Egypt for help and be assured of getting it and therefore Jerusalem could successfully resist the king of Babylon. The people, being induced to believe what these self-constituted wise men and prophetsand preachers said, would conclude that the message Jeremiah w-as bringing them was a very strange one and that his work was a strange work. To the leaders of the heathen nations, and to the people round about Jerusalem, Jeremiah and his work would also sound very strange. It would seem very unusual that the Jew-ish nation should be warned to put themselves under the rule of Babylon. These leaders, some among them at least, claimed to be prophets, and they prophesied or announced their prognostications before the Jews, and the heathen clergy preachers or prophets did likewise, haranguing the people and telling them that there was no danger from Babylon and therefore the people should give no heed to Jeremiah’s ‘fanciful prediction’. The people were credulous and were led by the self-constituted prophets and wise men.
10	Exactly the same conditions exist today. The clergy of “Christendom” and other chief ones of the religionists do not hesitate to say that their organization shall stand for ever. The Roman Catholic Hier
archy7 in particular boastfully claims that nothing shall prevail against that organization, not even hell itself, and the credulous “Catholic population” in general believe what these self-constituted prophets say. In modern times politicians have also turned to be prophets. They say: “History shows that every one that has opposed the Romau Catholic Hierarchy has eventually lost out and that every political ruler that now opposes the Hierarchy will fail to survive. ” Mussolini was at first opposed to the Hierarchy7, but now he switches about and makes peace with “papa”. The Congress of the United States, and other public officials, manifestly arc afraid of the Roman Catholic. Hierarchy and arc afraid to have anything even said about that devilish organization; and so they submit to the prognostications of the Hierarchy. The so-called “Protestants” cannot help but sec that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is working with the political dictators, but those so-called “Christian religionists” have no faith in the Bible and do not believe what the Bible says about Satan’s organization. On January 18, 1937, the Herald Tribune (New York) published a statement issued by the Methodist Federation to the effect that the Vatican is backing Mussolini, Hitler and Franco, adding, however, that only the political policies of the Vatican are assailed. Even those Methodists have not the faith and courage to oppose the Vatican’s devilish doctrines that are deceiving and turning the people away from God. The Watchtower has published time and again the fact that Mussolini and Hitler are acting under the direction of the Vatican, and also has shown the Scriptural reason therefor and what shall be the result. If the aforementioned Methodists had faith in God and in his Word they would boldly say what the Watch Tower publications have said, to wit: That the Roman Catholic Hierarchy relies upon false doctrines, and hoodwinks the common people, while working with the other elements of Satan’s organization to gain control of the nations of the earth and to rule them by dictator's, and that for this reason they have openly repudiated Jehovah God’s Word and rejected his King, Christ Jesus, and that now they- shall suffer destruction.
11	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergy7 scornfully push away from them any literature that publishes the truth of God’s Word concerning his kingdom. They order their parishioners not to read it, and to destroy what comes into their possession. Other religionists, together with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, seoff at the idea that the great system that now rules the earth, religious, political, financial, military and social, shall ever suffer destruction. To them the message brought by Jehovah’s witnesses at llis command, concerning God’s name and his purpose to destroy Satan’s organization, is foolishness and they denounce it as unbelievable. The prophecy of God’s Word, showing his purpose to destroy all nations at Armageddon, and which prophecy is delivered to the people by Je
310
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
hovah’s witnesses, seems very “strange” to all those who support the religious organization, and they turn away from it and dismiss it with the mere words, “We are not interested.” Only those persons of good will give heed to the message of the Lord, and only these will be protected. Jehovah commanded Jeremiah to say to the people that they should not hearken unto their prophets, soothsayers or sorcerers. Likewise today Jehovah, through his Word which is delivered by his witnesses, informs the people that they should not believe the clergy, the preachers, or the politicians, who tell them that there is no possible danger of Armageddon’s coming. The clergy are therefore the more reprehensible; for the reason that they not only decline to ally themselves with God’s kingdom under Christ, but prevent many other people from doing so. —Matt. 23:13.
11	Why did Jehovah tell the people to refuse to give heed to the clergymen and other prognosticators? Why does he now tell the people not to listen to the priests of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy clergymen and other so-called “prophets”? “For they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish.” (Jcr. 27:10) In view of the punishment that had been inflicted upon other prophets of Jehovah it took real faith in God, and therefore genuine courage, for Jeremiah to deliver the message that he did deliver. Having full faith in Jehovah, Jeremiah courageously called a lie a lie, regardless of what might be said of him as using rough talk. No doubt the clergymen of that time said that “the speech of this man Jeremiah shocks our religious susceptibilities of our time-honored organization”. Jeremiah was speaking the truth because God had commanded it; and even though the truth docs shock the religious susceptibilities of the clergy, it is doing them a good turn, and also the people in general a good turn, to publish the truth; and therefore the message of God is of the greatest public interest, convenience and necessity. The message was from the Lord and was a warning for the people of Jerusalem; and likewise the message delivered today is a warning to the people of “Christendom” and is for their good, if only they would so regard it. It is far more important that the people should know the truth, that they may learn and take the right way and find protection, than for Jehovah’s witnesses to put on the soft pedal in order to avoid shocking the religious susceptibilities of pious clergymen. The people in general must have an opportunity to hear the message, and for this reason God commands that it shall be delivered.
“Jehovah’s message having been declared by Jeremiah in the presence and hearing of the supporters of religionists of that time, those supporters could not plead ignorance and shift the responsibility on God. Likewise today, the message of truth being declared in the presence and hearing of the people who support
“Christendom” puts the responsibility upon them to act, and they will not be permitted to plead ignorance. The purpose of the Devil, as shown by the foregoing text of the prophecy, is to drive the people away from God that they might perish; and Jeremiah so told them. The same thing is true today. Even those who do not support the religionists must have an opportunity to hear. The godless ones may conclude that after the destruction of the religious systems, which operate in the name of God, then they, the godless, will have a larger freedom and license for wickedness and that therefore they can entirely ignore Jehovah. They will find, however, that the destruction of the religious systems does not mean that there is no Jehovah God nor Christ Jesus; rather the propheey shows that they will learn that the overthrow of the religionists means that the non-religionists are next in line to be dealt with by the Lord and thereby wiped out in disgrace. Ungodliness is no more justified than hypocritical religionists. The judgment day of Jehovah is here and is so exacting and searching that scarcely the righteous shall escape.—1 Pet. 4:17, IS.
14 Jehovah’s time is at hand when his name and his kingdom must be declared to the nations as a witness, and this must be done before Armageddon begins. This was clearly foretold by the message delivered by Jeremiah to the non-Jews as well as to the Jews. Jehovah informs the nations, in advance of approaching Armageddon, of the great ills that will come to them by refusing to bow themselves willingly to the rule of his servant, Christ Jesus, and this is done in order that they may not have an excuse for ignorance. God will permit to survive and live only those who willingly put them wives under the rule of Christ Jesus, who, in the prophetic drama spoken and enacted by Jeremiah, was pictured by the king of Babylon. The prophet therefore says: “But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own land, saith the Lord; and they shall till it, and dwell therein.”—Jer. 27:11.
18 Jehovah’s King will extend his rule over all the earth, and no power can successfully resist him. Those who will benefit by his rule will prove to be, not the nations as a whole, but the individuals of those nations who are of good will toward God, who learn the truth and who willingly and gladly submit themselves to God’s King, Christ Jesus.
16 The message delivered by Jeremiah to the nations was a prophecy illustrated with a wooden yoke or bent pole put on the neck. The Devil’s crowd thought to counteract God’s message, and therefore the false prophet, IlananiaL, broke the yoke that was on Jeremiah’s neck: “Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, and brake it. And Hananiah spake in the presence of all the people, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
October 15, 1937
6Te WATCHTOWER.
311
from the neck of all nations within the space of two full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.” (Jer. 28:10,11) Thus the false prophet was endeavoring to induce the people to believe that Jeremiah’s prophecy was false and that they should within a short time be entirely free from the Babylonish king.
ir The Roman Catholic clergy take exactly the same course today. They tell the people that the message of Jehovah God, which he sends by his witnesses telling the people that Armageddon is near, and that he will destroy the godless as well as “Christendom”, is wholly false, and these clergymen use all the power and influence that they possess to destroy in the mind of the people the effect of the message of truth. The false prophets of the present day, to wit, the Hierarchy clergymen and their supporters, tell the people that the nations will stand for ever and that the Roman Catholic organization is the rightful representative of God on earth, and that that organization shall rule for ever and stand for ever. These clergymen, therefore, stand in the same position that Hananiah occupied, in their efforts to destroy faith in God’s message that is brought to them. That the Devil and his agents cannot thwart Jehovah is illustrated by what followed the breaking of that wooden yoke by the false prophet: “Then the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah the prophet, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Thou bast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron. For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they shall serve him ; and I have given him the beasts of 1 he field also.”—Jer. 28:12-14.
” Likewise Jehovah tells the people, through his Word, that not only arc the false prophets or clergymen, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their supporters, uttering lies by their words, but all their efforts to thwart God’s purpose will fail, and that only those who will give heed to God’s Word and put themselves under Christ Jesus shall ever live. The nations cannot escape, by following the instruction given them by false prophets. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy will succeed for a time, but within a short time thereafter it will be completely destroyed.
w Jeremiah spoke to Zedekiah, king of Judah, and informed him that only those who would wear the yoke of the king of Babylon should live. Antitypieally this means that only those who voluntarily serve Christ Jesus shall live. Furthermore Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, and, no doubt, in the heaving of the people: “Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the Lord hath spoken against the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon ? ’ ’—Jer. 27:13.
20	Zedekiah and bis supporters pictured the present
day ruling elements, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and the supporters of that devilish religious system, and which is generally known as “Chris-tendom”and is falsely called the “Christian religion”. “Christendom” thinks she is different from the heathen nations and does not need to change her course of action and submit to God and his King, Christ Jesus. “Christendom,” meaning the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and her supporters, thinks to rule heaven and earth, but the prophecy of God shows exactly to the contrary. “Christendom,” and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, has greatly exalted herself, and now she must, according to the decree of Jehovah, be brought low and wallow in the dust of the earth. God says to the people, as he says to their rulers now: ‘Why will you die? Why not serve the King, Christ Jesus, and live?’ (Jer. 27:13) Those who refuse will certainly die.
21	As Jeremiah, the servant of God, warned the rulers and the people to give no heed to the false prophets, such as Hananiah, even so today Jehovah, by sending his witnesses with his message of warning to the rulers and to the people of “Christendom”, tells them to give no heed to the false prophets, such as the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergymen, and their supporters. Jehovah’s witnesses must carry this message to the people. This they have been doing ami are still doing, by God’s grace. The people must be warned, as Jeremiah warned Jerusalem, saying: “Therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets [preachers or clergymen] that speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you.”—Jer, 27:14.
22In Jeremiah’s day those false prophets did not trust in God, but they trusted in Egypt for help. Likewise today the false prophets, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergymen, do not trust in God, but they trust in worldly power, their own power, to accomplish their own selfish desires. As the people of Jerusalem did not have an appreciation of the sin that made it necessary for Jehovah Io execute his-judgment upon that city, even so now the people who support organized religion do not have an appreciation of the sins of “Christendom”, and that it is God’s will that all who live must willingly come under the rule of Christ Jesus. Hananiah prophesied falsely and gained the support of the people, and they tell under his seductive words; and likewise today the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergymen prophesy falsely before the people in order to keep the people in ignorance of God’s purpose. It means, therefore, a fight against these false prophets for Jehovah’s witnesses to continue to carry the message to the people that they may have an opportunity to be informed. The clergy, although hearing the message, are too proud to repent, and th"vefore they will not tell the truth to the people, and hence attempt to prevent the people from hearing it in any manner.
312
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
*’ Jeremiah told the people that such men as Hana-niah prophesied a lie; and likewise today Jehovah’s witnesses, informing the people of the truth, thereby show to them that those clergymen who prophesy contrary to God’s Word are deliberately lying. These clergymen represent the Devil, and they do the will of their father the Devil. (John 8:44) Hananiah had not been sent forth by Jehovah to prophesy in His name. Neither had God sent any of these other false prophets, and therefore he commanded Jeremiah to say to the people: “For I have not sent them, saith the Lord, yet they prophesy a lie in my name, that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish, yc, and the prophets that prophesy unto you.’’—Jcr. 27:15.
24 Corresponding thereto, Jehovah God has not commissioned the men of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy or any other clergymen to prophesy in his name to the people, and when those men go to the people and prophesy, they prophesy falsehoods, and hence they deliberately lie. Not only do they lie, but they persecute Jehovah’s witnesses for telling the people the truth as commanded by Jehovah. By the ungodly religious ceremonies that they practice and by the doctrines that they teach, and by the prognostications that they make, the clergymen keep the people in ignorance of God and his purpose, and turn them away from God. What Jeremiah said to Hananiah, the false prophet who opposed God’s message, now applies with stronger force to the present-day clergymen, who prophesy lies before the people. To the false prophet God’s messenger said: “Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet, Ilear now, Hana-niah, The Lord hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will east thee from off the face of the earth: this year thou sbalt die, because thou hast taught rebellion against the Lord. So Hananiah the prophet died the same year, in the seventh month.” —Jer. 28:15-17.
15 Such is the written judgment of Jehovah against the false prophecies that arc uttered by the leaders of “Christendom”. His Word, therefore, clearly shows that Jehovah’s witnesses must declare the truth today as commanded, even though it shocks the religious susceptibilities of the clergy. It is not the judgment of men, but is the judgment of Al might y God, written against those who resist him and his King, and who falsely prophesy and mislead the people. His decree is that such shall be cast out and die. This message must be delivered because God has so commanded it.
20 Jehovah’s witnesses arc not fighting any man or company of men, even as Jeremiah the prophet was not fighting against men, but was merely obeying God’s commandments: “Also I spake to the priests, and to all this people [as well as the king], saying, Thus saith the Lord, Hearken not to the words of your prophets that prophesy unto you, saying, Behold,
the vessels of the Lord’s house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you.”—Jcr. 27:16.
27	Jehovah’s witnesses, in obedience to God’s commandments, have declared to the nations, the clergy, the politicians, and the commercial and military men, God’s announced judgment and purpose of destroying Satan’s organization at Armageddon. They must continue to carry this message to the common people in order that all “Christendom” may be warned, and that those who arc of good will toward God may give heed to his Word and find the way to life. Their work, therefore, is not a fight against men, but a proclamation of the truth, which is a fight against wicked systems organized and carried on by the Devil. In the face of and contrarj’ to the message of God delivered by Jeremiah, Hananiah the false prophet defiantly challenged the message of the Lord and falsely said to the people: “Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon: within two full years will I bring again into this place all the vessels of the Lord’s house that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to Babylon; and I will bring again to this place Jcconiah the son of Jchota-kim king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, that went into Babylon, saith the Lord: for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.” (Jer. 28: 2-4) Hananiah must have known that he was lying. Likewise today the Roman Catholic Hierarchy must know that they are lying. God foretells that they even say they have hidden themselves behind lies; which refuge he will destroy.—Isa. 28:15.
28	Judah and Jerusalem were very much disturbed by the prophecy delivered by Jeremiah. Likewise today “organized religion”, and particularly its leaders, experience a severe shock of their susceptibilities by reason of the message of God delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses, and this of itself shows that the clergy are false vessels or instruments which bear religious fodder to the people and from which the people receive no nourishment or benefit whatsoever. The proclamation of the truth by Jehovah’s witnesses is like unto the invasion of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. The Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater-than-Nebuehad-nezzar, leads this assault now upon the religionists, and those false prophets and their organization are being jarred to the very foundations. The clergymen have been so shocked by the truth that they put forth every effort to destroy the message. A Catholic newspaper recently issued against Jehovah's witnesses says: “Some action will have to be taken sooner or later, and it is better taken now before the damage is greater than it already is.” (The Catholic Standard, Tasmania, October 29, 1936) This is in line with Cardinal Dougherty’s declaration to the effect that “he will take . . . more drastic action” unless the publication of the kingdom message ceases. Those
October 15, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER.
313
roosters arrogate to themselves a tremendous power and influence. Their day of disappointment is near. In their attempt at the present time to keep up their courage and the courage of their supporters the Korn an Catholic Hierarchy say: “We will, within a short time, gain all that was lost in times past, and this we will do at the expense of Jehovah’s witnesses.” In other words, their purpose is to destroy all the witnesses of Jehovah and their work in order that the Hierarchy may ride high and easy and without opposition. That organization now looks to its ally, “Egypt,” that is, the political and financial supporters, for help.
22	The religious leaders of the Jews said, and likewise the religious leaders of “Christendom” say to the people: “The message brought to you by Jehovah’s witnesses is too strange for belief. Therefore give no heed to that message. Look to us for advice. We are sure that our organization will stand for ever.” But, directly contrary to the s[>cech of such false prophets, Jehovah’s true prophet Jeremiah says concerning those religionists: “Hearken not unto them; serve the king of Babylon, and live: wherefore should this city be laid waste?”—Jcr. 27 :17.
30	No doubt there are yet within the religious organizations those persons of good will who arc prisoners. (Isa. 49: 9) They must be given the opportunity to hear and to hearken unto the Lord. There are those outside of the religious organizations that desire righteousness and hence arc of good will toward God. These must have the opportunity to hear the kingdom message and be told that the only way of escape and the only place of safety is by serving the Lord Jesus Christ, the King whom Nebuchadnezzar foreshadowed in this prophetic picture. The goodness of Jehovah God is manifested toward the people by sending them the message of warning. He therefore makes it an imperative obligation upon Jehovah’s witnesses that they must deliver this message.
31	Jeremiah suggested a test which would determine whether those prognosticators such as Hananiah were true or false prophets. Likewise a test is open to the clergymen at the present time. If they were honest, true and faithful representatives of the Lord, they would tell the truth to the people. Also Jehovah God would give heed to their prayers, but he does not hear the prayers of false and fraudulent preachers. Therefore at God’s command Jeremiah announced the test in these words: “But if they be prophets, and if the word of the Lord be with them, let them now make intercession to the Lord of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon. ’ ’—Jcr. 27:18.
32	If the opposers of Jeremiah had been sincere and honest and possessed faith in God, they would show this by making such intercession as Jeremiah suggested. Had they done so, that would have shown that
they had fear of the warning from God which had been announced to them by the mouth of Jeremiah. It would show that they desired to have some part in the service of God. The same is today true of the clergymen of “Christendom”. If they were really the representatives of God and they were sincere and honest, they would give heed to what is written in the Scriptures and would tell the people the truth as it is written therein, instead of withholding from the people the truth of the Bible. On the contrary, the clergy today, particularly the Hierarchy, instruct the people to not even read the Bible but to believe only what the priests tell them.
33	Some of the vessels of the Lord had not at the time of Jeremiah been taken away by Nebuchadnezzar, and concerning the same the Lord directed Jeremiah to say: “For thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that remain in this city, which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not, when he carried away captive Jcconiah, the son of Jchoiakim king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem; yea, thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels that remain in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem; They shall be carried [away].”—Jcr. 27:19-22.
34	Jehovah was giving warning that the remaining vessels would be taken away to Babylon. This part of the prophecy finds a fulfillment in modern times, in this, to wit: The Elisha work, which Jehovah’s witnesses now by His grace are doing, will not wreck the religious organizations or organized religions. Elisha’s witness work now exposes to view the crookedness of “Christendom” and is used to the pulling down of strongholds of “Christendom”, in the minds of honest and sincere people. The honor of wrecking the systems or religious organizations is given to Christ Jesus. As Samson inflicted punishment upon the Philistines and left the finishing work to David, even so now the finishing touches upon the enemies of God will be put on by the Greater David, the Lord Jesus Christ. The work now being done by the faithful followers of Christ Jesus in declaring the judgments of Jehovah against “Christendom” is very exasperating and humiliating to the religionists; but there is far more to follow, not of work by the witnesses, but the destructive work by Christ Jesus. When the uncovering of religious frauds is completed and the witness work done, then will follow the execution of Jehovah’s judgment, that is, “his act, his strange act.”
35	“They shall be carried [away] to Babylon, and there shall they be.” (Verse 22) How long? “Until the day that I visit them, saith the Lord.” (Vs. 22) Those vessels in the temple were carried away, and remained for seventy years. That part of the prophecy
314
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
meant nothing less than the total destruction of the city of Jerusalem and everything in it. Likewise it foretells that Jehovah’s “strange act’’ will mean the complete destruction of “Christendom” and everything pertaining thereto. The remaining words of Jeremiah 27:22, to wit, “then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place,” manifestly refer to the remnant, that is, God’s faithful witnesses on earth. As a remnant was saved out of Israel, so there is a remnant unto God that has come out of “Christendom”, and which remnant maintain their integrity toward God. The returning must take place seventy years after the destruction of Jerusalem, and therefore could not refer to unfaithful Jerusalem, but to the faithful remnant of the Israelites who rebuilt the city. This promise, therefore, docs not apply to wicked “Christendom” nor have any reference to the restoration of “Christendom” at any time. It docs apply antitypically to God’s faithful remnant on the earth from and after 1918 who then became a part of the New Jerusalem. After these faithful ones had undergone punishment they were fully restored to God’s favor and his anger was entirely removed from them. —Isa. 12:1-3.
"TO ALL THE PEOPLE”
“ The events set forth in the preceding part of Jeremiah’s prophecy, and considered heretofore in The Watchtower, find full agreement in what follows and which is set out in the 25th chapter of Jeremiah's prophecy. That chapter should be carefully read and prayerfully considered, together with what follows.
*’ “The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jchoia-kim, the son of Josiah king of Judah, that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.” (Jer. 25:1) Jeremiah had been commanded to take his stand in the court of the Lord’s house and to there proclaim the message of the Lord, fie there pictured Jehovah’s witnesses who take their stand after 1919 and who remain on God’s side fearlessly declaring his message. It was about that time that God’s consecrated people on the earth began to see that the prophet Elijah and his work pictured a certain part of Jehovah’s work, and that Elisha the prophet and his work pictured a work of Jehovah’s servants that must be performed without fear of man or devil. For the benefit of those who have later come to a knowledge of the truth mention Is here made that it was in 1919, at the first Cedar Point (Ohio) convention, that the Lord made known to his people the distinction between the Elijah and the Elisha work of the church. (See The Watchtower August 1 and 15, 1919.) Jehovah foreknew and graciously foretold that his servants would be entrusted with a service to be performed that would require absolute and complete faith in him and they would trust him implicitly for protection and salvation, and that therefore they must do their work without fear of what man might do unto them. Elijah showed
fear, and well pictured what occurred prior to 1919. Elisha showed no fear of creatures, and pictured what must take place after 1919. The experiences through which the faithful servants of Jehovah have passed furnish an abundance of proof that the fear of man and of the Devil and his agents must not be permitted to deter them in their work or interfere with their maintaining their integrity toward God. They must fear God and be blind to everything save that of doing his will. As servants they must steadfastly go forward, relying upon Jehovah and Christ Jesus, their Head and Lord. The faithful witnesses have now come to appreciate the great truth that the joy of the Lord is their strength. They likewise appreciate the fact that the fear of man leads them into a snare and that they must fear God only and make him their sanctuary.—Isa. 8:13.
WARNING THE REMNANT
’8 Now we come to the examination of that part of the prophecy uttered by Jeremiah at God’s commandment and which shows beyond all question of doubt that Jehovah’s witnesses must henceforth maintain their integrity toward God under the most trying conditions. The faithful will have in mind that to be forewarned of difficulties just ahead means to be forearmed and to meet them in the strength of the Lord and in the power of his might. The hypocritical crowd of religionists are increasing in power amongst the nations, and will continue to exercise their power until they have reached that point when they will boastfully declare, “Peace and safety,” and, “Now we shall rule the world without interference.” When they reach that point, as this prophecy shows, and which is supported by other prophecies, God’s wrath will fall upon them, and none of Satan’s organization will find any way of escape. To strengthen his people, and to give them comfort and hope, the Lord Jehovah now graciously unfolds to his people his prophecies. Those who really love God and trust him implicitly will not be dismayed or even disturbed by what the Lord reveals to them and which shall shortly fall upon the nations of the earth, nor will they be deterred in the performance of assigned duty. The faithful will continue to feed upon “the meat in due season” which the Lord provides for them. They will diligently and prayerfully study what God makes known to them. They will dwell together in peace with each other and show their love one for another by watching carefully for the interest of each other and endeavoring to render help to their brethren, including the Jona-dabs. (Jer. 35:G-19) This docs not mean finan-ial help, but the help that enables one to stand firmly, to get an understanding and appreciation of God’s provision for those that love him, and to diligently engage in his service. Let all the faithful therefore stand in the strength of the Lord and remember that God’s people must stand shoulder to shoulder against the
October 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER-
315
entrenched enemy. The admonition of the apostle Paul is peculiarly appropriate now: ‘Be alert; stand firm in the faith; acquit yourselves like men; be strong. Let all that you do be done from love.’ (1 Cor. 16:13, Weymouth) 'Only let the lives you live be worthy of the gospel of the Christ, in order that, whether I come and see you or, being absent, only hear of you, I may know that you are standing fast in one spirit and with one mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith of the gospel. Never for a moment quail before your antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them a sure token of impending destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation—a token coming from God. For you have had the privilege granted you on behalf of Christ—not only to believe in Him, but also to suffer on Uis behalf; maintaining, as you do, the same kind of conflict that you once saw in me and which you still hear that I am engaged in.’ (Phil. 1:27-30, Weym.) ‘Therefore put on the complete armour of God, so that you may be able to stand your ground in the evil day, and, having fought to the end, to remain victors on the field.’ (Eph. 6:13, Weym.) It seems certain that the climax is rapidly approaching. Have you clothed yourself with the full armor of the Lord? Are you determined, by his grace, to firmly and immovably stand for the Lord and his kingdom, relying wholly upon God and Christ Jesus? Only in the strength of the Lord can any of his people now stand the test that is before them.
’’.Jeremiah was commanded to speak to all the people of Judah and the city of Jerusalem. The Judeans pictured the ones now on earth and to whom God’s act will be a “strange act” because, although unfaithful to God, they will unworthily lay claim to the promises of God. They do not consider that such promises are of no value to them because of their unfaithfulness. Following their leaders that have had a form of worship, which they call “godliness”, they have likewise performed ceremonies, but they have no love for God and his kingdom. The time is fixed by the prophecy mentioned, and manifestly fixes the time of its fulfillment, which is in these last days.
40	Jehovah had suffered Pharaoh to put Jchoiakim on the doomed throne of Jerusalem, and he had continued there for four years. That was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, who here plays the part picturing Christ Jesus, whose first year at the temple was in 1918. That was the first year of his (Christ Jesus’) being laid in Zion as the Chief Corner Stone. (Isa. 28:16) Therefore the prophecy recorded at the 25th chapter of Jeremiah appears to have its antitypical proclamation beginning after 1918, and its actual fulfillment also thereafter.—See Vindication, Book One, pages 248,253.
41	It was in the beginning of 1918 that “Christendom” rejected “The Stone laid in Zion”, that is, the rightful King of the world, and set its hopes on the League of Nations. (Isa. 8:9-15) In other words,
“Christendom” looked to its own power, the power of men, to rule in man’s appointed way, even though claiming the League of Nations to be “the expression of God’s kingdom on earth”. It was following that time that Jehovah began his “strange work” by having Christ Jesus to use the temple company, the remnant on the earth, which Jeremiah pictured, to proclaim the most strange and unusual message throughout “Christendom” that had ever been heard by “Christendom”, and such message has so greatly “shocked the religious susceptibilities” of the clergymen and has appeared so very strange to those dupes who support and bear up the Devil’s organization that they called it a “strange work”. Jehovah had caused Isaiah to prophesy that his “strange work”, which is the proclamation of God’s message, would follow the laying of the Chief Corner Stone in Zion. (Isa. 28:16-21) All the facts show the fulfillment of that prophecy is now in progress and is nearing the end.
42	When Nebuchadnezzar ascended the throne of Babylon that proved that the end of Judah was near, because Nebuchadnezzar was Jehovah’s chosen executioner. Likewise when Christ Jesus was enthroned and came to the temple for judgment, that proved that the end of “Christendom” was near, because he is the great Judge before whom all the nations must appear and receive the execution of Jehovah’s judgment. The facts fully support this conclusion. Thus the prophecy fixes the time of the proclamation by Jeremiah and the time of the fulfillment. At God’s commandment Jeremiah spoke: “The which Jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying.” (Jer. 25:2) The people of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem were relying upon their religious leaders, the clergy, and the chief men among them, and hence were loath to believe the message that Jeremiah spoke. At that time Egypt still showed herself a power to be reckoned with and had, only four years previous to that time, made Judah a tributary of, or dependent on, Egypt, by placing Jchoiakim upon the throne, who was compelled to do the bidding of Egypt. (2 Ki. 23: 28-35) Doubtless the people reasoned that Egypt would be ready to deliver and defend its tributary nation, Judah, against all encroachments bj' Babylon. Judah was a buffer state for Egypt against Babylon. For that same reason here the prophet Jeremiah prophesied contrary to what Egypt might expect to accomplish. Likewise today the peoples arc relying upon the religious organization that rules “Christendom”, and the proclamation of the truth is exactly contrary to what they expect worldly institutions can accomplish.
43	Jeremiah had been preaching to the people for twenty-three years, and still eighteen years more were to pass before the fall of Jerusalem. He reminded the people of Jerusalem of this fact: “From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, even
316
fffc WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N, Y.
unto this day, that is the three and twentieth year, the word of the Lord hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not hearkened.” (Jer. 25:3) In all that period of time Jeremiah was active and diligent. He did not lead a lazy life, such as that which is led by the ‘‘dumb dog” class, the clergy of “Christendom”; he did not work a few hours in the day and then take it easy the remainder of the time. lie arose early in the cool and fresh part of the day, when the business people were up and about their affairs. He went to them and told them about Jehovah’s purpose. But they did not take his speech seriously. The faithful preaching of Jeremiah for that period of time had brought to Judah a definite crisis, and he told the jieoplc in plain and emphatic language what God purposed to do to that land. Although diligently working for twenty-three years Jeremiah was not old and worn out. By the grace of God he continued faithfully to perform his work. That is the privilege of everyone in God’s service today, to continue to work as long as he possesses any strength. Jeremiah’s faithfulness and devotion may well lx? compared with the long and faithful service of some of Jehovah’s witnesses who had part in the Elijah work and who have, since the ending thereof, continued faithful, diligent and zealous in the service of the Elisha period of God’s work. Let those who do have full faith in and love for God take courage now. The difficulties will grow no less until the “strange work” comes to an end. The fight is on. The old “harlot” and her paramours are more determined than ever to crush Jehovah’s witnesses, and are daily becoming more arrogant, scornful and cruel. Those enemies of God and his people are moving forward with confidence to the destruction of everything that exposes the crookedness of their organization. Let all who have taken a stand on the side of Jehovah and who are therefore relying upon the strength of the Lord be mindful of the truth that he who is for us is far greater than all that can be against us. The message which Jeremiah was commanded by the Lord to deliver, as set forth in the 25th chapter of that prophecy, foretells what Jehovah’s witnesses must now do, and what they may be expected to experience in faithfully performing their duty unto the Lord.
(To be continued')
QUESTIONS FOK STUDY
1. Point out (a) the oiigm, and the usce, of the name Babylon. (b) The appropriateness of Jehovah’s causing the
heathen king Nebuchadnezzar to play the part for which he was used in this great dramatic prophecy.
H 2. Why, at that time, did Jehovah do as recorded at Jerennah 27: 61 How has that part of the prophetic picture been fulfilled ?
V 3-6. Deferring to verse 7: Show whether (a) all nations we-e brought into tlie servitude here foretold, (b) “The veiy time of his land’ ’ came, (c) ‘ Many nations and great kings served themselves of him.’ How does eacli of these pio-phetic conditions, (a), (b), (c), have fulfillment?
T 7, 8. Did any of the nations, for the reason mentioned, incur punishment in line with the forewarning recorded at verse 8? Apply this part of the prophetic picture.
H 9-11. Justify the further forewarning at verse 9, for that time. Bor the pi esent time.
H 12,13. Why did those mentioned in veise 9 “prophesy a lie” to the people, and for the purpose as charged against them in verso 10? Show that the same thing is true today.
H 14,15. Describe the situation today for which the prophetic conditional promise at verse 11 was provided.
H 16-18. Apply the prophetic piocedurc recorded at Jeremiah 28: 10,11. That at 28: 12-14.
If 19,20. Show that Zedekiah and his suppoiters, resisting the warning given through Jeremiah, pictured the present-day ruling elements of “Christendom”.
21,22. Did Hananiah succeed in tinning the minds of the people away from the message of warning given through Jeremiah? Apply that prophetic fact.
U 23-25. Describe the present situation corresponding to that in the time of Jeremiah as shown in the tecord at Jeremiah 28:15-17. What is foreshown in the judgmi nt executed upon Hananiah for teaching icbelhon against the Lord?
If 26-30. Wliat was foreshown (a) in Ilaminiali’s fal-e mc-sago (Jer. 28:2-1) and (b) in the purpose for which it was spoken? (c) In Jehovah’s warning through ins prophet Jeremiah as at 27: 171
T 31,32. bhovv that a test corresponding to that suggested by Jeremiah C27: 18) has been placed before the false prophets of “Christendom”.
V 33-35. Explain and apply Jehovah’s words by Jeiemiah as recorded at 27: 19-21. How, in “the day that I visit them”, did Jehovah “bring them up, and restore them to this place ’ ’?
T 36,37. Apply the prophetic picture piesented in Jeremiah’s standing in the couit of the Lord’s house and there proclaiming the message of the Lord. Point out the prophetic significance of some of the tacts seen in comparing Elijah and his work with Elisha and his work.
If 38. Account for Jehovah’s now giving to liis people an understanding of his prophecies. What is now nece-sary on their part to enable them to stand the lest that is before them?
K 39. To whom was Jeiemiah commanded to speak? Whom did they picture, and how?
V 40,41. W hen, according to other scriptures, was the prophecy proclaim! d as recorded in the 25th chaptei of Jeremiah? What does that indicate as to the time of its antitypn-al proclamation? Explain the designation of the jnoilama-tion, then and now, as a “stiange work”.
If 42. Show that the prophecy fixes the time of the proclamation by Jeiemiah and the time of the fulfillment. It hat prophetic significance is seen in the relationship then between Judah and Egypt?
K 43. Point out the helpful instruction and example provided in the record at Jeremiah 25: 3. For wliat particular purpose has Jehovah given to his people an understanding thereof at this time?
INSPECTORS AND EXECUTIONERS
WHEN, in 1918, Christ Jesus came to inspect the professed people of God and to set up God’s temple of ‘living stones’, Jehovah’s “spiritual house”, he looked with indignation upon the desolation of the earthly part of God’s organiza
tion, the covenant people of the Most Itieh, the visible part of the New Jerusalem. More than two thousand years ago Jehovah caused his prophet Zechariah to have a symbolic vision of this and to write about it: “Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh
October 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
317
month, which is the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius [king of Medo-Pcrsia], came the word of the Lord unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying, I saw by night, and behold a man [Jehovah’s inspector general] riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom [east of Jerusalem]: and behind him were there red horses, speckled, and white.” —Zech. 1: 7, 8.
Zechariah inquired of the Lord the meaning of these men on horses, and the angel talking with him explained it to him. “Then said I, O my lord, what are these? And the angel that talked with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these be.’’ (1:9) This question is propounded for the benefit of those faithful ones of the remnant now on earth, and the angel of the Lord brings to them the needed information in answer to their questions. (Bev. 1:1) This is proof that the interpretation of prophecy docs not proceed from man, but that the Lord Jesus, the chief one in Jehovah’s organization, sends the necessary information to his people by and through his holy angels. “And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These arc they whom the Lord hath sent to walk to and fro through the earth.” (1: 10) In the vision these represent Jehovah’s host that he uses to express bis wrath against the enemy. (Rev. 14:20) With this host Jehovah’s witnesses on earth are duly associated.
Satan and his wicked agents stalk through the earth to spy out and to maliciously act against God’s faithful people; and these horsemen in Zechariah’s vision aet as observers of what concerns Jehovah’s organization and to carry out his purposes. The Lord now has his face or attention turned to consideration of things on the earth, and he ins|>ects both the enemy organization and the organization of Jehovah. The eyes of the Lord arc observing everything on the earth. (Zceb. 4:10; Rev. 5:6) The horsemen were as the eyes of the Lord.—Num. 10: 31.
The underinspectors report to their chief: “And they answered the angel of the Lord that stood among the myrtle trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest.” (1:11) The substance of their report is that they have found the entire organization of Satan self-centered, in a state of self-complacency and giving no regard or concern to the kingdom of God under Christ. This report must have been made following the end of the World War, in 1918, and when Satan’s agencies were seeking means and remedies to bring peace on the war-torn earth. They gave no heed to God’s kingdom, but so far as it is concerned they sat still and rested and relied upon the League of Nations, the World Court, peace treaties, and like things, to keep Satan’s organization in possession of the world. Of course, they gave no assistance to God’s people to proclaim the truth, but treated them with
contempt. Such describes the attitude of the various parts of Satan’s organization on earth from 1918 to 1922. But God’s remnant got on their feet and began to work.
At the conclusion of the report by these underinspectors, “then the angel of the Lord answered and said, 0 Lord of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years [during which Jerusalem and the land of Judah lay desolate while its former inhabitants were captive in Babylon] ?” (1:12) This corresponds to the condition amongst God’s people from 1918 to 1922, probably before the general convention of Jehovah’s witnesses [n the latter year at Cedar Point, Ohio. It was when the Lord’s covenant people at that convention sa w that Christ the Great Inspector General had come to the temple that they cried out: “Save no w, I beseech thee, 0 Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.” (Ps. 118:25) It was in 1922 that God’s covenant people became aware of their own negligence in connection with the building of the antitypical temple of God. It was tlien that the Lon] spoke words of comfort to them and they rejoiced, seeing that Jehovah’s anger had turned away from them. (Isa. 12:1-4; 61:1-3) “And the Lord answered the angel that talked with me with good  words, and comfortable words.”—1:13.
Zechariah, having received the good and comfortable words from the Lord, was commanded to make a proclamation : “So the angel that communed w ith me said unto me, Cry thou, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.” (1:14) This proclamation or message must be both of God’s vengeance against the enemy and of comfort to his own people. Jehovah had put his name on his consecrated people who represented bis true interest and whom he would give a part in the work of vindicating his name. Hence he manifests his jealousy (his zeal) by returning unto Zion his great favor. (Zech. 8:1-3; Ps. 102:16) For that very reason Jehovah provided for the release and delivery of his people from bondage in the year 1919. During the World War Satan’s agencies, particulaily the Anglo-American empire system, had ill-treated God’s faithful people much to the displeasure of Jehovah; hence he caused his prophet to say: “And 1 am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease [careless; proud (Rotherham, margin) ] ; for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the afilic-tion.” (1:15) It was “Christendom”, this Anglo-American empire system, that not only became indifferent to God’s kingdom and rested in case in their own strength to lift up the nations, but helped forward the affliction of God’s people in particular. The Lord also says, “I was but a little displeased,” that is, with his own people, and for this reason he permitted them to be fallen into custody by the enemy. (Jer. 12:7)
318
STk WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Instead of “Christendom’s” exercising mercy towards those who preached the gospel of God’s kingdom (at that time this very preaching was with fear and trembling), “Christendom” took delight in punishing Jehovah’s covenant people and ‘helped forward their affliction’. Since then the same agents of Satan continue to make war against God’s anointed.
In making preparation for the punishment of the enemy organization Jehovah sends his “Messenger of the covenant” Christ Jesus, to gather together his people, build up the temple class, and make them fit for participating in his work. (Mal. 3:1-3) “Therefore thus saith the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies; my house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.” (1:16) Seeing this, Jehovah’s remnant should be very zealous and not slack their hands in the work because of opposition put forth by the enemy. The Lord declares that his temple shall be built up, and it is built up, “even in troublous times.” (Dan. 9:25) The “line . . . stretched forth upon Jerusalem” is to measure the progressive work which Jehovah has done in the building up of his organization on earth since 1922. He expresses his purpose to comfort and strengthen his people: “Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, My cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad [my cities (shall) overflow with blessing (Roth.)]; and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.”—1:17.
Jehovah has prospered his organization by committing to the remnant the testimony of .Jesus Christ, the kingdom interests on earth, and the duty of carrying on the work foreshadowed by the prophet Elisha, and by pouring out his spirit upon them, and bringing them into his organization, and permitting them to drink the fruit of the vine new with the Lord Jesus Christ in his organization.—Luke 22:18; Matt. 26:29.
Having consoled his own people of Zion, Jehovah now tells her of the enemies that will come against her. Zechariah (1:18) says: “Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold, four horns.” Homs symbolize means of pushing or inflicting punishment upon another. (Ezek. 34:21; Dcut. 33:17) Up to the time of the prophecy of Zechariah four devilish world powers
had existed and inflicted punishment upon men who served Jehovah God. The prophecy here means that four more world powers, to wit, Greece, Rome, the Anglo-American empire system, which is “Christendom”, and the combination of the League of Nations,  which is the eighth world power, would further oppose God’s anointed people. (Rev. 17:11) The angel of the Lord tells Zechariah that these horns arc the powers that scatter God’s people. (1:19) The “four horns” would also fitly represent the complete power of Satan’s organization,  which docs violence to God’s people and which reaches its climax of wickedness in the seventh world power.
The Scriptural use of “four” is symbolic of completeness, such as foursquare. “And the Lord shewed me four carpenters [craftsmen (Roth.); smiths (A.Zf.U.)].” (1:20) Generally the word here used for “carpenters” means artificers or ones who do constructive work. The “four” is here used as symbolical of the complete army of the Lord which hammers the horns off the bull heads of Satan’s organization, and crushes them. Since the prophet inquires concerning the four constructors or artificers, the angel of the Lord said: “Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These [horns] arc the horns which have scattered Judah [God’s faithful people], so that no man did lift up his head [in 1918 and 1919]: but these [artificers or carpenters or constructors] arc come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.” (1:21) These arc God’s provided means to discomfit the enemy', as Gideon did in his time. (Judg. 8:12; Isa. 19:16; Ezek. 30:9) This wicked crowd of Satan rises up to scatter and to destroy those who praise Jehovah God, pictured by Judah, and the Lord Jehovah God purposes the destruction of these assailants and makes preparation to that end. If Jehovah’s witnesses were left without instruction or spiritual food they would be discouraged and cast down, and the enemy would put them to flight. Now Jehovah instructs his faithful people and gives them comfort and encouragement that they' may have hope of complete victory through Christ. Jesus, and thus he prepares them for their part in the work of vindication of his great and holy name.
THE NATIONS IN THE WINEPRESS
TODAY the nations of earth, particularly those forming the League of Nations, call themselves “Christendom” or “Christian”, therefore they “call themselves by the name of the Lord”. Addressing himself to all the nations forming the visible part of Satan’s organization, and specifically pointing out “organized Christianity”, or “Christendom”, so called, Jehovah, through his prophet says: “Fer. Io T
begin to bring evil on the city' which is called by' my’ name, and should ye be utterly' unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts. Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say unto them, The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily' roar upon his habitation; he shall give a
October 15, 1937
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
319
shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth. A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; for the Lord hath a controversy with the nations, hs will plead with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind [war] shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.”—Jer. 25:29-32.
Having pronounced his specific judgment against the Devil’s organization assembled in the valley of decision, Jehovah begins the battle. lie commands, and his mighty executive officer, Christ Jesus, leads the assault. As the Psalm (107:25-27) in figurative language describes it: “For he commandcth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which iifteth up the waves thereof. They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths; their soul is melted because of trouble. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits’ end.” A stormy wind or whirlwind is a symbol of a great war. The great battle of God Almighty is on and proceeds to a conclusion.
The prophets of Jehovah described the progress of the war, and the result. Knowing that these prophets arc proved to be true prophets, we know that their testimony here given imports absolute verity. Jehovah is the right-hand support of his beloved Son who leads the fight, and concerning which the prophet says: “The Lord [Jehovah] at thy right hand shall strike through [or, shatter] kings in the day of his wrath, lie shall judge among the heathen [nations], he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries”; or, as another translation (liolh.) reads: “he hath shattered the head” over many countries.
Jehovah will give such a demonstration of his power that all may sec and know that he alone is the Almighty God. The time having conic to settle the issue, it shall be settled. The prophet (Nah. 1:6-S) says: ‘‘Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him. But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.” ‘‘And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, liecause they have sinned against the Lord; and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord’s wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of bis jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.” —Zeph. 1:17, IS.
Jesus Christ, the great Prophet, declared that the battle of God Almighty will be the worst trouble that
ever has been or ever will be visited upon the world. (Matt. 24:21) That it will completely uncover and destroy the Devil’s organization and all the works and workers of iniquity, the prophet makes clear when he says: ‘‘And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.”—Jer. 25:33.
That it will be a day of despair and vain howling of the shepherds, the prophet also plainly states, saying: ‘‘Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock [the church congregations of these religious shepherds]; for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel.” (Jer. 25: 34) When a pleasant vessel falls and is destroyed, those who possessed it arc in distress. The illustration is an apt one, that the shepherds who have deceived the people shall so fall, as the prophet states.
Further describing the calamity befalling the organization, the prophet says: ‘‘And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape. A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard: for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture. And the peaceable habitations arc cut down, because of the fierce anger of the Lord. He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion; for their land is desolate, because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and because of his fierce anger.”—Jer. 25: 35-38.
The Devil’s organization, represented by ancient Babylon, shall fall and become desolate, as it is written by the prophet, who says: ‘‘Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.” (Rev. 18:2) From the very beginning Babylon was the Devil’s organization and was associated with unclean spirits. This text in no wise disproves that conclusion. On the contrary, the prophecy here quoted describes the condition of desolation that comes upon Babylon after her fall. The words are those of description, showing her condition after God has broken her down.
Good men and women have long been held in Babylon by the sophistry and deception of Satan and his agencies. After her fall, no more shall men or women dwell in her, but she becomes the habitation of hateful birds and beasts. She will be shunned by every man and w’oman. Another prophet of Jehovah supports this conclusion, saying: ‘‘And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there. But wild beasts of
320
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brookly.x, N.Y.
the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there. And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces.” (Isa. 13:19-22) “And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwellingplaee for dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing without an inhabitant.” (Jer. 51:37) The destruction of the Devil’s organization will therefore be complete, and will demonstrate to all creation that Jehovah is the Almighty God, besides whom there is none.
Jehovah uses apt illustrations to make plain his purposes. In the sixty-third chapter of Isaiah his prophet sets out one of such illustrations. What is there recorded follows shortly upon the coming of the great witness that God commands to be given (and which is now being given), as detailed by the same prophet in the preceding chapter (Isa. 62:10). The prophet has a vision of one returning from the slaughter of the land of Edom and the city of Bozrah, and whose raiment is sprinkled with blood. Undoubtedly the one seen in such apparel is the same one described in another prophecy, which says: “And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood; and his name is called The Word of God.”—Rev. 19:13.
It is helpful to an understanding of a prophecy to first explain the meaning of some of the words which appear therein and in connection therewith.
The name “Edom” represents that which is opposed to the Lord. (Obad. 1) It has the same meaning as the name “Esau”, and therefore refers to the organization of Satan, the most reprehensible element of which is the religious clement. Idumea has the same meaning as “Edom”, and really is Edom. (Isa. 34:5) The wrath of God is especially against Idumea.— Ezek. 35:15.
Bozrah was the chief city of Edom. Therefore Bozrah would represent that which is the center or most important part of modern Edom, to wit, the ruling factors thereof.
The wine-press is the instrument, or organization, employed by Jehovah to crush or break up the fruit
of the evil one. “The vine of the earth,” or that evil vine (Rev. 14:18,19), produces the grapes or fruit of the earth. The earth represents the Devil’s organization visible to man. The vine of the earth is the very opposite of the “true vine”, and is therefore the official part of the Devil’s organization.
The American Revised Version gives a better rendering of the text, and therefore the quotation is from that version. The prophecy begins with a colloquy or conversation. The first speaker is the prophet, and the second speaker is Christ Jesus, the mighty executive officer of Jehovah God who assaults the stronghold of the enemy.
The first speaker propounds the question: “Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, marching in the greatness of his strength?”
The second speaker replies: “I [Christ, the great Executive Officer and Prophet of Jehovah] that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.” (lie is the mighty Savior and Deliverer of oppressed humanity.)
The first speaker now asks: “Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winevat [or trough] ?”—Isa. 63:1-6, A.R.V.
To this the second speaker answers: “I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the peoples there was no man with me: yea, I trod them in mine aimer, and trampled them in my wrath; and their lifeblood is sprinkled upon my garments, and I have stained all my raiment. For the day of vengeance was in my heart, and the year of my redeemed is eorne. And I looked, and there was none to help ; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my wrath, it upheld me. And I trod down the peoples in mine anger, and made them drunk in my wrath, and I poured out their lifeblood on the earth.”
In such forceful terms the Lord shows how he will crush into nonexistence the great and mighty organization which has antagonized him and his purposes and has made life unbearable for the peoples of earth.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
R. H. BARBER
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Binghamton, N. Y. ..Nov. Oneonta. N. Y. .......“
Bingham iou, N. Y....“
Cooks Falls, N. Y...."
Great Bend, Fa.......“
Scranton, Pa.........“
7	Pittston, Pa..........Nov.	13
8	Wilkes-Ba rre,	Pa...“ 14.15
9	Williamspoi t,	Pa.......“	M
10	Elmira, N.Y.............“	H
11	Ithaca, N.Y............'*	IS
12	Syracuse, N.Y...........“	21
Waco, Tex.............Nov.	3-5	Ennis, Ter.............Nov.	19
Ross, Tex.............. “	G	Kemp. Tex...............•'	20
Mexia. Tex..............“	7-9	Teriell, Tex............."	21
Fairfield, Tex..........“	11,12	Dallas, Tex .............“	23,21
Streetman, Tex..........“	13	McKinney. Tex............"	25
Elkhart, Tex ..........••	14,15	Denison, Tex.............“	2G. 27
Corsicana, Tex. --------“	17,18	Bonlmin, Tex.............“	2>, 29
J. C. BOOTH
Great Falls, Mont. ..Nov. 4, 5
Lewistown, Mont.......“	6
Melstone, Mont ........“	7
Ryegate, Mont......... “	9
Belmont, Mont.........“	10
Twodot, Mont..........'•	11
Big Timber, Mont. „... “	12
Billings, Mont........“ 13,14
Roscoe, Mont...........“	16,17
Manhattan. Mont......Nov.	IS
Butte, Mont............“	19.20
Deer Lodge, Mont......."	21
Missoula. Mont........23
Pablo, Mont ...........“	24
Whitefish, Mont........“	25- 26
Kalispell. Mont........“	27.28
St. Ignatius, Mont.....“	30
Hamilton, Mont.......Dec.	1
“CONSOLATION” (Continued from page 306) this past September. Consolation, however, is published by the same company, Tho Golden Age Publishing Company, Ine., and though containing tho same basic features which made tho former magazine so popular and valuable, it is issued in a more attractive, handy and suitable style, making it an improved, a better magazine, which none of Jehovah’s people should fail to receive and read. The subsenption piiee is $1.00 a year for tho United States; $1.25 for foreign countries.

81



‘ A | lr Z!i ljg=
Ui
H A( _     h^ZtLL/ \ \ y z \ /£ i^ste
J

14
9
^'1
Witchman, (fthat of tte-KighF
Isaiah
•I
Vol. LVIII Semimonthly
NOVEMBER 1, 1937
No. 21

CONTENTS
V !

to
His “Work” and His “Act” (Part 5) 323
Enlarged Picture___________
Work of the Faithful Portrayed
Passing the Cup____________
Questions for Study
Idolaters ___________________
Rebellious-------------------
Letters _____________________
“Vindicator”_________________
“Enemies”____________________
“Safety”_____________________
“Model Study”________________
• ‘ Consolation ’ ’ _________
327
329
330
332
332
334
336
322
322
322
322
322
y/r

k,
©wiiEiin^

WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President	W. E. Van Am burgh Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; tliat God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed nnil faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare liis purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
“VINDICATOR”
The concluding united seivice period of the year 1937, the nine days December 4 to 12 inclusive, is called the “ Vindicator” testimouy ]>eriod. The feature offer of this period will be the new book Enemies, to lie placed on the usual eoutnbution of 25c. All those desiring to be for a vindication of Jehovah’s name will act upon tins announcement and will at once begin making all due pieparations for a vigorous part in this testi-monv. Consult the forthcoming issues of the lufoimant for additional details and instructions. Your prompt report at the close of the testimony will be appreciated by this office.
"ENEMIES”
This new book, written by Brother Rutherford, and first announced and released at the recent gcneial convention of Jehovah’s witnesses at Columbus, Ohio, is now available for all who arc lor Jehovah and his King and against his enemies. It is a grand work, of 384 pages, excellently bound, gold-stamped, with color illustrations and a compiebcnsive index. The initial edition is the autographed edition and contains, in facsimile, a letter written by the hand of the author and addressed to all the Lord's servants. Due to the limited quantity of this author’s edition a contribution therefor of 50c a copy is asked to offset the special expense of publishing this edition.
“SAFETY”
This is the new 64-page booklet, containing the two recent public addresses by Brother Rutherford, that delivered at the recent general convention of the Lord's people in Paris and
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people
of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for othei means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It docs not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yeacly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; C'nviia asd Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Gtiu.vr Bkiiain. A’siiiacv»ia, ami Soltii Aran. 7s American remittance, should b<- made by Postal or Express Money Older or by Bank In aft. Canadian, Briti-h, South Al. man and Australasian remlttames should he made direct to the n-j . t live branch olliees. Remittances from lountries oilier than tho •• mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn olltce, but by Intel national Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
Bntish...............34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian ...... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Cmaria Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, 8trnIlitrcld, N. 8. IV., Australia South African..........Boston House, Capo Town, South Al.lea
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay lire subscription true may have The Wati htairer Iree upon written application t<> tire publishers, ninde ome eich year, stating tlie re non for so requesting It. We are glad to thus nid the needy, but tlie written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Ruliseribrrs: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal snb-scitption will be smit only when requested. Clmm'e of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address lah-1 vvill-in one month. A renewal blank (carrying notl-c of c\|,ii .11 ion) v ill be sent with the journal one month bclore the subscription evplr<•>.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Itioollyn, -V. V., under the Act of March 3, IS7D.
entitled “Comfoit”, and that radiocast from the Colin tint at Columbus, Ohio, on the occasion of the international convention there and entitled ‘‘Safety”. The artistic cover design, m color, gives it an attractive appearance. A contribution of 5e ] or ropy is asked therefor. You may order a supply for geneial diMribu-tion from htuse to house at once.
“MODEL STUDY”
This new 6-1-page booklet, though plainly bound, is of great value to ail engaged in the service in conjunction with the latest phonograph series of recorded speeches on “Jlvpocnsy Exposed” and ‘‘Religion and Christianity”. The booklet contains specially prepared questions and answers, in logical order and based on the above-mentioned series of recorded speeches, and is an indispensable aid to everyone who would conduct or paiticipate in a study of said series at gatherings of newly interested people. The booklet is obtainable at 5c a copy.
“CONSOLATION”
This journal of fact, hope and courage supersedes the foimer magazine. The Golden Age, the last edition of which appealed this past September. Consolation, however, is published by the same company, The Golden Age Publishing Company, Ine., and though containing the same basic featuics which made tho former magazine so popular and valuable, it is issued in a more attractive, handy and suitable style, making it an improved, a better magazine, which none of Jehovah's people should inil to receive and read. The subscription puce is $1.00 a vear for tho United States; $1.25 for foreign countries.
Vol. LVIII
Nottmbkr 1, 1937
No. 21
HIS "WORK” AND HIS "ACT”
*‘As I have done to Shiloh.”—Jer. 7:14.
PART 5
JEHOVAH often sends his message by an imperfret man. The fact that Jehovah uses a man docs not mean that the man is perfect, or even blameless so far as the man himself is concerned. The man whom Jehovah uses must be loyal and faithful to God in order to be pleasing and acceptable to him. No man is perfect in his organism, but he can be perfect in heart; that is, he can and must love God if he pleases the Most High. That means unselfish devotion to Jehovah. What men may think of God’s servant is not at all material. The faithful servant always considers how he can please the Lord, and he is indifferent to everything else. Jeremiah was that kind of a man. Other faithful men, whom Jehovah selected and sent as his prophets to deliver his message to the people, were also that kind of men ; that is to say, they were perfect in heart and unselfishly devoted to Almighty God. Because of their faithfulness to God the Devil and bis visible agents bitterly opposed them and induced the people to treat both the messenger and the message with contempt. Such has ever been the course that faithful men have had to take, and the insults they have had to endure. The result, as in ancient times, still is, that comparatively few men hear and give heed to the Word of God. The religionists are the most reprehensible of all who have turned the people away from Jehovah. Speaking to the people of Judah and Jerusalem, Jeremiah now said: “And the Lord hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets, rising [up} early and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your car to hear.”—Jer. 25:4.
* The prophets Ilosca, Micah, Zephaniah, and other holy and faithful men, were raised up and sent by Jehovah as his prophets to deliver his message before the day of the coming of Jeremiah; and twelve years after Jeremiah delivered the message committed to him Ezekiel was raised up as a prophet and sent to Chaldea. (Ezck. 1:1-3) And so Jeremiah said to the people: ‘The Lord sent his prophets early to you, and ye have not hearkened nor inclined the ear.’ It is even so today. The people of “Christendom” have had many and favorable opportunities to hear the truth, but
323
comparatively few have hearkened thereto or inclined the car, and the reason is that the Devil, operating through his clergymen and religionists, has induced the people to treat the message of God with contempt. Those clergymen desire to have the honor and praise that is due to Jehovah, and hence they scorn his message and messengers. But in this day of enlightenment the people must bear their part of the iniquity, because they have opportunity to hear. If they fail or refuse to hear, then they are largely responsible.
a Again Jeremiah reminded the people that they had been warned by the prophets of old to turn away from their wrongful course and follow the right course: “They said, Turn ye again now every one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the Lord hath given unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever.” (Jer. 25:5) The leaders of the Jews, who practiced their religion, stood before the people and with solemn faces and trembling voices would say: “We are the sons of Abraham, and you are also the descendants of Abraham. We were chosen first of God, and we know that God would not send a message to us and to you by such a common man as Jeremiah; and the message he brings is not worthy of consideration.” But the fact that those men were the descendants of Abraham according to the flesh was no guarantee that they would never be ousted from the land promised to Abraham and his seed after him. This matter is made clear by the inspired words of the apostle, who said: “For they arc not all Israel, which arc of [fleshly] Israel: neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called. That is, They which arc the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God [whom Abraham typified]: but the children of the promise [to Abraham] arc counted for the [spiritual] seed.” (Rom. 9: 6-8) “Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, arc the children of promise.” (Gal. 4: 28) “So then they which be of faith arc blessed with faithful Abraham.” (Gal. 3:9) A man may say that he is a Jew, but that is no evidence whatsoever that he is a Jew. A Jew, within the meaning
324
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the Scriptures, is one who is devoted to Jehovah and serves and praises Jehovah God.
■•Like the fraudulent clergy of the Jews, so today the Roman Catholic Hierarchy crowd presumptuously claim to be the only favored ones of God and they fraudulently and falsely act to keep the people in ignorance of God’s Word. They seek the honor and praise that is due Jehovah. As a sample of how these self-constituted servants of God act the following is cited. Tire Ottawa Journal of February 1, 1937, published what is called “a pastoral letter, issued by Archbishop Forb®”, which letter says, amongst other things, the following: ‘‘Certain publications, which contain heretical doctrines attacking Christian truths, which are circulated throughout the city and district, . . . wc prohibit in our diocese, these writings, booklets, pamphlets, circulars. They are not allowed to be published, read, kept, bought or sold, nor to be translated into other languages nor to be passed about in any way. They are to be destroyed. To be perfectly clear, wc wish without exeluding all the rest of the same type, to point particularly to the writings of the so-called Witnesses of Jehovah.” Forbes feels his very great importance and exalts himself above Jehovah God and the Lord Jesus Christ. Jehovah’s witnesses are the only people on earth that publish the unvarnished truth, as contained in the Bible, and that is the reason why the Roman Catholic Hierarchy presumptuously assumes to prevent the people from having those publications. No Catholic priest or other official of the Hierarchy has any right or authority to destroy the property of another, and certainly no right to prohibit the people from hearing the Word of Cod. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy well know that God’s Word exposes the crookedness of the Catholic system, and for that reason, and that only, they wish to withhold from the people the truth, which exposes the crooked Catholic system.
• Let those cicries take notice of what the Scriptures say, to wit, that they are not the children of God and not his representatives merely because they claim so to be. Many of them lay claim to such, and the Lord rejects them. (Matt. 7: 21-23) Credulous and ignorant Catholics will obey the command of Forbes, but all sincere Catholics of good will toward God, and who love righteousness and hate iniquity, will get their eyes open and learn that Forbes and his associates are frauds, and then these people of good will will flee from the abominable Hierarchy organization, and will find refuge in the Lord’s organization under Christ Jesus. The bold, arrogant and scornful men of the Hierarchy, such as Forbes, will in the future find the same fate that befell the religionists of Jerusalem.
* As Jeremiah proceeded with his work in the face of all the opposition, so now Jehovah’s witnesses must continue to proclaim God’s message, regardless of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy or other agents of the
Devil. The people must be given an opportunity to hear, and then those who refuse to give heed must bear their own iniquity. Of all the bigoted, scornful, arrogant and self-exalted men that have ever been on the earth, the breed of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy stands in the front row, and to them surely the words of Jesus apply when he said: ‘‘Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell?”—Matt. 23:33.
1	As Jeremiah delivered Jehovah’s warning and admonition to the Jews, even so now Jehovah’s witnesses must continue to deliver Jehovah’s message of warning and admonition to the people, that they may have an opportunity of fleeing from idolatry and idolatrous worship of the Devil and his crowd: “And go not after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands; and I will do you no hurt.”—Jer. 25:6.
8	The Jew religionists, particularly the loaders, drew nigh to Jehovah God with their mouths in formal or ceremonial worship, but they were utterly void of any heart devotion to Jehovah and they induced the people to follow their unrighteous course. They led the people to believe that formal worship was all-sufficient and that, consistent therewith, they must give all their means of service and worship and praise to the clergymen amongst the Jews. Even so today the Catholic Hierarchy, and particularly the chief men thereof, hold a great powwow, during which, garbed in lace curtains, golden beads and fish-god hats, they pray before the common people and go through certain forms of ceremony or unreasonable actions, which they call “worship”, and in which they permit people to have some part, and that part of the people is to kiss the toe or the ring of someone of the Hieiarchy. They induce the people to believe that such formali-m is all that is necessary, so far as God is concerned, and that the people must give their time and honor and money to the mighty ones amongst the Hierarchy and hail them as gods and bow down before them. They also teach them that they must likewise honor the mighty men who work with the Hierarchy in polities and say to them: “Heil Hitler”; “Viva Mussolini”; and all like mighty men or so-called “rulers”. They teach the people to believe that such are the higher powers to which they must render full obedience, and that the Hierarchy itself is the highest amongst the higher powers. The Hierarchy induces the people to believe that if they do these things in the name of God they are thereby rendering unto God the things that are God’s, and that therefore they are safe. They can do all the devilment they wish aside from that. So the clergy and the principal of their flock say: “Why should God hurt us with death or hell? Why should ho send upon us and our nation a great calamity ? Such a message is nonsense”; and the people look upon it as strange. In flagrant violation of God’s law the clergy bow themselves before images and they
November 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
325
teach the people to bow before such images, which the clergy have provided, and induce them to believe that this constitutes a part of their worship. The people are therefore led to indulge in Devil worship and Devil religion, which turns them away from Jehovah and the way of life. Jehovah warned the Jews by the mouth of his prophets that they must repent, that is, turn away from such Devil worship; and likewise Jehovah now warns the sincere people, Catholic and non-C'atholie, through the message he sends them by his faithful witnesses, that they must repent, that is, turn away from the devilish religious organization that reproaches Jehovah’s name.
* For twenty years now the Lord Jesus has been at the temple, sitting in judgment, and during that time he has sent forth witnesses to deliver Jehovah’s message to the people, even as Jeremiah repeatedly testified in the presence of the Jews. The failure of the Jews to hear and to hearken, and their continued practice of Devil religion, provoked Jehovah to anger, and Jeremiah so informed the people: “Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saitli the Lord; that ye might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt.”—Jer. 25: 7.
10 The people of Judah were led by the clergy amongst the Jews to believe that for them to hearken to Jeremiah and to other prophets of God was merely to give heed to men. The people therefore fell and blindly followed the lead of the priests or clergymen and principal of the flock, who turned a deaf ear to the message of Jeremiah which he brought from Jehovah. The failure of the people to hear Jehovah’s word, and their yielding to the influence of the clergy, the Jewish leaders, had provoked Jehovah to anger, and the result was hurt to the people themselves. It is exactly that way at the present time. The “big clergymen”, such as cardinals, bishops and priests, who arrogantly “strut their stuff” and use words of high-sounding authority, induce the people to scorn the message of God; and the result is hurt to the people themselves. Those clergymen of the Hierarchy have no love for the people, and certainly no love for God. They are looking out for themselves. When Jehovah’s “strange act” begins, the religionists, who thought themselves safe by following the clergy, will then exclaim that had they known that the message was from the Lord they would have shown respect and given heed thereto, and many of those religionists will say, as Jesus stated, ‘Lord, have we not done wonderful works in thy name?’ but Jesus will push them away. It will then be too late for them. But the responsibility is now upon Jehovah’s witnesses and all of those of good will, the Jonadabs, who have the message of the truth, to see to it that the people have opportunity to hear, that the people may be without excuse in the day of their visitation. For that reason the commandment of the Lord must be obeyed, to wit, ‘This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world as a witness,
and before the end,’ and before Jehovah expresses his wrath upon “Christendom” and those associated therewith.
"There is no reason for any person who receives a knowledge of the Bible to rely upon man, because God’s express command is that such reliance upon man is to the hurt of those who do so rely; as it is written: “Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.” (Ps. 146: 3) Everyone who learns that the Bible is God’s Word is duty-bound to give heed to his Word, and if he does not he must suffer the results. Hence Jeremiah said, upon authority of his commission from God: “Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Because ye have not heard my words,” then God will visit you for your hurt.— Jeremiah 25:8.
15 For a long period of time Jehovah gave opportunity to the Jews to hear his warning message with their ears, but they refused to listen and to give heed to what they did hear with their natural ears. Had they been ignorant through no fault of their own, God would not hold them chargeable and punishable. In order that they might know, and in order that they might not plead ignorance of his cause, Jehovah commanded Jeremiah to take a place where he would come in contact with the religious-practicing people and to speak God’s message in their hearing. So liken ise today with “Christendom”. For many years God has caused his faithful witnesses to go among the people from house to house and to call attention of the people to his Word of warning. Millions of books and other publications explaining the Bible have been brought to the attention of the people. A wide witness has been given by verbal proclamation, by radio, and by public meetings in theaters and halls, and the people of “Christendom” cannot now plead ignorance, even though their clergymen have opposed the message of the Lord. The comparatively small number, people of good will toward God, who do give heed and flee to the place of safety, are blessed of the Lord, but the far greater number continue to follow the leadership of the hypocritical clergy, and, says Jehovah through his prophet, ‘those clergy preach lies, and my people love to have it so.’ Every person who thinks seriously well knows that such is the condition that now exists within the borders of “Christendom” and the people who arc associated with “Christendom”. Multitudes of people claiming to be Christians have turned their hearts wholly away from God and to Devil worship.
13	The Jews refused to give heed to God’s message, and the time came for God’s warning to them which must be uttered in their hearing, and he caused Jeremiah to utter that warning and to tell the people that, because they had not heard his words, “Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these
326
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N'. Y.
nations round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolations.”—Jer. 25:9.
14	Let all take notice that the final warning was not man’s message; but, as it is written, “Thus saith the Lord of hosts [the God of battle], . . . behold, I will send and take all the families,” and so forth. How did Jehovah send, and whom did he send to execute his warning in the first instance? Jeremiah’s prophecy may have been communicated to Nebuchadnezzar by some agent. But even so, that would not be the controlling power that induced the king of Babylon to act. It appears to be certain that God sent his holy angels to put into the mind of Nebuchadnezzar, whom he had chosen to be the executioner of Jerusalem, the conclusion and determination to go and make war on Jerusalem. The question before the mind of Nebuchadnezzar at that time was, Should he first make war on Ammon and the allied heathen nations, or should he first go to Jerusalem and attack it? Nebuchadnezzar appealed to the Devil and his angels, because he was a Devil worshiper, and he sought advice from the Devil that he might decide the question before his mind. Without a doubt, however, Jehovah had his angels on tiic spot and Jehovah employed his supreme power to control Nebuchadnezzar and cause him to decide to first go to Jerusalem and attack it. (Sec Vindication, Book One, pages 283-285; Ezekiel 21:19-23.) Thus Jehovah, by his prophetic picture, shows that it is his purpose to first destroy “Christendom” and then Io destroy the remaining parts of Satan’s organization. For that purpose he scuds his Executioner, Christ Jesus, against “Christendom” first. It was Jehovah who brought disaster upon Jerusalem, and it is Jehovah, acting by his Executive Officer, Christ Jesus, who will bring destruction upon “Christendom”, which Jerusalem foreshadowed. In passing it is worthy here to note that if Jehovah would employ his power through his angels to put in the mind of a heathen the conclusion to act in a certain way, then certainly Jehovah would employ his power through his angels to put in the minds of his servants to take the course that he would have them take. God is directing the way of his people, who in all their ways acknowledge him.—Prov. 3: 5, 6.
13	Jehovah declared that he would “take all the families of the north” and bring them against Jerusalem. Nebuchadnezzar had brought the “families of the north” into his army cither by subduing them and drafting them or else by winning them to his side. Jehovah had given Jeremiah a vision of what was to come to pass, and which is specifically set forth by reason of the vision God had given, and explained to him now what was coming to pass, just as Jehovah’s witnesses today know what is coming to pass by reason of what God has revealed to them through his Word. “The families of the north” picture the hosts of heaven, that is, those who follow Christ Jesus in the
battle of the great day. (Rev. 19:14) With Christ Jesus the Chief they utter God’s judgments and put it into the mind of the political and other earthly elements of Satan’s organization to fight against the religionists when God's due time comes to destroy the religionists.
18 Jehovah declared he would bring against Jerusalem “Nebuchadrezzar the [new] king of Babylon, my servant”, and his host. Mark this, that Jehovah did not speak of Nebuchadnezzar as “his worshiper”, because Nebuchadnezzar was a Devil worshiper. God called Nebuchadnezzar “my servant”, because he used him to picture his great Servant and Executioner, Christ Jesus. The name “Nebuchadnezzar” means “Nebo is the protector”, and therefore the name properly applies to the Lord Jesus Christ, that great Prophet, who is the protector and savior particularly of his people, whom he protects from the assault and injury by his foes. (Sec Vindication, Book Two, page 129.) Nebuchadnezzar pictured the One concerning whom Jehovah said: “Behold my servant, whom I uphold.” (Isa. 42:1) He is the one to whom the “nations” that survive must and do look and hope for protection and salvation. (Alatt. 12:18-21) The declaration of Jehovah was: “I . . . will bring them [1] against this land”; that is to say, against modern Jerusalem, which is “Christendom”, the clergy and the “principal of the flock”, and will utterly destroy the religious system, because it is devilish and an abomination unto the Most High; and then, (2) “against all these nations round about, ami will . . . destroy them”, that is, all the nations listed in the prophecy of Jeremiah 25:18-2G. All of such in the prophecy picture all of Satan’s visible organization inside and outside of “Christendom”. In the miniature fulfillment of the prophecy Jerusalem and Judah fell and, after seventy years, were recovered; and therefore the words of the prophecy, to wit, “will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, [to look at], and an hissing [by those who pass by], and perpetual desolations,” must refer to and do apply to “Christendom”, which will suffer complete and perpetual desolation. The Devil’s religious system will go down at the beginning of Jehovah’s “strange act” and will never rise again, because such is the declaration of the Lord.
17 Doubtless the people of Jerusalem boasted and reveled in the fact that they were the favored people of the earth; and hence they were given over to mirth and hilarity, and Jehovah informed them that the end of such mirth and hilarity was at hand: “Moreover, I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle.” (Jer. 25:10) Having adopted the Devil religion in the place and stead of the commandments of Jehovah, the Jews were grinding out meal for cakes to the “queen of heaven”, that is, to
November J, 1937
watchtower.
327
the Devil’s organization, and now the sound of their millstones must cease. The flambeau torches or candles illuminating their resorts of hilarity must go out, and they must be in complete darkness, and the sound of gladness and shouting would cease, and there would be no more bridal processions, and no more feasts or night celebrations at the temple. In this way Jehovah foretells what shall shortly come to pass upon “Christendom” when he begins his “strange act” and the lighted candles in the habitation of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy will become darkness. No more public processions, led by men wearing lace window-curtains for dress or lace gowns, with small boys carrying the trains, will be seen. No more “Heil”ing the dictators of the Roman Catholic organization or any of her supporters, political or otherwise.
” With the beginning of the “strange act” the witness work of Jehovah’s servants will have been done throughout “Christendom” by Jehovah’s faithful witnesses, who since the death of the man Jesus have held forth the light of the world, letting their lights shine before men to the praise of Jehovah. The faithful followers of Christ Jesus know these things are coming to pass soon, because Jehovah has so dcelaicd and he is certain to perform bis purpose. To be reassured now strengthens their faith, and their praises arc to Jehovah God as they press on in the face of vicious opposition, knowing that victory is near.
It is interesting here to note a comment made by a Hebrew writer recarding this prophecy, and particularly as to its miniature fulfillment, and which says: “Travellers remark, that in the East, everywhere in the morning may be heard the noise of the mills, which often awakens people; for they generally grind every day just as much as may be necessary for the day’s consumption. Where, then, the noise of the mill is not heard in the morning, nor the light of the candle seen in the evening, there must be an utter desolation. ’’—Lcescr, footnote.
2	u The Hierarchy big moguls send out their “blackbirds” daily to gather in the shekels, and they grind what is necessary for that day and they light their candles for each day. But when this visiting to the offices and factories by the poor deluded women ceases, and when the candles of the Hierarchy are extinguished, it will mark utter desolation amongst the religionists of “Christendom”. That day is near.
21	There will be some who will survive Armageddon, as Jehovah has declared, and to all such “Christendom” will appear as a complete desolation: “And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment [an object of astonishment]; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.” (Jcr. 25:11; By this means Jehovah will show’ how terrible are his judgments when executed against his enemies, and all who survive will know that he is truly the Supreme One, to be greatly feared and not be reproached with impunity.
22	Judah and Jerusalem suffered first, and God made it clear that not only they, but also all nations round about, should suffer. This shows not only that “Christendom” will be wrecked at the beginning of Armageddon, but that the wrath of God will then be continued and will extend to all the nations of the earth. Says the prophet of God: “These nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years”; that being symbolic of “all their lives”. “The days of our years are threescore years and ten.” (Ps. 90:10) Call to mind again what Jehovah caused Jeremiah to say: “And now I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him. And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son’s son, until the very time of his hind conic; and then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him.”—Jcr. 27: 6, 7.
23	The “seventy years” mentioned in the scripture here are prophetic and mean forever, or for all time. All who survive Armageddon must serve the King, Christ Jesus, whom Nebuchadnezzar foreshadowed in the prophetic drama. The people of good will, forming the “great multitude”, come from every nation, kindred, people and tongue, and they must serve Jehovah and his King for ever: “I .saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man eatne with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.”—Dan. 7:13,14.
21 The destruction of “Christendom” means the destruction of the nations outside as well as inside of her, and that destruction will serve as a vindication of Jehovah’s name and kingdom. Such are the “vessels of wrath” and by the Lord doomed to destruction, and upon whom Jehovah shows his almighty power at the battle of Armageddon; which “strange act” he will cause to be performed by Christ Jesus his King. There will be no recovery for “Christendom” or for any of the other wicked nations. This is further foretold by the fact that at the end of the seventy literal years neither Judah nor Jerusalem, nor any of the nations involved, regained their independence, but were subject to Medo-Persia, which overthrew Babylon, and whose kings, Darius and Cyrus, pictured Jehovah God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
ENLARGED PICTURE
25 The complete and everlasting destruction of “Christendom” and all other parts of Satan’s organization is implied by the language of verses 12-14 of this chapter of the prophecy. A different picture now here appears, which is enlarged over that winch we have heretofore been considering. “And it shall come
328
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the Lord, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and will make it perpetual desolations.” —Jer. 25:12.
“At the end of the literal seventy years “Jerusalem” passed out of the picture and a new prophetic picture or drama appears. At the end of the seventy years Nebuchadnezzar had been succeeded by Belshazzar, and the latter was in no wise used as the servant of Jehovah, but, on the contrary, he misused the sacred vessels of the Lord to grossly reproach Jehovah’s name. It was then that Babylon was “weighed in the balances, and . . . found wanting”. (Dan. 5:27) From that point and forward Babylon symbolized exclusively the Devil’s organization, and her king Belshazzar, the head thereof, is a symbol of the Devil. The end of the seventy years pictured the climax of Armageddon. This does not mean that the battle of the great day' of God Almighty will last seventy years, but rather it symbolically says Armageddon shall eome and end with the destruction of every' visible part of Satan’s organization that is on the earth. Then what shall follow? The wrath of God will be expressed against the invisible part of Satan’s organization, and including Satan himself. Says the prophet of God: “I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation [the Devil’s hordes invisible now to human eyesj.” Belshazzar, the king of Babylon, and who represented the Devil, is designated in the prophecy’ as “the king of Sheshach”. The Devil is the real king of Babylon. (Dan. 2: 37,38) At this point of the prophecy of Jeremiah “that nation” is the same as that described by the prophet Ezekiel as “Gog, of the land of Magog”. (Ezek. 38:2, 3, A.A’.V.) (See Vindication, Book Two, page 311.) Their punishment is “for their iniquity”; which shows that the king of Babylon and his nation stood for the Devil and all of his angeiie or invisible forces. That wicked horde must be and will be whipped and punished and brought under the feet of the great Conqueror. After Christ Jesus cast Satan and his angelic hosts out of heaven and down to the earth (Rev. 12: 9), about 1914, they were put under the feet of Christ Jesus. z\t Armageddon, the great battle of God Almighty, Christ Jesus and his heavenly armies will trample under foot Satan’s organization, visible and invisible, and Satan’s organization will become a complete desolation. “The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly’.” (Rom. 16:20) “And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled; and after that he must be loosed a little season.” (Rev. 20:2,3) No recovery will ever take place for the Devil’s organization, for the reason that when he
is loosed for a “little season” then he will be completely annihilated.—Rev. 20:7,10.
27 Jehovah emphasizes his purpose to destroy Satan’s organization so that no creature will have reason to doubt its destruction: “And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.” (Jer. 25:13) What was “written in this book”, as prophesied by’ Jeremiah, was recorded at chapters fifty and fifty-one of Jeremiah’s prophecy, and is a corroboration of the prophecy uttered by Isaiah about 100 years previous, and which is recorded at chapters thirteen, twenty-one, and forty-seven. Jehovah foreordained and declared that his word"and name shall be vindicated at his appointed time; and to creatures it seems a very’ long time, but it is certain to come at the right time. Jehovah has given to Satan full time and opportunity to carry out his boastful threat or challenge.
2S The prophet Jeremiah was commanded to prophesy’ against “all the nations”, and he did so against all visible parts of Satan’s organization. Jchotah issued to Jeremiah this specific command, to wit: “I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations. See, I ha\e this day set thee over the nations, and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down.” (Jer. 1: 5,10) That commission to Jeremiah foretold the commission which Jehovah issued to Christ Jesus, who will execute it fully; and all his faithful ones, including the remnant, will have a part therein, and their part is to declare the “judgments written” before they are executed.
29For more than 6,000 years Jehovah has suffered Satan to go on in his wickedness; but the time mars when there shall be a complete end of him and his wicked organization. The hosts of heaven, led by Christ Jesus in tiic great conflict of Armageddon, will vindicate Jehovah’s name. That will be a mighty host of warriors that will not back down and will know no defeat. Concerning that great host it is written: “And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them.” (Rev. 9:16) “The chariots of (tod are twenty' thousand, even thousands upon thousands: the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the sanctuary.” —Ps. 68:17, A.Ii.V.	'
30 Jerusalem’s desolation foreshadowed the beginning of Armageddon; and following that the words of Jeremiah’s prophecy’ apply. “For many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of them [Babylon and the Chaldeans] also: and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the works of their own hands.” (Jer. 25:14) The “great kings” are Jehovah, the King of Eternity (Jer. 10:10. margin), and Christ Jesus, the “King of kings, and Lord of lords”. (Rev. 19:16) These great Kings were foreshadowed by Darius and Cyrus when the Babylonish kingdom was divided and fell. (Dan. 5-2<)
November 1, 1937
*3Tg WATCHTOWER.
329
These mighty Kings shall "serve themselves of them [the Chaldeans]” by whipping them to a complete standstill, of an everlasting destruction, and thus vindicating Jehovah’s name and his word upon "the Chaldeans”, that is, the spirit members of Satan’s organization, including the Devil himself. The deeds of that wicked one and his hordes have reached the limit, and so the Lord God says: "I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the works of their own hands.” Satan and his wicked angels now use the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other fanatical religionists to commit the most indescribable deeds of wickedness, and particularly against those who serve Jehovah. The Hierarchy being the chief instrument of the Devil on earth, the Devil uses the same to reproach Jehovah’s name by the practice of gross hypocrisy, deceiving the people, and by wickedly persecuting faithful men and women who serve Jehovah God; and concerning that devilish organization God, through his prophet, says: "And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea, all their evil that they have done in Zion [God’s organization, of which Christ Jesus is head] in your sight, saith the Lord.”—Jer. 51:24.
81 From the time of Abel to this very day the faithful servants of Almighty God have been foully murdered by Satan and his cohorts. At the present time this cruel, foul and malicious murdering goes on in such countries as Germany, and concerning those who are thus attempting to destroy Jehovah’s servants Jehovah causes his prophet Jeremiah to say: “As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.”—Jer. 51:49.
88 The Roman Catholics’ day of wicked persecution and defamation of God’s name draws near to an end. Jehovah will see to it that Satan and all his agents, and particularly the Hierarchy, pay the full measure of penalty. "Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works; in the cup [cup of bitter dealings] which she hath filled, fill to her double. How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her; for she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall sec no sorrow.” —Rev. 18: 6, 7.
31 At the present time the old "harlot”, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization, describes herself as queen and goes forth and sings the harlot song. (Isa. 23:15-17) Let her boastful men take warning now that their days of hilarity are brief and soon the Lord will visit them with what is due to them. To be sure, the Hierarchy will have some of its crowd to read wliat is here published, that they may keep in touch with what is going on. Let them not attempt to excuse themselves by saying: "These are the words of some earthly creature.” The quotations are from the Word
of God; and God, having declared his purpose, is absolutely certain to perform it.
34 It was in the nighttime that the Medes and Persians sacked the stronghold of Belshazzar’s kingdom. “In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old.” (Dan. 5:30,31) For a long period of time the Devil has operated, and he still operates, through the religionists, and particularly through the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, to keep the people in ignorance of God’s gracious provision and therefore in the dark. Now the time has come when, in the language of the prophet of God, ‘darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people.’ (Isa. 60:2) Such darkness is the result of Satan operating through his wicked agents upon the earth, to wit, the religionists, led by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Satan’s wicked woman, the old "whore”, is now singing and lulling to sleep the political rulers of the world by turning their attention entirely away from God, and the same is the result upon all the people who willingly give heed to and support the Hierarchy organization. Soon the song of the harlot, however, will cease and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and her supporters will come to a bitter end. That will necessarily be in a time of great darkness, and in that dark time Christ Jesus, the great King, acting for Jehovah, the King of Eternity, which great Kings were foreshadowed by Darius and Cyrus, will push forward and crush Satan’s entire organization, even as the Chaldeans were crushed. The fall of Babylon under Belshazzar foreshadowed what is soon to come to pass.
35 While the faithful followers of Christ Jesus now on the earth continue to suffer from increasing indignities and cruel assaults upon them by the religious representatives of the Devil, Jehovah graciously unfolds to his faithful witnesses the meaning of his prophecies, showing them that long ago he had his faithful ones in mind, and that he made and caused to be recorded his prophetic dramas, which now he unfolds that the faithful may receive comfort and increased hope in these perilous times. Let all, therefore, who love the Lord Jehovah God and his King, Christ Jesus, be of good courage and rejoice that they have a part in filling up the sufferings of Christ Jesus left behind that they may ere long participate with him in the glory and joyful satisfaction of seeing the vindication of Jehovah’s name.—Col. 1:24.
WORK OF THE FAITHFUL PORTRAYED
80 A word picture is now drawn by the Lord, dramatically outlining the work that must be done by Jehovah’s faithful servants upon the earth. Christ Jesus is “the faithful and true”, and those who follow him faithfully unto death are of the class embraced in this word picture. To those who have devoted themselves to Jehovah the Lord has given his truth. This
330
WATCHTOWER-
Bsooklyx, n. y.
he has done, not that the recipients of the truth may hold it only for their own mental satisfaction, but that they may know and understand what duty and obligation is laid upon them and what service they must perform. Even today there are those who think that they are following Christ Jesus and who, in accord with the words of the apostle, are “ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth”. (2 Tim. 3:7) Such persons will not appreciate the prophecy of Jeremiah and what is here said concerning it, but will occupy the time by continuing to argue about questions that have long ago been made clear and plain to those who love God. Those who truly love the Lord will appreciate, and do appreciate, the unfolding of the prophecy and will see their duty and will joyfully undertake the performance thereof. Shortly after 1918 Jehovah began to make know to his servants the meaning of some of his prophecies. The faithful ones discerned the Lord Jesus bad come to the temple of Jehovah, not a temple made with hands, but to the gathering together unto himself those who arc truly devoted to God and who are in Christ Jesus. They saw the overwhelming Scriptural proof that the resurrection of the faithful, who died in faith, must begin about or shortly after 1918; they saw that Christ Jesus, enthroned and sent forth to rule, had cast Satan and his angels out of heaven and down to the earth; they then saw and appreciated the two great organizations in opposition, that is, the organization of Satan and the organization of Jehovah. Since then, as God has unfolded Io them his prophecies, these faithful ones have joyfullv fed upon them, which arc “meat in due season” to them, and to them their commission and duty have been clarified. Now they sec the clear distinction between religion and Christianity ; that religion is fraudulent and originated with the Devil and is practiced by those whom the Devil has deceived, and that thus ‘‘Christendom” has grown into a powerful organization of the Devil, and which organization holds the people in blindness to God and his gracious provision for them. The faithful have a keen desire to know what is the present duty to be performed by them, and when they see it they will do it, by the grace of the Lord. The lukewarm, however, arc still musing over what little they learned years ago. They have looked upon themselves as great and wise, and so such continue to argue about the question of the Lord's coming to his temple, and the resurrection of the saints. They have gotten so far behind that they no longer see the unfolding of God’s purposes. Those who arc devoted to the Lord are concerned about what he would have them do. What, then, is the duty of the remnant now and of all those who are associated with them in the service of Jehovah God?
PASSING THE CUP
•’Jeremiah played a part in the great prophetic drama, picturing those who are truly devoted to God
and his kingdom. What Jehovah commanded Jeremiah to do is now the command of the Lord to his faithful witnesses on earth. Let all the witnesses of Jehovah now take heed and give careful consideration to the commandment that Jehovah gave to Jeremiah at this point in the prophetic drama: “Eor thus saith the Lord God of Israel unto me, Take the wine cup of this fury [the cup of the wine of this fury (E.Il.V.)] at my hand, and cause all the nations to whom I send thee to drink it.”—Jcr. 25:15.
38	This does not mean that those who are servants of Jehovah now must take a literal cup of vine and carry that to somebody. The cup of wine which Jeremiah was commanded to take was a symbol representing what God would present to the people. Jeremiah was playing a part in the prophetic drama or a vision, just as John the apostle did later when he took a little book out of the hand of the angel and ate it up, and found it sweet to his taste but bitter to his stomach, (llev. 10:8-11) Ezekiel also performed a like part in one of God’s prophetic dramas. (See Ezekiel 2:9,10; 3:1-4.) In the vision of Jeremiah a cup contained “the wine of this fury”, hence not literal wine, but the fury of Jehovah God against his enemies. The cup was a vessel holding a potion, and therefore pictures the vessels which Jehovah uses to present “the wine of this fury” to those who must drink it. Hence the cup pictures (1) Jehovah’s faithful witnesses under Christ Jesus, who are sent forth to the nations to bear witness, which nations include “Christendom”; and (2) Christ Jesus, the great Vessel, the mighty Executioner, and all his holy angels with him and associated with him in the execution of Jehovah’s judgment.
39	The cup contained “the wine of this fury”, which contents picture respectively (1) the judgment message of Jehovah delivered by Christ Jesus the Head of his organization at the temple through his faithful servants and witnesses, that is, Jehovah’s witnesses, such message having heretofore been dictated to and uttered by Jehovah’s holy prophets foretelling the outpouring of God’s fury at the battle of the great day of God Almighty ; and (2) the actual execution by Christ Jesus and his associated heavenly forces of the judgments in which God’s fury upon the whole of .Satan’s organization and its works are poured out in fulfillment of the prophecies previously written. This message is now proclaimed by Jehovah’s witnesses and is in the “cup” which is taken “at my hand”, that is, at God’s hand; and therefore the “cup” pictures Jehovah’s servants. It is in reality God’s “hand” that presents the cup to those who are made to drink its contents. The contents of the “cup”, therefore, arc handed to them, first by Jehovah’s ‘sent’ witnesses, and then by his ‘sent’ Executioner, Christ Jesus.
40	The command is a comprehensive and sweeping one and says: “Cause all the nations to whom I send thee
November 1, 1937
QTe WATCHTOWER.
331
to drink it.” Why all? Because all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them are claimed by Satan and are a part of his organization, and therefore all such and all the elements thereof arc enemies of God, whom He will search out now and destroy. ‘‘Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies; thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee.”—Ps. 21:8.
41	Take note of this, that Jehovah’s witnesses, whom Jeremiah pictured, now are not permitted to except or pass up or excuse any peoples or nations. The duty of the witnesses is to declare the message of Almighty God as it is written. The religionists of “Christendom” are astounded and greatly offended because Jehovah’s witnesses classify, not just one religion or church system, but all religions and religious systems, as devilish and therefore wrong and dishonoring to God. Jehovah’s witnesses must carry the message and proclaim it, regardless of any organization. All these organizations draw nigh to God with their mouths, but their heart devotion is not to him and his kingdom. All such arc a part of this world and therefore a part of Satan’s organization, used to dishonor and reproach the name of Jehovah God. Because this message of the Ix»rd God is publicly proclaimed the religionists set up a mad howl and shout: “Jehovah’s witnesses say every religion is wrong except their own”; but the facts arc, Jehovah’s witnesses have no religion whatsoever; they stand solidly and entirely upon the Word of Almighty God and point out from the Scriptures the authoritative words of Jesus and the apostles that religion is of the Devil, the purpose of which is to make void the Word of God. The religious leaders, and particularly the Boman Catholic Hierarchy, brand Jehovah’s witnesses as self-coneeitcd and bigoted and as disturbers of the peace. Jehovah’s witnesses arc merely bringing the message of the Almighty God and are not claiming any credit whatsoever to themselves. It is impossible for Jehovah’s witnesses to make “Christendom” drink the contents of the cup, but they bring the message to “Christendom”, informing them of God’s purpose. Jeremiah could not “cause all the nations ... to drink”, but he delivered the cup with its contents, which Jehovah compels those to whom it is presented to drink. And so it is today. Jehovah’s witnesses bring the prophetic message of God to the attention of the people and the nations, and it is the Almighty God who will compel them to drink of the cup of this fury. The present-day duty’ of Jehovah’s witnesses is therefore plain and strictly in accord with the command which Jesus gives to them, to wit: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.”—Matt. 24:14.
42	Jehovah’s great Prophet, Christ Jesus, is uttering this command by authority conferred upon him by the Almighty God; and it is written that it shall come to pass that everyone who does not obey this prophet
shall be destroyed. (Acts 3:23) Jehovah’s witnesses and servants, therefore, have no alternative. They must obey the commandments of Jehovah, and they delight to obey them. No one person can perform service for another person, but each one who is a witness of Jehovah must perform his part.
43	The religionists, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, now vehemently rage against Jehovah’s witnesses and desperately attempt to stop these servants of God from carrying out the commandments of the Most High. There is no power that can stop this message and the execution of God’s purpose. The Lord Jehovah says to Jeremiah (and which now applies to Jehovah’s witnesses) as to what they must do and what shall follo w, and what the nations will be compelled to do: “And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, be’eause of the sword that I will send among them.”—Jer. 25:16.
44	The religionists cannot escape the drinking now, even if they do take away the license of the radio stations that broadcast the truth, and coerce the owners and operators of other radio stations and compel them to ecase broadcasting God’s message, and employ other drastic means to stop the proclamation of the truth. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies are now enacting all manner of laws and ordinances, and wrongfully enforcing the same, for the purpose of preventing the people’s receiving the truth. They attempt to stop the use of sound equipment to proclaim the message of Almighty God; they have enacted and have enforced laws preventing the freedom of speech and the importation into the various countries of the printed message of God’s Word. They make these laws to stop Jehovah’s witnesses from going from house to house to preach the gospel of the kingdom, and they punish with heavy fines and imprisonment the faithful men and women who do continue to go about proclaiming the message, which the Almighty God has commanded they’ must proclaim. But all their cruel, Godless and vicious efforts to suppress the message of the Lord cannot succeed in stopping it, nor can these nations of “Christendom” and her “great men” escape drinking the cup, because Jehovah says: ‘They shall drink, and be moved, go mad, and reel to and fro.’ They arc very mad now. They arc not merely offended at those who bear the message of the Lord to them, but they are beastly drunk and gone mad, like a mad dog frothing at the mouth, and seeking to bite everyone who comes to them with God’s message. Jehovah says they shall drink ‘because of the sword that I will send among them’. This shows that “wine of this fury” is equivalent to (1) the “sword of the spiri*, which is the Word of God”, expressing the furious message of Jehovah, and (2) the destructive sword of execution wielded by’ Christ Jesus at the battle of Armageddon. The ‘wine in the cup’ and the “sword” both picture what is God’s will
332
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
before and at Armageddon. His will shall be accomplished.
43 This part of Jeremiah’s prophecy is in strict accord and harmony with the words of the Lord at Obadiah 1:1: "Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle." Can anyone who really is on the Lord’s side and who loves God and his kingdom have any doubt now as to what is the present duty of the faithful? Jehovah God’s time is at hand when his name must be proclaimed throughout all the earth, and such proclamation must be done and must be completed before he exhibits his supreme power.—Ex. 9:16, Lecser.
“ If we find that Jeremiah lay down on the job and concluded to wait until some other and more favorable time to carry the message pictured by the "cup” to those who should drink, then we may conclude that Jehovah’s witnesses at this time will be justified in lying down on the job and waiting until what might seem to them a more favorable opportunity or time to declare God’s message, as commanded. What course of action did Jeremiah take? and what shall Jehovah’s witnesses, who arc faithful, do now?
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOK STUDY
1. How has Jeliuvivlv from time to time lind his message delivered to the people] With vvlr.it result or response?
T 2. Show that the statement at Jeremiah 25: 4 was true at the time it was spoken, and that it was also piophetic.
K 3-5. With related scriptures, explain whether the leaders of the Jews weie truly Jews. In what facts is the foregoing seen to have been prophetic?
H 6. Point out the piesent-day application of the words of Jesus nt Matthew 2.3: 3,3.
H 7,8. Justify the words of naming and admonition at Jeremiah 25: 6 (a) at the time when spoken, (b) At the time of their prophetic npplu ation.
V 9,10. Account for the Jews’ having failed or refused to heaikcn to the message sent by Jehovah through his prophets, ns recorded nt vcise 7. Show that it is exactly that way at the present time.
V n, 12. Show that in the time of Jeremiah Jehovah gave the people ample opportunity to ‘hear His words’; also that the same is true of the pre*-ent time.
K 13,14. What was the result to the Jews of not having given heed to God’s message through liis prophets? How did Jehovah send, and whom did he send to execute his warning at that time? What is seen therein as to the manner and order in which Jehovah directs his work now and will accomplish his purpose at Armageddon?
K 15,16. What was foietold in the record at verse 9?
17-20. Apply the prophetic declai ation of verse 10.
T 21-24. When and to whom will “this whole land’’ be a desolation and an astonishment? How will “these nations” “serve the king of Babylon” “seventy years”?
25,26. What is implied by the language of verses 12-14 of this chapter of the prophecy? What took place at the end of the literal seventy years? How will Jehovah “punish the king of Babylon” and “that nation”?
K 27. To what does Jehovah refer by the words (vs. 13) “all that is written in this book”? How and for what purpose will ho bring this “upon that land”?
K 28,29. What was Jeienuah’s commission from Jehovah? nnd of what was it prophetic?
K 30. How shall “many nations and great kings” “seive themselves” of “Babylon and the Chaldeans”? According to what deeds and what vvoikj?
31-33. Explain the turn of ulfaiis foretold at Jeremiah 51: 49. IT 34. What was foretold in the iceord at Daniel 5: 30,31?
1[ 35. To whom and for what purpose does Jehovah now make known the meaning of his prophecies?
K 36. Point out some of thu many impeltant truths already seen by the faithful, the undei standing of which is essential to their nppiecintmn of further prophecy being unfolded by Jehovah in his appointed way.
37,38. Why is it so important for those devoted to God and his kingdom to unde i stand this ptopheev of Jeieminli now I What was the cup mentioned in verso 15? 01 what was it a symbol?
H 39,40. What was pictured by the contents of the, cup? By whom aro the contents of the cup handed to the nitiomsl To what nations is the cup sent, and why?
K 41,12. How aio the contents of the cup icgaidcd by those to whom the cup is sent? What, then, i.s plainly the duty as well as the privilege of Jehovah’s witnesses today J Is this a collective or an individual responsibility!
43,4 4. What does the cup contain? How do the religionists attempt to escape drinking?
H 45,46. Jehovah having unfolded his prophecies and pto-vided examples of faithfulness by Ins sen ants of tunes past, what will each one now do who is on the Lord's side and loves God and lus kingdom?
IDOLATERS
WHAT Jehovah’s prophet Ezekiel saw in the defiled temple at Jerusalem foreshadowed what God’s "faithful servant" or remnant would see shortly preceding the battle at Armageddon, in which "Christendom” shall be destroyed. According to the God-given record (Ezek. 8:13,14), after seeing the "image of jealousy" and the idolatrous portrayals on the temple walls, the inspection continued and more abominations were seen by the prophet. “He [Jehovah] said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations that they do. Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the Lord’s house which was toward the north; and behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz."
"Tammuz” was the name of a Phoenician god, which the Devil had provided, of course, to deceive the people. Whatever the Tammuz represented, it is cer
tain that women adored and idolized it and worshiped the creature and ignored the Creator, and that death overtook it, and they wept bitterly. This fits the so-called "fundamentalists", who worship their church organizations and give no heed to the kingdom of God under Christ. They profess to be defenders of the Word of God and the followers of Christ Jesus, but their devotion is entirely to their organization, which Tammuz fitly represents. These church organizations are patronized chiefly by women. Their men look upon religion as taught in the orthodox churches as being fit only for women and children and weak-minded persons.
The women well pictured the Epworth League workers, the managers of church affairs, and like organizations within the church, which they idolize and worship because they arc attached to the church. Tho..e
November 1, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER.
333
represented by the women have for some time seen the steady decline of their church organization, and they weep because the church is dying or practically dead, and they know that soon it must die. They believe that with the passing away of these churches morality and human reformation will die also, and the entire world will be lost. They pretend to make much over Jesus, who died, but they have no time for nor interest in the kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ as the means of vindicating and honoring Jehovah God’s name and for the blessing and uplift of the human race. The second coming of Christ and the establishment of his kingdom do not interest them. Their interest is centered in doing the work of their organization. They think that, because some selfconstituted “wise” men have said that ‘the church must clothe the earth in the moral achievements of man, so that Christ can come’, the work of the church therefore is to carry out this announced slogan and clean up the world. And now seeing that the church is in a dying condition, and is practically dead, they weep and wail. They look to the clergy of their church to clean up and save the world, and the clergy go to the political rulers and ask for instruction as to what they shall do to accomplish this purpose. Hence the members of their church look upon their organization as dying and almost dead.
The fundamentalists, while claiming to support the Bible, ignore every part of it with reference to God’s kingdom, and ally themselves with this world and are led by the god of these world powers, the Devil. They arc deceived, to be sure; and this statement is made here because it is a fact, and in order that those of good will may get their eyes open to a realization of the facts. The preachers themselves have ‘become as women’. They sense the end of their organization, and they weep. All of them have great cause to weep, liecause they have drawn near the Lord with their mouths while their hearts are far removed from him and now no more is the blessing of the Lord with them. They have allied themselves with Satan’s organization and looked to the League of Nations, the Epworth League, and other leagues and peace pacts, to accomplish the desired end or reformation and upbuilding of the human race. They are therefore an abomination in the sight of the Lord.
The inspection continues and more abominations are exhibited to Ezekiel, and hence more abominations are revealed to the temple class. “Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen this, 0 son of man! Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations than these.” (Ezck. 8:15) It is a well-known fact that in modern times human intellectuality, or ‘‘the wisdom of this world”, is placed before and above the worship of Jehovah God. The clergy, acting as Satan’s instruments and hypocritically claiming to be God’s representatives, are chiefly responsible for this condition in the nations called “Christendom” or “organized
Christianity”. From the pulpits discourses are regularly delivered, not in explanation of the Bible, but upon what is called “scientific matter”, and the Word of the Lord is ignored. Ezekiel 8:16 reads: “And he brought me into the inner court of the Lord’s house [the temple]; and, behold, at the door of-the temple of the Lord, between the porch and the altar [the place of sacrifice, and near the location of the laver, which symbolizes the Word of God by which one is made clean, and which is ignored by the clergy], were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the east; and they worshipped the sun toward the cast.”
In this modern day, called by the self-wise “the brain age”, young men arc required to take a course in the secular colleges and there have all faith in God and his Word destroyed, before they arc admitted to the theological seminary. By the time they have finished their education in the theological seminary and are turned out as clergymen and labeled with a high-sounding title, although they occupy a place in a church called ‘the house of the Lord’, their worship is of the creature and to the utter disregard of the Creator. Modern colleges and theological seminaries arc therefore mere hatcheries of infidelity. It is these worshipers of so-called ‘intellectual power and great men and their institutions’ that arc put forward as the saviors and deliverers of the world. These modern “brain-age” men, together with their institutions, are held forth to the people as the “sunlight of the world”. As Ezekiel was shown this condition in the temple, even so the class whom he represented, God's faithful anointed ones, had a vision thereof in fact and so declared themselves.
On August 29, 1925, in convention assembled at Indianapolis, the consecrated passed a resolution known as the “Message of Hope”, and sent it forth to all people of good will of “Christendom”. 2\.mong other things, that resolution said:
“World powers, science and philosophy, commerce and religion, have each in turn offered their respective remedies for man’s relief. In the name and under the guise of democracy, these combine in offering their joint and several powers to meet the requirements of man. Together they claim to be the sunlight of the world, holding forth all the light that shines to enlighten and guide the human race.
“Intrigue, duplicity, and trickery are freely resorted to by the political and commercial powers; science and philosophy arc marked by vanity and selfsufficiency ; while the religionists, both Catholic and Protestant, arc conspicuous by their arrogance, self-conccit, impiety and ungodliness. Therefore, it is apparent that the remedies offered by any and all of these aforementioned elements are vain, impotent, and powerless to satisfy man’s desire.” (Sec Light, Book One, page 130.)
The twenty-five men that Ezekiel saw at the door
334
QT^e WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the temple of the Lord represent the modem clergymen and the principal of their flocks, who are the chief ones in the organization of the religion of ‘ ‘ Christendom” and hence claim to be in the house of the Lord. While they claim to be the representatives of God, they are in fact the servants of Satan the Devil, and hence are constantly practicing hypocrisy before men. These self-wise “sun worshipers” (meaning those who worship intellect, science and power) greatly defame and reproach the name of Jehovah God. They are an integral part of Satan’s organization. It is the solemn duty and obligation laid upon every member of the “servant” class to tell the truth concerning such hypocrites, that by the grace of the Lord the truth may sweep away the lies and expose the hiding place thereof, that the people may know that Jehovah is the only true God and that their hope rests entirely with him. For any of the Lord’s anointed ones to slack his hand in declaring the truth concerning Satan’s organization and the visible representatives therein would be to show unfaithfulness to God and to his covenant.
It is a fact well known to all that since the ending of the World War a great crime wave has swept over the land called “Christendom”. Who is responsible among men for this great crime wave? The prophecy of Ezekiel lays the responsiblity for the crime wave at the door of “organized Christianity” by reason of its perversion of the true worship of God and the forsaking of his Word. This was pictured in the false religious practices tliat Ezekiel saw going on in the
temple at Jerusalem. The clergy and the principal of the flock of “Christendom” claim to represent God and Christ and to rule by divine right, and yet they pursue a course of unrighteousness and have brought great reproach upon God’s name and upon the name of his Christ. They have attempted to induce the people to believe that Jehovah approves of them. The people know that they are hypocrites, because they claim to be for God and righteousness and at the same time practice unrighteousness. They claim to be advocates of the law, while they themselves break the law. By reason thereof the people have lost respect for law and order and have no regard for God and the Bible. The sanctity of human life is no longer held by the great mass of mankind, and hence “the everlasting covenant” (Gen. 9:1-6) is transgressed and frequently broken.
This was shown to Ezekiel, and foreshadowed the condition existing today in “Christendom”: “Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a iight thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have filled the land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger; and, lo, they put the branch to their nose.” (Ezek. 8:17) “The land is full of bloody crimes, and the city [‘Christendom’, Satan’s organization on earth] is full of violence.” (Ezek. 7:23) “The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. ’ ’—Isa. 24: 5.
REBELLIOUS
JEHOVAH sent his prophet Ezekiel to the nation of Israel, a rebellious people that were impudent and stiffhearted. (Ezek. 2:3,4) He warned Ezekiel not to Ire afraid to speak to them nor to be afraid of their words. “And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they arc a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them. And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns be with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions; be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house. And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear; for they are most rebellious. But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee: Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house; open thy mouth, and cat that I give thee.” —Ezek. 2: 5-8.
This well corresponds to the truth that the Lord permitted his people to understand in 1919, that they were to go forward to “organized Christianity” with the message of truth and to deliver it fearlessly, ‘whether they were heard or whether they were not
heard.’ It was also a warning to the “servant” class to be not rebellious before the Lord as “Christendom” was and as some who were then in the truth were, but that those who would please the Lord must be bold and fearless in the proclamation of his message of truth. The Watchtower warned the prominent ones of companies against a rebellious course and pointed out the necessity of fearlessly engaging in the Lord’s service, and where some showed fear and refused to do the work the opportunity to do it was given to others.
About the autumn of 1922 the organization of God’s people on earth was more fully completed, and it was then, at a general assembly of his people at a convention in Cedar Point, Ohio, that they got a better vision and appreciation of God’s purposes concerning them and their commission, and then they went to the work with a real zeal. Isaiah’s vision seems clearly to have foreshadowed this particular time. Isaiah had a vision of the Lord at his temple and came to a realization that he as a servant of the Lord was a man of unclean lips, and he cried unto the Lord, and the Lord sent to him his invisible messenger with a coal of fire from off the altar with which Isaiah’s lips were made clean. Con-
November 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
335
ceming this it is written: “And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged. Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me. And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.”—Isa. 6:7-9.
From 1919 to 1922 others had come to a knowledge of the truth and had responded to the call for the kingdom. It was on the occasion of that Cedar Point assembly that all the faithful who were present saw the opportunity and necessity of carrying the message of the kingdom to the people, and there was a tremendous response such as never to be forgotten by those who witnessed the demonstration at that assembly. The spirit and zeal of the Lord were upon that people. It was doubtless about that time that ‘the holy spirit was poured out on all flesh’, meaning that all who had responded to the call for the kingdom, and who were brought into the temple, were commissioned and commanded to carry the message of truth to the people, regardkss of sex or previous position in the church. (Joel 2: 28, 29) The cleansing received by Isaiah foreshadowed the fact that God’s “faithful servant” class would come to a realization that the proper zeal had not been shown in proclaiming the truth and thus the sin was upon their lips. The cleansing of Isaiah’s lips by a coal of fire pictured the faet that God cleansed the lips of his people and sent them forth to do his work of witnessing to the' truth, and that all then who were faithful were anointed of the Lord, and that these constituted thereafter God’s “faithful servant”, otherwise called “the remnant”.
Prior to the Lord’s coming to his temple for judgment there were a number who had received the truth and lesponded to the call for the kingdom but who because of selfishness had rebelled against the light and began to fall away. The “rebellious” ones mentioned in the prophecy therefore would include all sueh who began to fall away about 1917 and who were gathered out and formed the “evil servant” class. Such claimed to be Jews (that is to say, devoted to God’s praise and service of his King), and, says the Lord, ‘They are not, but are of the synagogue of Satan.’ (Rev. 2: 9 • 3: 9) ‘They are those that rebelled against the light.’ (Job 24:13) It was the duty of The Watchtower to speak with plainness to such, and by the Lord’s grace this was done. Those who failed to heed the Lord’s warning found themselves in the “evil servant” class and the “man of sin”.
The commission to Ezekiel, and therefore to the “faithful servant” class, was also to warn “such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron; because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of the klost High”. (Ps. 107:10-16) As Ezekiel was commanded by the Lord to warn the rebellious Israelites,
so God’s “faithful servant” class is commissioned to warn those who profess to be the children of the Lord and who are rebellious. When the warning to such rebellious ones was published in The Watchtower the prophecy of Ezekiel was not then understood. (See The Watchtower 1926, pages 323-328, 339, 340; 1929, pages 134, 147.) This is mentioned here as further evidence that the Lord uses his people to fulfill prophecy and afterwards advises them thereof by revealing the meaning of the prophecy. It is an evidence that the Lord feeds his people upon food convenient for them and directs the way they shall go, and to the Lord is due all glory. God commissions his people to do his work and sends the obedient ones forth upon that mission; and he directs their way, using them as his instruments, and all in the temple give him glory therefor and sing forth his praises.—Prov. 3: 5, 6; Ps. 29:9.
As further proof that the truth is not the product of the “servant” class or of any man, but that all truth proceeds from the Lord, it is written, by the prophet Ezekiel: “And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein; and he spread it before me; and it was written within and without; and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe.” (Ezck. 2: 9,10) God’s due time had come to send forth his message; and ‘a roll of a hook in a hand’ shows that this truth comes by the spirit and power of God, and not by any creature, and that it is God’s product. The roll or book spread out before Ezekiel shows that the time had arrived for God to send forth his “servant” lo deliver a message to his people. ’Phis time especially dates from and after 1922, when the Lord had provided his people with a means for witnessing to the truth. Whin the prophecies are understood it will be found that they are all in exact harmony; which is another proof that they all proceed from God.
The statement of Ezekiel is in exact harmony with Revelation 10:1,2, which says: “And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, . . . and he had in his hand a little book open.” Thus is shown that God’s time had come to make known his purposes and he sent forth his message of truth to his people. (See Light, Book One, page 174.) God’s judgment written must be declared before the execution thereof. “Organized Christianity,” or “Christendom”, pictured by Jerusalem, must be told the truth and be warned of God’s impending judgment against her. Also those who had been in line for the kingdom and had fallen away must be warned. “Organized Christianity,” or “Christendom”, is pictured by Jerusalem and is more reprehensible than the heathen nations; hence God’s judgment is written against her.
The roll of the book exhibited to Ezekiel contained the message of ‘the day of the vengeance of God’ against Israel; and likewise now that which the Lord reveals to his people contains the truth concerning the
336
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
day of the vengeance of our God, which must be declared to “Christendom”. (Isa. 61: 2) Let the fearful and rebellious refuse to declare God’s righteous indignation against Satan’s organization, if they will; but all who are of the “faithful servant” class will without hesitation declare God’s truth and expose to view the enemy and the hideous agencies of his organization. Those who were once in line for the kingdom and who fail and refuse thus to do put themselves in the class with God’s enemies. (Ezek. 2:3) It is comforting and gratifying to see how Jehovah uses his people to do his work and then later shows them what he has done; and this is further proof that prophecy was written to make brighter the hope of those who arc in the covenant for the kingdom and who obey the terms of that covenant. (Rom. 15:4) For several years God’s faithful people on earth have been doing, and are now doing, a work which was foretold by the prophet and the meaning of which the Lord is now pleased to ret cal to his faithful ones.
It is observed that almost a hundred times the Lord addresses Ezekiel as “son of man”. That is one of the titles given to Jesus Christ; hence the class whom Ezekiel pictured and foreshadowed must of necessity be those who arc of the body of the anointed One. The title does not apply to any individual, but applies to the body members of Christ and takes in all the faithful anointed ones of the earth. It is this class that the Lord uses in proclaiming his Word and also in connection with the fulfillment of his prophecy.
The third chapter of Ezekiel’s prophecy opens with the statement: “Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, cat that thou findcst; cat this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel.” In harmony with this God first causes his own people to feed upon his truth and to grow strong thereby, and then their strength must be used in obedience to his commandment to the glory of the Lord by speaking these truths to others. This is in harmony with Revelation 10:8,9: “And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is open in
the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth. . . . And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up.” These prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation concerning the eating of the roll or book symbolically represent God’s anointed servant receiving the truth to be used to the glory of the Lord.
This is further corroborated by Jehovah’s words to the prophet Isaiah. Isaiah also pictures the “faithful servant” class to whom the Lord Jehovah says: “I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow cf mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.” (Isa. 51:16) The message of the Lord he puts in the mouth of his “servant” not merely to feed upon for his own benefit, but that it might be used in accordance with God's commandments by proclaiming it to others. “So 1 opened my mouth, and be caused me to cat that roll. And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to cat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.”—Ezek. 3: 2, 3.
These words last quoted from Ezekiel picture the faithful people of the Lord who were hungry for a further revelation of his Word, whom the Lord Jesus began to feed when he earne to the temple of God. It took some time to fill them up and for them to digest the food before they were ready for the fight, and when the time came they were made strong in the Lord and went forth in obedience to his commandments. This is in exact accord with Revelation 10:10,11, which says: “And I took the little book out of the angel’s hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey; and as soon as I had eaten it my belly was bitter. And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.” Thus is shown God’s provision and his preparation of his people for a campaign that shortly thereafter began, and is now in progress, the purpose of which is to proclaim the King and his kingdom and to announce the day of God’s vengeance.
LET
JOY IN JEHOVAH’S SERVICE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Tlio Brownwood (Texas) company of publishers wish to assure you of our joy in the sen ice of Jchoiah, and of our appreciation of being able to eat the food, which we find most “convenient”, at the table furnished by the Lord for all the willing ones now on earth.
Let this message, brief though it must be, convey our warm personal regaid and loyalty to you in this hour of stress. Daily we remember you at the Father’s throne of grace, and ask that you so remember us.
AN INQUIRY, AND THE ANSWER
Mv dear Brother Rutherford:
I am a young girl aged fourteen years, and have been a publisher for Jehovah for four years now.
I was told the other day by a brothel that I am not a Christian, as I claim to be a Jonadab. On asking other brethren I
TERS
find there is a big difference of opinion amongst the brethren, and I should like to know definitely if I am a Chiistian or not. If not, would jou please give me two scriptures to prove I ani not; and if not a Chiistian, what can I say if someone asks me at a door what I am I
With much love,
Your fellow publisher in Jehovah’s scivice, Constance A. Wood, Hngland.
My dear little Sister:
Because you love Jehovah and obey his commandments in the way Christ Jesus obeys, that constitutes one a Chiistian. Both the anointed and the Jonadabs (great multitude) are the Lord’s sheep, and all must be of one fold. (John 10: 10) Watchtotcei article “Companions”, August 15, 1937, explains.
With much love,
Your fellow Christian,
J. F. Rutherford.
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” • Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to hfc.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God laiscd up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus nre children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and piivilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in tho Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth Can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
“VINDICATOR”
The concluding united service penod of tho year 1937, the nine days December 4 to 12 inclusive, is called the “Vindicator” testimony period. The feature offer of this period will be the new book Enemies, to be placed on the usual contribution of 25e. All those desiring to be for a vindication of Jehovah "s name will act upon this announcement and will at once begin making all due pieparations for n vigorous part in this testimony. Consult the forthcoming issues of the Informant for additional details and instructions. Your prompt report at the close of the testimony will be appreciated by this office.
“ENEMIES”
This new book, written by Brother Rutherford, and first announced and released at tho recent general convention of Jehovah's witnesses at Columbus, Ohio, is now available for all who are for Jehovah and his King and against his enemies. It is a grand work, of 384 pages, excellently bound, gold-Btampcd, with color illustrations and a comprehensive index. The initial edition is the antogiaphed edition and contains, m facsimile, a letter written by the hand of tho author and addressed to all the Lord’s servants. Due to the limited quantity of this author’s edition a contribution therefor of 50c a copy is asked to offset the special expense of publishing this edition.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1938
Tho Year Book for 1938 will embody the featuies that have made the issues for previous years so valuable to all who de-
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people
of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to tho Bible as authoiity for its utterances. It is entirely fiee and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada ano miscellaneous FotmioN, 31.50; Giieat Britain, Austhalasia, and Soltii Africa. 7 s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Rank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may lie made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British.............34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian.........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Aasfralasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. 8. W., Australia South African.........Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address tho Society In every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear In several languages.)
All sincere students of the Blblo who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay tho subscription pine may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each .sear, stating the ic-ason for so n--questlng it. We nre glnd to thus nid Hie needy, but the mitten application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of n new or n renewal subscription vvill be sent only when requested. Change of mldie-s, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label with n one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will bo sent with the journal one month before tho subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. I'., under the Act of March 3, 1319.
claro themselves on Jehovah’s side and who are actively interested in and participating in the publishing of his name and his kingdom. The president’s report contained therein gi> < s an accurate and comprehensive account of tho state of th> Lord’s work in tho various lauds throughout tho earth, showing in considerable detail the activities and efforts put forth during the service year just ended and the results thereof. Then there is tho year text for 1938 and a pointed comment t'lere.m. This, together with well chosen daily texts and explanatory comments thereon from The Watchtower, makes this Year Bool; one of everyday help and use for all the Lord’s faithtul. Tho edition thereof is limited, and hence tho contribution of 5‘)c per copy is received theiefor. Company groups should combine individual orders and send same in through company servant, to reduce mailing expense.
1938 CALENDAR
The text for the calendar year 1938 is: 'Fear not; for the battle is God’s.’ (2 Chron. 20: 15) The calendar art picture was specially painted to fit this text and beautifully illustrates it and its action. Beneath the picture on the calendar bi-e appears a letter from the president of the Society setting forth the several united service pciiods for the year and sening as a ready reference for the kingdom publisheis. The calendar pad also indicates the dates of these testimony periods. Company servants should send in a combination order for all in tho company wanting calendars. Remit, with order, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
VouLVUI	November 15, 1937	No. 22
HIS "WORK” AND HIS “ACT”
“As 1 have done to fiT/uZoA.”—J er. 7:14.
PART «
JEHOVAH hates the wicked. “As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.” (Rom. 9:13) This does not mean that God loved Esau some and loved Jacob more. “Jacob” stands for those who faithfully serve Jehovah; "Esau” stands for those who practice the Devil religion for gain, and Jehovah hates that class, because all such are on the Devil’s side. The most reprehensible on earth are those who pretend to serve God, and who constantly bring reproach upon his name, and who inflict punishment upon God’s servants because they serve God faithfully. Being subjected to persecution because of faithfulness to God puts to the test his servants, which test, if properly met, will work to the good of the righteous. “Jehovah putteth the righteous to the test, but the lawless one and the lover of violence his soul doth hate.” (Ps. 11:5, Roth.; Rom. 8:28) The lawless and the lover of violence, who practice violence contrary to God’s law, arc the religionists in particular. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy takes the lead among the wicked and is therefore the worst among the wicked. That wicked institution arrogantly and blasphemously assumes to be the representative of God and Christ on earth, while, hiding behind its false cloak, it prosecutes its wicked schemes to gain power over the people. Jehovah has appointed the day to fully recompense that wicked crowd, and the time for the expression of his wrath against them appears to be very near. The faet that the Lord God now makes clear to his people what his purpose is concerning the wicked, and shows to them that the religionists arc the chief ones of the wicked, is strong and persuasive proof that the time of the execution of Jehovah’s wrath against the wicked is near at hand.
2 Jehovah gave Jeremiah a vision of what his purpose is toward the wicked, and he caused his prophet to act out a part in making clear that picture. “Then took I the cup at the Lord’s hand, and made all the nations to drink, unto whom the Lord had sent me.” (Jer. 25:17) Jeremiah then performed this pictorial drama or that part of it foretelling what those whom Jeremiah represented should do in the future. Whal
he did was not an easy task for Jeremiah to perform, but he did not refuse it because it was hard, llis commission from Jehovah obligated Jeremiah to perform faithfully the duty laid upon him. It was a God-given job. Jeremiah was fully advised of the mental condition of the clergy of his day, and he knew that to carry out his commission would bring hard things upon him from the religionists. But it was a joyful service because he was rendering it according to the will of God. Jeremiah had learned that the joy of the Lord was his strength. That joy was an antidote for all the disagreeable and painful parts of the tasks that lay before him. And what did that foreshadow? It foretold exactly what the witnesses of the Lord today arc commissioned to perform and must perform. Looking at the picture made long ago foretelling disagreeable conditions, and having in mind the cruel persecutions that have here been inflicted upon some of their number, particularly upon the faithful in Germany and New Jersey, the remnant now well know that the task before them is not an easy one, but the difficulties that lie in their pathway do not deter them in the least from proceeding to the performance of their commission. The true, faithful and zealous ones arc not now wasting their time, and the time of others, by writing letters and asking what they shall do. They have the commandments and orders from the Lord, they know their duty, and they arc going forward to perform it. It is well that they know this. Some of the Lord’s people are not now privileged to communicate by letter with others. They arc not permitted to receive the publications of the Society, and particularly The Waichtower. But they have fed upon God’s Word and know what he has commanded the faithful to do, and they are doing it, even at the cost of their own lives. They arc not writing long dissertations in to the office and saying: “I have run onto this interpretation, and I want it answered to my satisfaction.” Those who are indulging in this kind of practice, wasting their time and the time of others, will not keep abreast of the Lord’s army, and they will not stand the test and will not go through to the end. No one is justified now in
339
340
Stfe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
wasting time to stop and discuss the question as to whether or not the Lord Jesus has come and is at the temple, and whether the apostles and other faithful saints have been resurrected or not. These questions have long been settled, and now the faithful see a duty to be performed and are eager to perform that duty in the strength of the Lord. Let this be an answer to letters of this kind that arc written asking for the space in The Watchtower to be used to answer their questions, which have heretofore been clearly answered. The army of the Lord is moving forward under the command of Christ Jesus. There is no time for quibbling. Our duty is to obey the Lord, and particularly so when his commandments are clear and specific. The purpose of unfolding the prophecies to his people now is to encourage and strengthen those who arc in the front ranks to go on and not lag behind.
*	The command to Jeremiah was to make “all the nations ... to drink” to whom the Lord sent him, and he did so. In a symbolic or figurative way he caused the people to drink. What he did was to make a picture foretelling what would come to pass in the last days, that is, in the day of Jehovah. The record docs not show that Jeremiah left Judah and Jerusalem and journeyed to all the nations named, nor docs the record show that he sent messengers to such nations to deliver the cup and to make them drink. The record at chapter 27 of Jeremiah’s prophecy shows that he did take advantage of the presence in Jerusalem of the ambassadors or representatives from Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre and Zidon and that he sent the “cup” with them, or that he made them the official representatives of their respective countries or governments to drink the cup. Also Jeremiah did send the Lord’s written statement or message with Prince Scraiah, whom Zcdckiah the king was sending to Babylon. Seraiah was directed by Jeremiah to read what he had written in a book, of all the calamities that should come upon Babylon, and after reading it he was to bind it to a stone and cast it into the Euphrates river, thus symbolically foretelling what should befall Babylon. (Jer. 51:59-64) The picture made by Jeremiah, however, was complete, showing how the message of Jehovah’s warning gets to all nations of the earth in one form or another. For this present day Jehovah provided the radio, which has carried the message of the kingdom to almost all the nations of the earth, thereby giving the people warning that Satan’s world is to be destroyed and Christ Jesus shall reign in righteousness. lie also provides sound equipment to otherwise transfer the spoken message to various parts of the earth. In addition thereto Jehovah’s witnesses have the printed message in as many as seventy-five different languages and dialects, and which are distributed in that many and more countries of the earth. In the United States alone are some peoples of almost every nation of the earth, and these have been brought into contact with Jehovah's message in some form.
In obedience to the Lord’s command his witnesses have carried the testimony to the nations, and they must continue to carry this message as commanded; and when this is done and completed, then, as Jesus declares, the greatest tribulation of all time shall fall upon the nations. (Matt. 24:14,21) The message of Jehovah at the present time has become so very bitter to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy that that wicked religious institution employs every possible effort to suppress God’s message of truth.
CATHOLIC ACTION
*	In the outposts of the British Empire, which are generally known as the colonics of Great Britain, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is causing laws to be enacted prohibiting the importation or sending of the printed message of God’s kingdom into those countries. This devilish religious institution has become so bold that it publishes in its own papers that it is using its power and influence to cause the enactment and enforcement of such laws. This of itself is a clear admission that the clergy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy organization have received the warning, and they will never be able to plead ignorance of God’s purpose to destroy them.
8 In the United States, which has long been considered a place of freedom of speech, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has been able to put the clamps on radio stations, newspapers and other means of publication to prohibit the free and wide proclamation of the message of God’s kingdom. They do this on the pretext that the message of God’s kingdom “shocks their religious susceptibilities” and causes dissension amongst the people, and should be prohibited. At the same time the big moguls in the Roman Catholic organization, and their political tools which they put in office, unhesitatingly and without hindrance flagrantly denounce the highest court in America because that court does not yield to the seductive and political influence of the Hierarchy. This is a further admission that the Hierarchy have heard the warning and that it has stung them to the quick; and never shall they be permitted to plead ignorance that they did not know what God was sending upon them. Let the Hierarchy and its representatives, as they read what is here said, take further notice that God’s message shall be declared and that they now have no power to stop the oncoming of Jehovah’s Executioner, who shall inflict upon their wicked organization the judgments of Jehovah long ago written.
6 Jehovah’s witnesses are not trying to convert the world, they arc not carrying on a propaganda, they are not engaged in a bigoted proclamation in order to cause dissension, as the clergy of the Hierarchy falsely claim. Jehovah’s witnesses are obeying God’s commandments to tell the truth; and let the people of good will, who are honest and sincere, take note of this fact and obey God’s Word and refuse to give
November 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
341
further heed to the malicious and false accusations made by the Roman Catholic clergy and their allies against the representatives of the Lord.
BEGIN WITH RELIGIONISTS
r The prophetic part of the drama enacted by Jeremiah at God’s command shows where the cup must first be delivered, when he says: “To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse; as it is this day.”— Jer. 25:18.
4 Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, the kings and others thereof, claimed then to be God’s people. They pictured and therefore foreshadowed the religionists, clergy and the others of “Christendom” today who claim to be the people of the Lord and to be ruling the world by divine right. The clergy, the priests, the preachers and practitioners of the Jews’ religion for hire, professed to be God’s servants, and they claimed to be the seed of Abraham according to God’s promise. They were bound by the terms of the law covenant, which God had made with that nation through Hoses; and they were also bound by the covenant of obedience and faithfulness to the Lord (Dcut. 29:1-14); and they were also bound by the terms of the everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of life. (Gen. 9:1-17) But they had fallen away to the Devil religion and had broken all these covenants and were worthy of destruction. (Rom. 1:31,32) They were bloodguilty, and there was no way for them to escape. Whom did they foreshadow? The facts clearly show, and that beyond any question of doubt, that they foreshadowed the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allies and rulers and nations of “Christendom”. No one will attempt to question the fact that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims to be the only true representative of God and Christ on earth. That unholy religious crowd uses its influence over the political rulers of the nations and causes them to join the Hierarchy in reproaching God’s holy name. They are all without excuse. They have been warned. All those religionists and their supporters claim to be Christian, and they therefore are in an implied covenant to obey the commandments of Almighty God. They claim to be followers of Christ Jesus, and therefore must obey him whom Moses foreshadowed. (Acts 3:22,23) They are also bound by the terms of the everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of life. They have broken these covenants by the shedding of human blood viciously and without regard to the rights and privileges of other creatures. They have wickedly and ruthlessly engaged in slaughtering animals, contrary to God’s covenants. They are covenant-breakers and guilty of death.
* How do the men of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy deport themselves? They claim to represent Jesus, but they arc wholly unlike Jesus, who was meek and lowly of heart and adhered strictly to the commandments
of Almighty God. They follow the traditions of men and make void the Word of God. Far from following the course that Jesus took, who made himself of no reputation, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and particularly the cardinals and bishops, now go about wrapped in lace curtains and wearing lace “pants” or aprons, and dazzling tinsels and peculiar hats, and pose as sanctimonious and holy ones while everybody who knows them knows they are the crookcdcst gang that have ever afflicted the earth, and that they are carrying on the worst racket that has ever been practiced upon any people. These chief men of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy are scornful men. They use high-sounding words in praise of themselves, and with scornful countenance and haughty mien they command the people to do their own selfish bidding, and this in utter disregard of the people’s rights. The Hierarchy assumes the power and authority to tell the people what they must and must not read, when and where they must go, and what they must do, and to what they must listen and to what they must not listen. They attempt to control and rule everything in the land of “Christendom”. They have gotten their hooks so completely into the political and judicial clement of almost all nations that the Hierarchy is really the power behind the throne that rules the nations of “Christendom”.
10	Jehovah now speaks to that wicked and unholy crowd of religionists through his prophet and says: “Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem,” anti-typically “Christendom”. (Isa. 28:14) These words of Jehovah without doubt apply to the Hierarchy. They arc the ones that have said: ‘Our organization is invulnerable; even hell itself shall not prevail against us’; and therefore the Lord says to them: “Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell arc we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves; ... ye shall be trodden down.” (Isa. 28:15,18) It is this ruling crowd of “Christendom” to whom the Lord commands the cup shall be taken and that these shall be the first to drink of the cup of this fury.
11	And what is the purpose of compelling them to drink of the cup? Jehovah answers: “To make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse.” It is upon this religious crowd of “Christendom” that Jehovah begins his “strange act”, and that could well appear strange to all supporters of the Hierarchy and all the dupes thereof and they will say: “It is strange that God would so afflict an organization that for centuries has been using God’s name.” That organization has been using the name of God blasphemously in practicing its religion for pecuniary gain. God knew the end from the beginning, and it pleased him to speak of the things that did not then exist as if they weie
342
STIe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
already in existence. (Rom. 4:17) Therefore Jehovah says, as stated in the prophecy, that he is bringing upon “Christendom” this curse, “as it is this day.”
13	The picture enacted by Jeremiah shows that it applies when Jehovah begins his “strange act” against “Christendom”. At the time that Jeremiah enacted this picture it was eighteen years before the fall of Jerusalem. Jeremiah saw by faith and believed what God would bring upon Jerusalem, and he was not ashamed to boldly announce Jehovah’s purpose. While the fall of Jerusalem was a minor fulfillment of the prophecy, the complete fulfillment thereof is upon “Christendom” in the day of Jehovah, which is at the present time. The message of God’s prophet exposed the religionists of the Jews to shame and hissing; and today the honest-hearted Catholics and non-Catholics, who believe on God and Christ Jesus, look with contempt and hissing upon the fraudulent Roman Catholic Hierarchy that practices its religion for personal gain. Jehovah God’s message, written in his Word and now being delivered, is like a hailstorm, and, says the Lord, “the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters (truth] shall overflow the hiding place.” (Isa. 28:17) The double-dealing, the extreme crookedness of the hypocritical Roman Catholic Hierarchy and of other religionists’ supporting institutions, arc now being uncovered in order that honest persons may view them in their true state. “Christendom,” that is, the hypocritical religionists that claim to be Christians, shall be the fii'st ones, according to Jehovah’s decree, to ‘drink of the eup of this fury’.
WHO IS NEXT?
” The fact that Jehovah’s “strange act”, that is, the battle of the great day of God Almighty, will begin by the destruction of the religionists of “Christendom” does not mean that there will thereafter be a period of witness work for the purpose of gathering the “great multitude”. On the contrary, the Scriptures show that the witness work must be completed before the great tribulation begins. (Matt. 24:14, 21) When the old “whore” goes down, there will be some that will weep and wail, and the chief ones amongst that wailing crowd will be those who have commercialized the religion of the Roman Catholic system and her allies. And why will they wail 1 Because they will understand that they are next in line for destruction ; and this is shown by the statement in the prophecy: “Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and all his people.”—Jer. 25:19.
14	The great commercial traffickers (pictured here by the rulers of Egypt) and their cruel, selfish hirelings or servants (the Ethiopians), advocators and hired killers, including the police, the army, and the navy, and the conscienceless politicians, all forming a part of the world organization, all must drink the “cup” and drain it to the dregs. They are the rulers in the world which are symbolized by Egypt. “Or
ganized religion” not only is and has been friendly with the political and military elements of the world, but has depended upon such to help carry on the religious schemes and perform their ceremonies by which the people have been hoodwinked. The religionists, and particularly the priests or other clergymen, have ‘gone down to Egypt for help’, as the prophet Isaiah (30:2) puts it, and have turned their backs upon Jehovah God and his King, just as Jehoiakim and Zedekiah, the kings of Jerusalem, did in their time. The reliance of the religionists or religious practitioners upon Egypt, the world, is like leaning upon a bruised reed: “Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.”—Isa. 36: 6.
15	In the prophecy of Jeremiah, in chapter 25, and particularly in chapters 46-51 inclusive, Egypt is dealt with after Jerusalem. The same is true as set forth in other prophecies, to wit (Ezck. 32:1-32): “There is Edom, her kings, and all her princes, which with their might are laid by them that were slain by the sword: they shall lie with the uncireumeised, and with them that go down to the pit. There be the princes of the north, all of them, and all the Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they arc ashamed of their might; and they lie uneircum-ciscd with them that be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to the pit. Pharaoh shall sec them, and shall be comforted over all his multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith the Lord God.” (Isa. 19:1-22; Zech. 14:18,19) These prophecies all support the conclusion that when the religious systems, the old “whore”, fall, then the punishment will proceed to the Godless element, that is, the commercial and political elements, their allies and supporters.
10	“Egypt,” antitypically, includes the commercial elements; but there are others which must drink of the “cup”, and which arc specifically named aside from Egypt: “And all the mingled people, and all the kings of the land of Uz, and all the kintrs of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Azzah, and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod.” (Jcr. 25:20) “The mingled people,” as they are called in the Authorized Version, Rotherham (margin) renders in this wise: “And all the Bedawin,” or, “mixed multitude.” That means mongrels of no specific nationality or race. (See Vindication, Book Two, page 134.) “Uz,” named in this part of the prophecy, is dealt with. The land of Uz was where Job resided, and was in the east. (Job 1:1-3) Since the day of Job it is no longer a “land of Consultation” with Jehovah, but has been Godless. It represents that Godless people of the earth that have adopted the policy of dealing with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy by sending ambassadors to the Papal court; such as mentioned in Jeremiah 27:3. Its people are wholly devoted to the Devil.
November 15, 1937
Tfle WATCH TOWER.
343
Hence it is written in the record: “0 daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land of Uz; the cup also shall pass through unto thee; thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thyself [vile] naked.” (Lamentations 4:21) Such are profe.ssed “Christian” religionists who are entirely and openly against God.
11	The prophet next mentions the kings of the land of the Philistines, specifically naming the principal cities of the Philistines. The Philistines in the drama in which Samson played a part, and also in that of David’s time, picture the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Seeing the setting of the picture by Jeremiah’s prophecy, the Philistines here appear to represent the commercial religionists and necessarily include the Hierarchy, which is commercial and political and works with the religious practitioners in persecuting Jehovah’s witnesses and resisting the work of God’s servants in the realm of the earth controlled by them.
14 The Scriptures show that Jehovah hated Esau (Mal. 1:3); and yet Esau was, according to the flesh, a descendant of Abraham. Jehovah hated Esau because he went entirely over on the Devil’s side. Edomites were the descendants of Esau. And so the prophecy declares that that people must drink of the cup of this fury: “Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon.” (Jcr. 25:21) Moab and Ammon were in the same class. The nations here mentioned appear to refer to others in the conspiracy against the Lord and his faithful servants, and who arc moved by the Devil to do his bidding in reproaching the name of God and violently opposing his kingdom. (Ps. 83:2-12) They have no faith in things pertaining to God, but they connive with those who practice the so-called “Christian religion” for selfish or commercial purposes, and together they seek to do injury to Jehovah’s witnesses and are haters and pcrsecutoi's of all who try to do good to their fellow man and, above all, of those who are diligent in proclaiming the name of Jehovah. In other prophecies the Edomites picture the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the religious practitioners; the Moabites picture particularly the commercial element; and ‘the people of Ammon’ refers to the political religionists, whether within or outside of the nations called “Christendom”, who do not acknowledge Jehovah or even pretend to worship and serve him. They picture a people who practice some form of Devil religion and who are received by and consort with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy as her allies. They are a people that are self-centered, self-contained, relying upon their own strength. (Jer. 48:1-46; 49:1-22; Amos 1:11-15; 2:1-3; Isa. 15:1-9) The people-here referred to represent those who take a delight in hissing God’s people and hindering them in their work and mocking and persecuting them.—See Vindication, Book Two, pages 27-36.
1	4It is clearly made manifest that Jehovah’s purpose is to cause every nation to feel his strong arm, and therefore he names the nations specifically: “And
all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea.” (Jer. 25: 22) In certain prophecies Tyre pictures the Hierarchy ; but there arc many persons connected with the Catholic organization who have no faith in what the Catholics teach, but who hold on to the Catholic organization for the commercial gain derived by such association. By their mouths they may claim to be Catholics, but they really have no sincere devotion to the organization aside from what pecuniary benefit they derive by association with it. The peoples of Tyre and Zidon well picture such a class, because the ancient people of Tyre and Zidon selfishly operated for pecuniary gain. In brief, the nations described in this part of the prophecy include those who acknowledge the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and its religion solely for gain in a pecuniary way. In support of this conclusion, note that a Catholic of authority says:
“Though Catholic laymen as such have no jurisdiction in the Church, they arc today the chief agents in the work and development of the Church. They are ready and willing to help the great cause. Priests and bishops mingle with them, guiding and advising them, and taking the lead openly when important issues are at stake. But the heavy work, the spade work, is done by the laity, men and women, to whom ‘the Catholic Cause’ appeals.
“There was a time—it is now past—when only pious Catholics took part in the work of the Church. But today many Catholics who cannot qualify as pious are busy about Catholic Action. Catholicism, in America at least, has ceased to be a matter of religious observance. Catholicism now is something that partakes of clannishness, and that is constituted in large part by social and political and ‘club’ affiliations. Among the hundreds of Catholic leaders who are outstanding in their loyalty to the cause arc to be found quite a few who have little if any regard for Catholic doctrines or observances. Catholic Action would be a far less serious factor in this country [U.S.A.] were its only agents pious and devout Catholics. The starting point of the wave of Catholic Action in this country may be traced back to the inauguration of the National Catholic Welfare Conference in 1921. On that occasion Archbishop Hanna declared: ‘We have co-ordinated and united the Catholic powei of this country. It now knows where and when to act and is encouraged by the consciousness of its unity. We feel ourselves powerful because our reunion has become visible.’ From that day Catholic strength has grown apace, and Catholic organizations have multiplied.
“In no country of the world is there such thoroughgoing organization as among American Catholics.” —Rome Stoops to Conquer, page 16, fl 1, 2.
20	As to the “kings of the isles which are beyond the sea”, the Mediterranean sea is the sea here referred to in the type, and those people beyond carry on a commercial business with Tyre; and so today there are
344
STe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
those nations and people who are willing to be classed as Catholics, although entirely without faith in the -organization, holding to it only for mercantile purposes.—See The 'Watchtower April 1 and 15 and May 1, 1937; the book Enemies, chapter 6.
21	Jehovah’s prophet then specifically names other nations, to wit: “Dcdan, and Tcma, and Buz, and all that are in the utmost corners.” (Jer. 25:23) The people of Dcdan were close associates with the Edomites, and hence another branch of Satan’s crowd. Because of their commercial mind and ungodly selfish spirit they line up under Gog, the Devil’s chief officer. -—See Jeremiah 49:7, 8; Ezekiel 25:13; Isaiah 21:13; Ezekiel 38:13,14.
“ The people of Dedan were cither all Cushite or they were mixed with Shcmites. (G'cn. 10:7; 25:1-3) All of that people practiced a Devil religion. The prophecy named Tema, which means “desert”. They were desert men and supplied provisions to those actively engaged in commercial traffic. (Isa. 21:14,15; Job 6:19) Tema, or that nation, therefore pictured a class of persons or nations who cater to the commer-cialists and for hire do the bidding of the commercial strong men. “Buz,” mentioned in this part of the prophecy, means “contempt”. The descendants of Buz, with the exception of Elihu (Job 32: 2, 6), joined the bad company of Satan’s commcrcialists. They despised anything and everything pertaining to God and his Word, and therefore pictured a siindar class of modern times, who are haters of anything and all things that arc good and pertain to God, and who resort to anything at the instance of the commcrcialists.
23	None must be omitted, and therefore Jeremiah, under the commandment of the Lord, says that he causes to drink of the cup “all that arc in the utmost corners”. Other translators render this text in this wise: “And all that have the corners of their hair polled” (EJi.V.) ; “And all those that have their hair cut round.” (Lccscr) “Those with clipped car-locks.” —McClintock & Strong’s Cyclopaedia.
24	The covenant people of God, the Israelites, were forbidden this mode of haircut. (Lev. 19:27) According to Jeremiah 9:2G (margin) the people were those descendants of Abraham who dwelt in the wilderness near the Edomites, and who were unfaithful to God, and adopted the method or course followed by the Edomites. They did not wish to be classed with the covenant people of God, and therefore they did not appear sanctimonious, like the religionists of the Jews. They attempted to escape reproach resulting to those bearing tl>c name of God’s covenant people, and therefore they dwelt apart from them and had dealings with the commercial traffickers because of their insatiable desire and love for money. They well picture that class of persons who in this day resort to anything for money-gain or what money will bring them. Money is their god.
** The Arabs were a class of peddlers. They traded
with Tyre, but were not a part of Tyre. In the prophecy they are included with those who must drink the “cup” which Jeremiah carried. “And all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the desert.” (Jer. 25:24) In Jehoshaphat’s time the Arabians brought to him rams and billy-goats. (2 Chron. 17:11) They lived in tents and were therefore tent-men. (Jer. 3:2; Isa. 13:20) They had no love for God or his temple, but, on the contrary, consorted with the Philistines and other opposers of God, and opposed the rebuilding of the temple and the walls at Jerusalem. (2 Chron. 21:16; Neh. 4:7,8; 2:19; 6:1,2) Some of the people “out of [that] nation” heard the gospel preached at Jerusalem, and heard it in their own language, as shown by the testimony of Acts 2:5-11. The Arabians, therefore, well picture those who are opposers of God’s organization and his people on earth, particularly Jehovah’s witnesses at the present time, and arc of that class of people who accuse Jehovah’s witnesses of being rebellious against the worldly powers, and who find it profitable to their own selfish desires to serve Big Business and the chief moguls of the Itoman Catholic organization for what profit or commercial gain they get out of it. They delight to have part in the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses. They belong to the roughneck class. Among such people there arc the leaders, who are known and arc designated by the prophecy as “kings of the mingled people”, that is, the chief ones of the ‘mongrels’, who arc willing to hire out to do any kind of dirty work just so there is something in it for them. They arc ready and willing tools to act for the Hierarchy. They picture an unsettled clement that have no distinct classification but arc out solely for selfish gain.
20 Continuing, then the prophet says: “And all the kings of Zitnri.” (Verse 25) The word “Zimri” means “musical”, “my song.” It appears that such well fit the present-day “commercialized musical profession”. The paid choirs of the church organizations fit this description exactly. With their mouths they make music to the praise of Jehovah, but they have no heart devotion to the Lord whatsoever. They make song for commercial gain. For one to make music to the praise of Jehovah God is a blessed privilege, but those who indulge in song for professional and commercial purposes, calling out the name of God and Christ Jesus, and who hate God and his kingdom, are certainly a Godless crowd. They arc reprehensible because they use the language pertaining to Jehovah and the Savior, Christ Jesus, and yet openly reproach the name of God and Christ. These professional choirs indulge in music for commercial purposes, but their own hearts are not stirred in the least toward God thereby. They arc professionals.
27 Compare this with the untrained voices of ten thousand of Jehovah’s witnesses assembled in convention, who sing songs of praise to Jehovah, and which
November 15, 1937
<3Te WATCHTOWER.
345
songs thrill the hearts of the ones who are devoted to him because they sing with the spirit of loving devotion to God and praise to his name. How different the paid church choirs whose songs, to those who are devoted to God, are like a sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal! The apostle Paul had in mind such when he said: "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling eymbal.” (1 Cor. 13:1) It has become a rule of the so-called "Christian” religionists to employ hired choirs or professional musicians at a large, money salary to sing in the great cathedrals and church buildings, and when the pope has a celebration, such as the inauguration of so-called "holy year”, the professional singers celebrated in the world are brought forward to make music. In fact, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their commercial allies are in a scheme to control the common people for pecuniary gain, and to carry out their schemes they employ music-makers to sing songs for them. This same crowd now controls the radio and furnishes music to suit the people who desire to yield to commercial solicitations. Likewise professional music conductors play anthems, which were written for the praise of Jehovah, but which musicians have no interest whatsoever in God and his kingdom. They play military marches and furnish like music that stirs men’s emotions and makes them easy victims of the commercial and political crowd. They play sacred music at the instance of the leaders of the religious organizations in order to stir the people, and sway their emotions, and cause them to yield to the importunilies of th: clergy and give up their money. Whenever the clergy want to take up a big collection they put on a paid song-fest first, and then "get the one-armed man to pass the hat”. Music, which should be employed to the praise of the Creator, is improperly and wrongfully employed to swing the people into the Devil’s trap and rob them of their hard-earned money. This crowd, however, is amongst those who ^re employed to turn the people away from God, and they, the Lord says, must drink of the cup of this fury.
” Up to this point in the prophecy consideration is given to the ruling elements in the countries south of Babylon, and then Jeremiah turned his attention to the kings of the north or northeast of Babylon and passed the cup to them. "And all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes.” (Jcr. 25:25) Elam was one of the early nations and was in an alliance with the nation or king of the plains of Shinar and joined with that Devil nation in wars of conquest. (Gen. 14:1,2,5, 9) In the days of Abraham Elam was a prominent nation of imperialistic ambitions and took the lead of a combination of kings in war. They were a devilish people. Abraham engaged them in baftle and defeated them when he recovered Lot. (Gen. 14:1-16) God foretold the destruction of Elam, by the mouth of at least two of his prophets. (Jcr. 49: 34-38;
Ezek. 32: 24, 25) The Elamites appear to well picture the rulers of imperialistic designs that form leagues, such as the League of Nations, to accomplish their purpose, and that are in a league against God and his kingdom. Those who support imperialism would be included within those described as "Elam” in the prophecy. The following texts support this point:
"And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast [of imperialism] and his image [the League of Nations, which is against God’s kingdom], and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.” (Rev. 14: 9,10) “And the first [angel] went, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.”—Rev. 16:2.
f0 Those mentioned in the prophecy above as "the kings of the Medes” apparently were the descendants of Madai, the brother of Magog the son of Japheth. This is the first mention of the descendants of Japheth in connection with the cup of this fury. Up to this point in the prophecy the descendants of Ham and Shein arc shown to have received the cup, and now the third great division of the human race gets its turn to drink of the cup at God’s hands. (Gen. 10: 2) Those Medes mentioned were, of course, before tho time of Darius the Mede a.'.d Cyrus the Persian, as mentioned in the prophecy of Daniel. Those carly-day Medes acted with the politicians of Assyria in scattering the Israelites, the covenant people of God, among their cities and there holding them captive. (2 Ki. 17:6; 18:11) Such Medes (who were before Darius and Cyrus) appear to picture those organized elements who work with religionists in striving to prevent the activities of God’s covenant people, the remnant, and who endeavor to hold such witnesses in restraint and prevent them from worshiping Almighty God as he has commanded. The present-day crowd, whom those Medes pictured, claim to be God’s people, but are unfaithful to Jehovah and are hypocrites. In the various political and judicial offices there arc many men who claim to be Christian, but have no faith in God and in Christ, but who work with the high-up religionists who do claim to be Christians, and cooperate with such in inflicting punishment upon Jehovah’s witnesses because it appears to be to the advantage of such political and judicial tools of the Hierarchy. Such arc the magistrates and other judicial officers, flagrant examples of which operate in New Jersey, Quebec, and other like places, who are without conscience and void of all honesty. They work together with the police or others of the military crowd
316
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. y.
to compel obedience to their unrighteous judicial decisions rendered against God’s true people.
30 Every part of the Devil’s organization is included, who must drink of this cup of his fury, and therefore it is written: “And all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.”—Jer. 25:26.
31 All the nations that have willingly pursued a course of unrighteousness for gain of things material have joined Satan's crowd and come under the Devil and under the immediate command of Gog of Magog. That entire wicked crowd have joined in the conspiracy in making assaults u]>on those who serve Almighty God in spirit and in truth. All such are now in the conspiracy against God’s remnant on the earth. Gog, the Devil’s chief official, manipulates the wicked forces in the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses. Therefore says the Lord concerning Gog: “Say, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I am against thee, 0 Gog, the chief prince of Meshach and Tubal: and I will turn thee back, and put books into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed with all soils of armour, even a great company, with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords: Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya, with them; all of them with shield and helmet; Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah of the north quarters, and all his bands; and many people with thee. And thou shalt come from thy place out of the north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company, and a mighty army: and thou shalt come up against my people of Israel [the true people of God], as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days.”— Ezek. 38:3-6,15,16.
82 All the nations that lie north of Palestine have for a long while been dominated by the extreme religionists, and particularly that form of religion introduced and practiced by the old “whore”, and doubtless will also make up a large portion of the “ten horns” that hate the old “whore” and will destroy her, as foretold by the Lord. (Rev. 17:15-17) That same wicked crowd also makes war against the King of kings and all his faithful followers, and meets complete and absolute defeat.
88 The Devil is the god of this wicked world and rules and claims the right to rule all the kingdoms of the earth, and which the Lord will destroy; and therefore all such must drink of the “cup”. Hence the prophet says: “And all the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth.” In order to mock Jehovah God and to bring Jesus into a position of disapproval the Devil offered to turn over to Jesus all these kingdoms, upon condition that Jesus would worship him. (Matt. 4: 8, 9; Luke 4: 6) Jesus rebuffed that wicked one, because in the heart of the Loid Jesus has always been the law of God written and the
will of his Father he always does. Christ Jesus could not and would not take possession of the world until Jehovah’s due time. (Ps. 110:1) Now at the present time Christ Jesus has been placed upon the throne of full authority, and he must and will destroy all rule in all the nations under Satan, because they are against God and his kingdom. “Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.”—Ps. 2: 8, 9.
34 For many years Japan has practiced her own peculiar Devil religion. In more recent times she has yielded to the influence of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, for gain, of course, and now actively engages with the Vatican in a conspiracy to destroy the work of the Lord and his witnesses. Japan is included in the kingdoms of the north as mentioned in the prophecy, and she must be one that drinks the cup of this fury. Japan resents the message of Jehovah and confiscates the literature containing such message; but the Scriptures show that neither that nation nor any other shall escape, because Armageddon will not omit any nation or government on earth, be the same large or small, far or near. Japan is not included in what are commonly called “Christian nations”, but she has received the witness to the truth of and concerning God’s kingdom and of God’s purpose to destroy 1hc kingdoms of this world. There has been a wide distribution of the kingdom message in Japan, and in addition thereto Japanese official ambassadors in America, and other countries, have had that witness. Regardless of the persecution there continue to be a few faithful witnesses of the Lord in the land of Japan.
35 With all his boasted power, the Devil himself cannot avoid ‘drinking the cup of this fury’. This is made certain by the words of the prophet: “And the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.” (Jer. 25: 2G) Clearly that means that the Devil himself shall be the last to go into oblivion, after seeing all of his organization destroyed. The king of “Babylon”, who is therefore the chief in the universal organization of wickedness, is Satan himself. “Sheshach” is a symbolic name for Babylon. The meaning of the name “Sheshach” is an enigma to all religionists. The clergy have never been able to understand it, and they scoff at the existence of “Sheshach”. Until recently God’s covenant people did not have an understanding of the name and its meaning. But in this day of Jehovah, after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, God has revealed to his people the meaning of that name. Jehovah has made known to his people that Satan’s organization is symbolized in The Revelation as a “wonder in heaven” or great “sign”. Jehovah God’s organization is revealed under the symbol of “a great wonder [or, sign] in heaven”, like unto “a woman clothed with the sun”. (Rev. 12:1-4) Satan’s organization is nor; understood, and is therefore no
Novembek 15, 1937
WATCH TOWER.
347
more an enigma to God’s people, but is known, by the grace of God, as that wicked organization, both invisible and visible, that for centuries has opposed Jehovah and defamed his holy name. The “king of Sheshaeh ” therefore pictures the Devil, who is the king or head of the great wicked organization in opposition to Jehovah.
“But “Sheshaeh” shall fall in the great day of God Almighty. When Satan’s organization begins to tumble, the religionists of “Christendom” being the first, from that time on those who have looked upon .the world as perpetual, unbreakable and immovable will be greatly surprised and astonished. They will be greatly astonished when they see the Roman Catholic Hierarchy go down, and to them it will be a very “strange act”.
“At chapter fifty-one of the prophecy, Jeremiah takes his stand as though he were at the point following the destruction of the Devil and his organization. He now records the historical fact as though it had already come to pass, and he says: * ‘ How is Sheshaeh taken! and how is the praise of the whole earth surprised! how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations! And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him; yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.”—Jcr. 51:41,44.
“Quite fittingly therefore the prophecy against Sheshaeh is the last part of the prophecy of Jeremiah against all of the worldly organization. The last chapter of the prophecy of Jeremiah is purely prophecy recorded as fulfilled, and therefore is history written in advance. This shows that the last part of the battle of Armageddon will be the destruction of Satan’s angelic host under Gog, the commander of the invisible as well as the visible army of the Devil. Then follows the seizing of Satan and casting of him into the bottomless pit. It will be a great punishment to the Devil to stand by and sec all his power taken away from him by the Ix>rd Jesus Christ, whom he has for centuries persecuted. Then in complete disgrace Satan himself will be taken away by the Lord Jesus Christ and completely shorn of all power and cast into the bottomless pit. (Rev. 20:2,3) Thus the Lord, by his prophet, shows the beginning and the ending of the battle of the great day of God Almighty, which ends in complete victory at the hands of the King of kings, Christ Jesus, and to the honor and vindication of Jehovah’s name.
THE GATHERING STORM
” Undergoing great suffering because of their faithfulness to Almighty God, Jehovah’s witnesses of the remnant, and their brethren of the Jonadabs, view with keenest interest the march of the present-day events. The elements gathering for the great storm, which soon shall break, are moving forward to the
mighty climax. They see the freedom of the people being taken away from them and the people themselves put in great fear and forced to obey the ruthless dictators of the nations of the earth. The British Empire, which has long stood for the freedom of speech and right of worship, is now seen moving to a point of crushing all freedom. The outlying colonies are now observed as putting forth their agents and enacting laws to shut out the message of God as delivered by his faithful witnesses, and those who are acquainted with the prophecies now see these prophecies being fulfilled as the cords arc being tightened around England herself, which ere long will be ruled for a time by the hand of some despot. In the land of America, which for the greater part of her existence has boasted of her freedom of speech and freedom of worship, is now seen vigorously active a movement to take away the liberties of the people and to destroy freedom of speech and freedom of worship of Almighty God. The officials or ruling elements, although sworn to uphold and to defend the fundamental laws of the nation, arc now seen as pushing with all available power to have all branches of the government, including the highest judicial body, controlled by a dictator, which dictator will act under the direction of the old “whore” until that wicked system is destroyed at the beginning of Armageddon.
40	Jehovah’s witnesses, now in the light of revealed prophecy, see the reason of the present-day events and know what will be the result. Some of the more noble-minded politicians now begin to see the great dangers arising to the liberties of the people, and they cry out: “We must act quickly.” The difficulty, however, is that they have waited too long. The warning was given some years ago by those who are devoted to Jehovah. America was told of the oncoming of the condition now existing and what shall be the result. But the ruling powers gave no heed thereto. Then in due time millions of American people signed a petition to the lawmakers of the land calling their attention to the rapid encroachment upon the rights of the people by the ultrareligionists, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and called attention to the fact that such is against God and his kingdom. That petition to the lawmaking body was ignored, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy was permitted unhindered to move forward with a ruthless hand. The cry of alarm that now comes up from a few of the politicians appears to be entirely too late. It is too late. The American nation or government is moving rapidly to the point of dictatorial rule. Then that nation will be compelled to ‘drink of the cup of God’s fury’. By the grace of Jehovah the remnant now are permitted to sec these things in advance in order that they may receive comfort and hope and know that their faithfulness to God and his kingdom will be fully rewarded in due time. Let all those who arc on the side of God now be diligent to inform themselves of the unfolding of prophecy and also diligent
348
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
in bearing testimony to those who have the hearing ear and who, hearing, may flee and find safety in God’s organization. The day of deliverance for those who are devoted to God is near, and although the persecution continues to increase, there is every reason for those who love the Lord to greatly rejoice.
41	Jeremiah having performed that part of the drama showing that each and every nation must drink of the cup of this fury, and having presented it to all, then Jeremiah is directed by the Lord what he is to say: “Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.” —Jer. 25:27.
" Jehovah does not take action against his enemies until he first gives the warning of his purpose and states the reason for so doing. Here he tells Jeremiah to notify the people that it is the Lord’s command, the command of Jehovah of hosts, that the peoples and nations shall drink and be drunken and spue and fall, never to rise again. God now commands that the rulers and their supporters be told that fatal drunkenness is their lot, and soon they will find themselves in that drunken condition, from which they will not revive. God has caused to be written in his Word, and brought to the attention of religionists and others, that the great and mighty organization of the world, which they think is invulnerable and immovable, shall fall and that the Lord will see to it that all the world shall drink of the wine of his fierceness: “And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell; and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.” (Rev. 16:19) The wicked religionists have time and again, although having heard the warning, continued to assault the faithful people of God, and nowr “Christendom” shall receive pay in kind. “For as ye have drunk upon iny holy mountain, so shall all the nations drink continually; yea, they shall drink, and swallow down, and shall be as though they had not been.”—Obad. 16, Il.V.
“ As the religionists and their supporters have heard God’s message during the past few years, not only have they gone mad by reason thereof but they would rather die than to continue to hear it, and hence they continue to cry out, when the message is spoken, that “it shocks their religious susceptibilities, and should be forbidden and stopped”. Being unable to stop the message they would really like to die and get away from it. “And in those days shall men . . . desire to die, and death shall flee from them.” (Rev. 9:6) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy is now driven to madness by reason of the plainness of the message of truth delivered, and, knowing their inability to defend their fraudulent and false teachings, they refuse to come into the open and attempt to defend their traditions; and concerning this it is written: ‘And it shall be a
vexation when he shall make them understand the doctrines/—Isa. 28:19, margin.
44	The organized forward movement of this plain message of truth began in 1922, and has progressed since, by the grace of God. Jehovah will have this message of warning delivered; as he states: ‘Because of the sword, which I will send upon you,’ meaning the sword of execution, which shall fall upon Satan’s organization. The sword of execution, wielded by the Mightier-than-Nebuchadnezzar, to wit, by Christ Jesus, will fall with greatest heaviness upon “Christendom”, and from such there is no escape. This fact is now known by those who are faithful to Jehovah, and gives them comfort and hope, because they know their deliverance is sure and that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is absolutely certain.
45	Jehovah's witnesses are not to go to the people and deliver any man’s message; and this is plainly shown by what God directed Jeremiah to say, to wit : “And it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Ye shall certainly drink.” -—Jer. 2u: 28.
48	His witnesses of this time must go in the name of Jehovah God, in the name of the Lord of hosts, who now makes war upon the wicked. The people will refuse to hear, except a few; but the faithful witnesses will continue to say: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Ye shall certainly drink.” Jehovah’s witnesses will not stop to argue with opposers. That is not their business. Their work is to bring the message of the Lord to the attention of the people, that they may have an opportunity to give heed thereto. Much and prolonged talk at the door with those of the homes is not obeying God’s commandments. His message must be delivered as the Lord’s message and as he has commanded it, and those who refuse to hear cannot be forced to hear, but, having an opportunity to hear, must bear the responsibility. The message must therefore be carried to them by those who arc serving God. They have no excuse for disobeying his commandments, the disobedience to which would result in the destruction of the ones who are in a covenant to obey his will.
47	It is not the purpose of The Watchtower to boast of what has been done and is being done in fulfillment of this prophecy, but some of the well-known facts may here be mentioned in order that the faithful may sec that in the past few years, under the guidance of the Lord, they have been working exactly in harmony with God’s will in giving the message of warning to the nations and to the people. Some of the “wiseacres”, who think they are in the truth and wiser than others, will, figuratively speaking, continue to sit on the fence and whittle, and say, in substance: “I think we had better go easy now, because the great work that we will do is still in the future and after the end of the first part of Armageddon.” Also some who are fearful will say: “Let’s talk about love and say nothing about
November 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
349
the trouble.” The faithful will not be deceived by any such sophistry. God has revealed the meaning of these prophecies to his people in order that they may see their duty, obligation and privilege. Idleness and indifference now will result in disaster. Full and joyful obedience the Lord requires. This is the day when God has commanded his people to “rise up against her in battle” and to have a part in his work, which work appears to the religionists as strange. The faithfol now recognize that God has afforded them an opportunity to have a part in his work for the comfort and encouragement of such as have covenanted to do his will. Therefore he furnishes them meat in due season by revealing the meaning of his prophecies Written long ago. God has promised to direct the path of those who acknowledge him. lie often causes such devoted ones to perform duties that they do not understand until afterwards. It therefore seems fitting that we here call attention to some of the things that the Lord has permitted his people to do.
" Since 1922 Jehovah’s witnesses have been presenting the cup or message of Jehovah to nation after nation, and that message has been rejected and refused by the kings or rulers. In 1931 the message set out in the booklet The Kingdom, the Hope of the World, was seined upon the rulers in many lands, and thereafter the same message was taken jnorc particularly to the common people. While there is no specific or direct effort to serve the rulers further with the message of the kingdom, it is still brought to the attention of such time and again by reason of its being carried to the people, and the rulers must take notice thereof. The mighty religionists are very much opposed to the people's hearing the message, and they, together with their political and judicial allies, formulate, enact and enforce laws to prevent the people from hearing. A small number of the common people hear, understand and appreciate this message as from the Lord, and they give heed thereto; but the far greater number of the people think that this work in which Jehovah’s witnesses are engaged is a 'very strange work’, and so they dismiss it by the mere saying, “We are not interested.” Since 1931 Jehovah’s witnesses have, in obedience to God’s commandment, made a wide distribution of God’s message to the people. There has been a wide distribution of such Biblical explanations as contained in the books Vindication, Preparation, Preservation, Jehovah, Riches, Choosing (“Separating the Nations”), Uncovered, Protection, and many others. In addition thereto the radio has been employed to proclaim the message throughout the earth, and also thousands of sound machines have been and are being used to proclaim God’s Word within the presence and hearing of the people. The faithful and true witnesses rejoice in this and, regardless of opposition, push on. They will obey God rather than men.
49	Since 1934 the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their “man Friday”, one Hitler, have been personally
served with the message, and they cannot claim ignorance. In 1936 a Resolution, publicly adopted at a convention in Lucerne, Switzerland, was widely distributed throughout that land and in Germany and in other parts of the world, although the work of distributing that Resolution was fraught with peril, and many who did distribute it were put in peril of their lives and are now languishing in filthy prisons in Germany. The rulers and the people of such lands have been warned, and it is their fault now if they do not find the way of escape. The day of reckoning and recompense is now at hand.
50	“As Babylon hath caused the slain of [true] Israel [that is, God’s people] to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth”; and the Lord now so declares. (Jcr. 51:7,49) “For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red; it is full of mixture, and he poureth out of the same; but the dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them.”—Ps. 75:8.
“Since the Roman Catholic Hierarchy stands at the very head of the wicked class and is the more reprehensible because of using the name of Jehovah and Christ Jesus for the purpose of carrying on a cruel persecution upon Jehovah’s witnesses, and which brings great injury and suffering upon the people, her claim of lasting stability and immovability sounds very foolish. In the light of revealed prophecy can there now be any doubt as to where Armageddon begins? Do the Scriptures make this matter clear? or is it still a question of open speculation? Those who love Jehovah and his kingdom arc not left at all in doubt, as will now appear from what follows.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
H 1. Whom does Jehovah hate, and why? How and why does ho put the righteous to the test! Who are the wicked! and how will Jehovah deal with them! Why docs Jehovah now make known his purpose concerning the wicked!
2.	Compare Jeremiah's position and course of action (Jcr. 25: 17) with that of the witnesses of the Lord today. Account for this zeal and definite course of procedure on the part of the true and faithful, even though some of these are denied written communication with others.
3.	How did Jeremiah carry out Jehovah’s command as declared at verse 17?
U 4-6. What is the evidence that the clergy have heard the warning! For what purpose is this warning given!
H 7,8. To whom must Jeremiah first deliver the cup! Why first to them! Whom did they foreshadow, and how!
V 9. How do the men of the Homan Catholic Hierarchy deport themselves! To what end?
H 10-12. To whom does Isaiah 28: 14,15,18 apply! What is the purpose in compelling them to drink of the cup! Apply the words, “as it is this day.’’
K 13. 'Whp will weep and wail when the religious element of Satan’s organization goes down! Why!
K 14,15. Identify those prophetically mentioned in verso 19. Why must they also drink!
1[ 16. Whom did “Egypt’’, and “the mingled people’’, and “the kings of the land of LTz’’ represent! How!
V 17,18. “Edom,” “Moab,” and “the children of Ammon” pictured whom! How!
K 19, 20. IIow, in the fulfillment of the prophecy, do those mentioned .in verse 22 come in for a share in the cup! Show
350
£THE WATCHTOWER-
Bbooklyn, N. S'.
that they picture a class today practicing religion solely for pecuniary gain.
, 21-24. Why send the cup to those mentioned at verse 23, and to those whom they pictured, and require these also to drink! Explain the expression, “ail that are in the utmost corners.''
f 25. Who were the kings mentioned in verse 241 Why must they, and those whom they pictured, drink of the cupl
5 26,27. Identify “the kings of Zimri”. Why must they also drink of the cup of this fury!
f 28,29. Why must the kings of Ehm at that time, and those now whom they pictured, drink of the cup! Why also the kings of the Medes, and those whom they pictured!
f 30-32. To whom* does the expression “all the kings of the north” apply! Why must these drink!
, 33,34. Account for the expression “all the kingdoms of the world”. How do parts of the earth not commonly called “Christian nations”, such as Japan, deserve a share in the cup of fury!
1 35. Who is “the king of Sheshaeh”! How has his identity come to be known by Jehovah's people!
H 36,37. Apply Jeremiah 51: 41,44.
i 38. Show that it is fitting that “the king of Sheshaeh shall drink after them”.
K 39,40. In what facts do those faithful to Almighty God now see the elements gathering for the great storm! Account for their seeing the reason of the present-day events, and knowing the result thereof. For what purpose have they been permitted to see these things in advance!
U 41,42. Apply the command recorded at verse 27.
If 43. How docs the message of warning affect the religionists and their supporters!
f 44. How and when has Jehovah ‘sent the sword among them’!
V 45,46. What if they refuse to take the cup sent by Jehovah at the hand of his witnesses!
H 47,48. What are some of the well-known facts showing that the faithful have been working in harmony with God’s will in giving the message of warning! What will they now do!
K 49-51. With what result to the witnesses has the message of warning been proclaimed ! With what result now, and later, to those who have been served with the message!
BESIEGED
JEHOVAH’S servants on earth speak his message. If the rebellious ones, meaning the professed Christians of “Christendom”, and the “evil servant” class, had their way they would stop the work of God’s “faithful servant” and completely silence all who speak the truth of and concerning the Devil’s organization. But as God said to Ezekiel, so now he says to the “faithful servant” whom Ezekiel foreshadowed: “But thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them: and I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover; for they arc a rebellious house. But when I speak with thee, 1 will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God, He that hearcth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious house.”— Ezek. 3:25-27.
The “servant” is not to tell his own message. Jehovah has made his “faithful servant” the “watchman”, and only as the Lord God directs the “servant” to □peak he does speak, having always a “Thus saith the lx>rd” for every part of the message that is delivered. The work of the servant is not to make converts to get them to join an organization, but to give a witness to the truth. The hearers must cither accept or reject the message, and take the responsibility. “He that hath an car, let him hear what the spirit saith.” (Rev. 3:22) Jehovah brings his servant into action and uses him for his purposes while he moves forward to the vindication of his name. The opposition by the rebellious house of “Christendom” or by the “evil servant” will in no wise prevent the truth from being told as God purposes it shall be told.
Jehovah continues to instruct Ezekiel what he shall do. In chapter four of the prophecy it is written that God took Ezekiel and made him a sign-man to the pro
fessed people of God, first to Israel after the flesh, and thereafter to “Christendom”. “Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem: and lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it; set the camp also against it, and set battering rams against it round about.” (Ezek. 4:1,2) Ezekiel is here instructed to lay a siege against Jerusalem. In this he performs a mimic siege against the city. This performance was in the presence of those in the city and was a sign to them and a warning. It was a prophecy against “Christendom”. Originally Jerusalem was the capital city of ‘both houses of Israel’, and Jehovah let the iniquity of both houses bo visited upon that city. To Ezekiel Jehovah said: “Moreover, take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city; and set thy face against it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.”—Ezek. 4:3.
Ezekiel was commanded first to lie on his left side for three hundred and ninety days, thus picturing the iniquity of the house of Israel; and then at the end of that period he was to lie on the right side forty days, picturing the iniquity laid against Judah. “Moreover lie thou upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it; according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it, thou shalt bear their iniquity. For I have appointed the years of their iniquity to be unto thee a number of days, even three hundred and ninety days; so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel. And again, when thou hast accomplished these, thou shalt lie on thy right side, and shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah; forty days, each day for a year, have I appointed it unto thee.” (Ezek. 4:4-6, R.V.) This did not mean that Jerusalem was besieged that length of time when the actual siege came to take place.
November 15, 1937
<3Tie WATCHTOWER.
351
(2 Ki. 25:1-8) This represents the long-suffering of God toward the two houses of Israel. The number of days that Ezekiel lay on his left side and then on his right side represented the number of literal years that God forbore with the two houses of Israel, suffering them to perform their iniquitous work. Both the 390-year and the 40-year period must have terminated at the same time, to wit, in the year GOG B.C., when the long-suffering of God ceased and the city of Jerusalem was broken up, marking the beginning of ‘the gentile times’.
The 390-year period just mentioned applies to the ten tribes of Israel, and the 40-ycar period applies to the house of Judah and Benjamin. In the year 999 B.C. the ten tribes revolted against Judah. This was 393 years before the destruction of Jerusalem. God had foretold through his prophet that he would rend the ten tribes away from Solomon’s son Reho-boam and give them to Jeroboam, and, if the latter would remain faithful to God, through the ten tribes the Lord would build him a sure house. (1 Ki. 11:29-40) But Jeroboam did not remain faithful to God, but, on the contrary, instituted a base and false worship and set up two golden calves, one at Bethel and the other at Dan, and caused the people to worship there instead of going up to Jerusalem. (1 Ki. 12: 26-33) God sent his prophet up to warn Jeroboam; but Jeroboam refused to heed the warning and to turn aside from his false worship, and continued his iniquity. The iniquity of the ten tribes would therefore begin to count from that time, which was 996 B.C., or three years after the revolt of 999 B.C. It follows, then, that 390 years from that date would end 606 B.C. Israel’s iniquity dates from the beginning of the religious revolt and the substitution of the false worship.
Since the Israelites in general foreshadowed “Christendom”, the application of the above is this: “Christianity,” so called, was organized shortly after the demise of the apostles; and the Roman Catholics, acting through their clergy and the principal of their flocks, monopolized the field, that is to say, the entire world, from the religious viewpoint, until the year 1531 (A.D.), when the rulers of England and Germany broke away from the pope and the League of Schmalkald was formed for the protection of the Protestant religion. This date is definitely fixed as a historical fact. (See The Watchtower 1920, page 174.) It was therefore in A.D. 1531 that Jehovah began to bear with the iniquity of “organized Christianity”, as represented by the Roman wing of “Christianity” so called. God’s bearing with this iniquity begins to count at that time, and counting 390 years from then brings the period of time down to the year 1921.
Now as to the house of Judah: Jehovah begins to count her iniquity, with which he had to bear, from the year 646 B.C., that being the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah. The proof is this: The ten tribes
went into captivity to Assyria in 740 B.C. Judah should have drawn a warning from this and should have been faithful to God, button the contrary, Judah departed from the worship of Jehovah. When God gave warning to Jeroboam concerning the false worship established, he caused his prophet then to foretell the coming of Josiah the king of Judah. (1 Ki. 13:1,2) Manasseh and Amon, who preceded Josiah, had desecrated the temple of Jehovah God and established the devil worship amongst Judah. After Josiah came to the throne he did right in the sight of the Lord. (2 Ki. 23:26, 27) It was in the thirteenth year of the reign of this king Josiah that God raised up Jeremiah and caused him to prophesy to Judah, and Judah refused to hearken to the words of the Lord spoken by the prophet. “The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah of the priests that were in Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin: to whom the word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.” (Jcr. 1:1,2) Therefore it was from that year, to wit, 646 B.C., that Jehovah began to count the forty years’ iniquity of Judah which terminated in 606 B.C. Jeremiah began to prophesy forty years before the fall of Jerusalem, and his first prophecy was one of warning to Jerusalem of the impending destruction of the city, to which warning the people declined to give heed. This corresponds exactly with the forty days (symbolic of forty years) that Ezekiel lay on his right side to bear the iniquity of the house of Judah.— Jer. 1:14-17.
There must of necessity be a proper application of this mimic siege on Jerusalem to that which Jerusalem represented, to wit, “organized Christianity,” or “Christendom”. As hereinbefore stated, it was in A.D. 1531 when God began to recognize her iniquity and to bear with the iniquity of the Roman branch of “organized Christianity”. That day is marked by the fact that it was then that the two main pillars of the Protestant wing of “organized Christianity” were set up. Germany, Britain and the United States, and the colonies belonging thereto, are the chief countries of Protestantism, or “organized Christianity” according to the Protestants. It has been chiefly in these countries where God has caused the truth to be proclaimed concerning his kingdom. A comparatively small amount of the witness work of “present truth” has been carried on in Italy, Spain and suchlike Catholic countries. The beginning of this public witness work in these Protestant countries would specifically mark the beginning of God’s forbearing with Protestantism. Mark now that it was in 1881 that this public witness work began and is especially indicated by the publication and wide distribution of the booklet Food for Thinking Christians, which set forth the doctrine of the second coming of Christ, and the kingdom of the Lord, and the fundamental truths that had long been obscured by the unfaithfulness of “organ
352
WATCHT0WEFL
Brooklyn, N. I.
ized Christianity”. That work, begun in 1881, was exactly 350 years after Jehovah began to bear with the iniquities of the Catholic wing of ‘‘organized Christianity”, and 40 years thereafter exactly corresponds with the 390 days that Ezekiel lay on his left side in the mimic siege. At the end of the 390 days of the mimic siege Ezekiel lay on his right side for a period of 40 days, symbolic of 40 years, as stated by the scripture. This foreshadows that God would bear with the iniquity of Protestantism for a period of forty years from the beginning of that period, to wit, the year 1881, as above stated. Forty years added to 1881 marks the year 1921, at which time the forty-year period of forbearance of Jehovah with Protestantism would end.
Now be it noted that both the 390-ycar period, applying to Catholicism, and the 40-ycar period, applying to Protestantism, end exactly at the same time, showing that the application is correct and is to all ‘‘organized Christianity”. It was in that year, 1921, that The Watchtower, by the Lord’s grace, was permitted to identify and did identify and publish the truth concerning ‘‘the beast”, ‘‘the image of the beast,” and ‘‘the abomination that maketh desolate”. (Revelation 13) (Sec The Watchtower 1921, page 11.) In that same year, 1921, the nations of “Christendom”, by their duly constituted representatives, held a national assembly at Washington, D.C., known as the International Arms Conference. The announced purpose of that Conference was to establish lasting peace on the earth. The clergy of “organized Christianity” ably supported this movement. God’s covenant people, Jehovah’s witnesses, then known as “Bible Students”, presented to that International Arms Conference a resolution that had been duly passed by the convention of Jehovah’s witnesses, which, among other things, stated: ‘That no nation can be truly Christian which fails to obey the teachings of Jesus and the apostles; that the ruling powers of “Christendom” are
made up of the commercial and political leaders supported by the clergy of both Catholic and Protestant eburch organizations who, contrary to the Word of God, had allied themselves with such leaders and become a part of the world organization; that the kingdom of heaven is at hand and that it is the divine and only remedy for lasting peace on earth.’
The resolution memorializing this international conference called upon these nations to recognize and adopt God’s remedy, and then added: ‘If the divine Scriptural remedy be ignored, God’s wrath will be visited upon their governments and the system of “Christendom”.’ (Sec copy of Resolution, Golden Age magazine, December 7; 1921, page 138.) At the time of the presentation of this resolution it was not known that the matter was in any wise foreshadowed by the prophecy of Ezekiel or any other prophecy. In the light of “present truth-” wc must conclude that the angel of the Lord directed God’s covenant people to thus serve notice upon “organized Christianity”.
With the close of the year 1921 the 390 years and the 40 years of Jehovah’s forbearing with the two houses of “organized Christianity” had expired. The year 1922 was manifestly God’s due time to begin to make known his judgments against the nations of “Christendom” and to pronounce his judgment by and through his anointed people. It was in that same year, to wit, 1922, that the commandment came from the temple of God to his angels to begin the pouring out of the bowls of the wrath of God on the earth, and God’s covenant people in convention assembled at Cedar Point participated in that work. (See Revelation, chapter 1G; Light, Book Two, page 19 and pages following.) When at least two of God's holy prophets prophesy against “organized Christianity” and the events coming to pass fit both prophecies, then it must be that such events constitute the fulfillment thereof, and this should be a great encouragement to everyone who loves Jehovah.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
J. C. BOOTH
Challis, Idaho ..—..Dec.
Pocatello, Idaho......“
Burley, Idaho ........“
Tu in Falla, Idaho ...“
Boise, Idaho _________“
Nampa, Idaho__________“
Emmett. Idaho ________"
Baker, Oree...........“
La Grande, Oreg. _____“
Wallowa, Oreg......—_ “
A. H. MACMILLAN
Pendleton, Oreg.......Dec. 21
Richland, Oreg ........“	22
Sunnyside, Wm-h........“ 23,24
Walla Walla. Wash....." 25, 2d
Dayton, Mash.................11	28
Lewiston, Idaho ......."	29
Moscow, Idaho .........“	30
Colfax, \\ ash...Dec. 31, Jan. 1
Benewah, Idaho ......Jan. 2.3
Spokane. Wash, ________“	5. 6
Morganton, N. C, .....	.Dec.	2	Gieensboro, N. C.	......Dec. IS, 19
Shelby, N. C			_»	3	Durham, N. C			“ 21.22
Bessemer City, N. C.	..."	4,5	Stem, N. C			“	23
Gastonia, N. C	—	.. "	7, 8	Louisburg,-N. C. ..		“	24
Charlotte, N. C	—	.. "	9,10	Raleigh, N. C. 			" 25, 20
Kannapolis, N. C. 		.." 11.12	Clayton, N. C. .			“	28
Salisbury, N. C		.. " 14.15	Dunn, N. C				«	29
Winston-Salem, N. C.	" 10.17	Hayne, N. C. —			" 30, 31
G. Y. M’CORMICK
South Royalton, Vt. ..Nov. 28.29
Ticonderoga, N. Y.....Dec. 1
Adirondack, N. Y. ______“	2
Granville, N. Y......."	3
Glens Falls, N.Y. .„.. “	4,5
Schenectady, N. Y. —... “	7, 8
Syracuse. N. Y. ____Dec. 10-12
Buffalo, N. Y...........“	14,15
East Palestine, Ohio ..‘1 17-19
Fort Wayne,	Ind. ______“	20, 21
Chicago, Ill............"	23-28
Clinton, Iowa___________“	30, 31
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE b TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children." -Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all tilings; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name nnd clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
“VINDICATOR”
The concluding united service period of tho year 1937, the nine days December 4 to 12 inclusive, is called the “Vindicator” testimony period. Tho feature offer of this penod will be the new book Enemies, to be placed on the usual contribution of 25c. All those desiring to be for a vindication of Jehovah’s name will act upon this announcement and will now see to making all due preparations for a vigorous part in this testimony. Consult the most recent issues of the Infoimant for additional details and instructions. Your prompt report at the close of the testimony will be appreciated by this office.
“ENEMIES”
This new book, written by Brother Rutherford, and first announced and released at the recent general convention of Jehovah's witnesses at Columbus, Ohio, is now available for all who are for Jehovah and his King and against his enemies. It is a grand work, of 384 pages, excellently bound, gold-stamped, with color illustrations and a comprehensive index The initial edition is the autographed edition and contains, in facsimile, a letter written by the hand of the author and addressed to all the Lord’s servants. Due to the limited quantity of this author’s edition a contribution therefor of 50c a copy is asked to offset the special expense of publishing this edition.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1938
The Year Book for 1938 will embody the features that have made the issues for previous years so valuable to all who de-
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Chiist his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, 31.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Fobeicn, 31.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa. 7s. American remittances slioulil be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South Afi lean and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the lospeetno branch oHiees. Kemittances from counthes oilier than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontano, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Itoad, Strathfield, N. 8. W., Australia South African.......Boston House, Cape Town, South At. ica
Please address tho Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription pru e may have The IVatehtoicer free upon written application to tlie publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so ic-qmSting it. We are glad to tints aid the medy, but the wntt«n application once each jear is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label v. itbln one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of cvpiiation) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription explies.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1379.
claro themselves on Jehovah’s side and who are actively interested in and participating in the publishing of his name nnd his kingdom. The president’s report contained therein gives an accurate and comprehensive account of tho state of the Lord’s work in the various lands throughout the earth, s'lowinq in considerable detail the activities and efforts put forth during the service year just ended and the results thereof. Then there is tho year text for 1938 and a pointed comment thereon. This, together with well chosen daily texts and explanatory comments thereon from The Watchtower, makes this 1’cnr Book one of everyday help and use for all the Lord’s faithful. Tho edition thereof is limited, and hence tho contribution of 50c per copy is received therefor. Company groups should combine individual orders and send same in through company servant, to reduce mailing expense.
1938 CALENDAR
The text for the calendar year 1938 is: 'Bo not afraid: the battle is God’s.’ (2 Chron. 20:15) The calendar art picture was specially painted to fit this text and beautifully illustrates it and its action. Beneath the picture on the calendar base appears a letter from the president of the Society setting forth the several united service periods for the year and serving as a ready reference for the kingdom publishers. The calendar pad also indicates the dates of these testimony penods. Company servants should send in a combination order for all in tho company wanting calendars. Remit, with order, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five.
HIS "WORK” AND HIS "ACT” “As I have done to Shiloh.”—Jer. 7:14.
PART 7
JEHOVAH’S judgment day is a time of first cleansing his sanctuary and then destroying everything that is an abomination in his sight. Jehovah’s judgment is carried forward by and through his Chief Officer, Christ Jesus, whom Jehovah has installed at his temple for the purpose of judgment. (Mal. 3:1-3) The time of judgment is from 1918 onward. The time and manner of judgment is definitely fixed, as stated in the Scriptures: “For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely l:e saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?” (1 Pct. 4:17,18) The execution of Jehovah’s judgment against the wrongdoers begins with those who have taken the name of God in vain, proving unfaithful and against God and his kingdom.
* The organized religion falsely and wrongfully called ‘ ‘ Christianity ’ ’, or ‘ ‘ the Christian religion ’ ’, has taken the name of God and Christ Jesus, and that great combined religious system is headed by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. That religious institution has presumptuously assumed the name of God and falsely claims to be the direct representative of God and Christ on earth, and yet every part of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy institution is hypocritical. The Hierarchy has brought greater reproach upon the name of Jehovah than any other institution that has existed on the earth. It has carried on the most flagrant and cruel and vicious racket of any criminal institution that ever existed. This is particularly true because that institution has practiced a great fraud upon the people in the name of God and of Christ, deceiving them and robbing them of their property and destroying their opportunity for life everlasting.
3	Where, then, should it be expected that evil or adverse judgment will begin? The Lord God, through his prophet Jeremiah, answers that question specifically: “For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts. ’ ’—Jer. 25: 29.
* The Roman Catholic Hierarchy in particular, and all the so-called “Christian” religionists in general, for centuries have induced billions of persons to believe that such religious institutions represent God and Christ, and those billions of people have gladly followed the hypocritical and blasphemous leaders. Because the religious leaders have boldly claimed that they represent God and Christ, and because they have exhibited the greatest amount of hypocrisy, millions of honest men have rejected God and the Bible, his Word, and Christ Jesus, the Savior, and have reproached God for apparently having such an organization of hypocrites on earth to represent him. Seeing the hypocrisy of the clergy, which particularly was exhibited during the World War, millions of young men, as well as older ones, have turned entirely against God and anything that pertains to him and his kingdom. The religious leaden by their false doctrines and their wrongful and immoral conduct have made God to appear as a fiend and as a party to their crimes. They have collected money upon their announced claim that God would hear their prayers and forgive cruel and wicked crimes and criminals. The honest men have said: ‘We want nothing to do with such a God, who is a party to such wickedness’; and thus the religionists have greatly reproached the name of God and Christ Jesus.
5	The word “evil”, as used in the text above quoted from Jeremiah, means a calamity befalling a creature or organization for wrongdoing. It is written that Jehovah creates evil. (Isa. 45:7) That means that Jehovah has provided for the punishment of wrongdoers by sending upon those wrongdoers a calamity. That calamity is an evil or a punishment to the wrongdoers. Now Jehovah definitely and plainly states: “I begin to bring evil [calamity] [at or] on the city upon which my name is called.”—Margin.
6	God’s judgment upon the new Jerusalem, that is, upon the faithful remnant on earth, brings no evil upon them, because he approves them and clothes that faithful company with the robe of his righteousness that they may offer unto him an offering in righteousness; and hence he puts his name of approval upon
355
356
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
them. (Mal. 3:3; Isa. 61:10) But there is an organization which calls itself by the name of the Lord, that is, the so-called ‘ ‘ Christian religion ’ ’, which religion is claimed to worship God and Christ but does not. ‘Upon that city [organization]says Jehovah, ‘ “upon which my name is called,” but which is unfaithful to me,’ he begins the evil. God puts his curse, that is, his expressed wrath, upon or against that organization. The clear distinction is made between the true followers of Christ Jesus and those who practice religion in the name of Christ. Even the faithful ones of God were partially “drunken” and were unwillingly guilty of much deflection before the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, and this was due to their ignorance and to the ignorance that had been forced upon them by the religious systems, out of which they came. They were honest of heart and truly endeavored to do God’s will as well as they knew, and upon the coming of the Lord to the temple for judgment they were cleansed; and concerning such it is written: “And there shall be no more curse [on the faithful remnant for being negligent]': but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants [those of the 'elect servant’ class] shall serve him.”—Rev. 22: 3.
’ The organization that has presumptuously assumed the name of God and Christ and brought great reproach upon that name and continued to do so is exactly in a contrary position. Upon that unfaithful crowd God inflicts full punishment, and that punishment is the beginning of Armageddon, and hcncc the beginning of God’s “act, his strange act”.
• To the religionists who hang on to what they call the “Christian religion”, whether they be of the laity that go to church and indulge in certain religious forms and ceremonies or are non-professors of religion but who think the church organizations arc necessarily a part of the governments and must be tolerated for that reason, all these the Lord includes when he says: “Should yc be utterly unpunished!” Otherwise stated, the Lord’s words arc: 'Are you guiltless with respect to the organized religion and religionists who practice in my name? Have you not also reproached Jehovah’s name?’ Such persons have joined with the leaders of religion in persecuting God’s faithful servants, upon whom the Lord has truly put his name, and thus they have added further insult to injury. They join in the persecution of such faithful ones to reproach God’s name out of malice, and because they hate God and righteousness and hate anything that pertains to him and his organization. Have not such persons in the past acted, and do they not continue in the present to act in conjunction with the hypocritical leaders, that is, the clergy, in doing violence to God’s people, and in reproaching his name? Such persons have received the warning from God’s Word, which has been delivered to them by his witnesses, and they have shown themselves to be of the “goat” class, by joining the religionists in the persecution of God’s faithful wit
nesses. Those persons have no regard for what is right and just. They operate with the religious leaders and do so for political and commercial gain; and so with the fall of the religious systems those men will be next in order upon whom tne wrath of God will be executed. The Scriptures therefore clearly show that at first the clergy and like hypocrites receive punishment and then their supporters suffer a like punishment.
8	The so-called “Christian religion” will be no protection to any creature or nation when Armageddon begins. To those who claim such protection the Lord says: “Ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts.” Christ Jesus, the great Sword or Executioner, will quickly and promptly respond to the call of Jehovah and will move into action against all that are a part of or supporters of the Devil’s organization; and concerning this it is written: “And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease; for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.” (Zcch, 1:15) “For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood. For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year of recompenccs for the controversy of Zion.” (Isa. 34:2,3,8) By these scriptures it is seen that Jehovah’s record of prophecy is really history in advance by which he advises those who serve him what they may expect to come to pass in the near future.
10	Having expressed his determination to visit his calamity or punishment upon all the nations of the world, Jehovah then gives Jeremiah positive command to tell the people about it: “Therefore prophesy Ihou against them all these words, and say unto them, The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar upon his habitation; he shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.”— Jcr. 25:30.
11	Here Jeremiah pictures Jehovah’s remnant as a whole, and each one thereof; and upon each one rests a like responsibility. All who will be faithful unto God and prove their integrity toward him will quickly and gladly obey this commandment. No one can obey this commandment by substituting some other person for himself. It is an individual responsibility. It is an opportunity for each one to prove his devotion to Jehovah. Some may be incapacitated physically or otherwise as to going from house to house, but such will avail themselves of every possible opportunity that comes their way to get the message to others. One’s responsibility is in proportion to his opportunity. Some are concerned with preparing the material for the field workers, and in doing this they thereby share
December 1, 1937
STe WATCHTOWER.
357
in the service of the Lord. All of Jehovah’s faithful people are now to be at unity in making known Jehovah ’s purpose upon the nations of the earth, and each one performing his assigned duty is having part in the service, whether he be in the office, in the factory, or in the field, or preparing food for others. God’s people must now be wholly and completely devoted to him and his cause, and be blind to everything else. The Jonadabs will remain in the city of refuge and show their devotion and faithfulness to God by joining in the proclamation of the message of the kingdom as opportunity is afforded them. It is now war time, and the witnesses of the Lord must now be engaged in that war, and their part therein is singing the praises of Jehovah and his King; and that song of praise sung in full confidence to the Lord strikes terror to the heart of the enemy. The Lord’s invisible forces will do the inflicting of the mortal punishment.—2 Chron. 20:15-25.
12	The Scriptures indicate that the enemy may for a time put to silence the earths witnesses. The purpose of the enemy now is to rid the earth of Jehovah’s witnesses and the message which they bring from the Lord. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and her allies, when gaining control of all the nations of “Christendom”, almost certainly will clamp down on the witness work. That is exactly what the Devil’s organization has done recently in Germany. Then the religious crowd will felicitate one another and say: ‘ Peace and safety; now we have everything our own way.’ Then the Lord acts; as it is written: ‘Sudden destruction shall come upon them, and they shall find no way to escape.’ (1 Thess. 5:3) Says the prophet: “The Lord shall roar from on high”; that is, from the top of his universal organization, because he is the Supreme Power, the Most High. Jehovah’s roar will be most terrible and appalling to the enemy and will drown out everything else and fill the ranks of the enemy with dismay. Jehovah, in righteous indignation, goes into battle action by his chief representative, Christ Jesus, who takes the lead of the heavenly host to completely crush out the enemy. “The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy [zeal, great heat of battle] like a man of war; he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies. I [Jehovah] have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and refrained myself; now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and devour at once.”—Isa. 42:13,14.
13	Zion is the habitation of Jehovah. It is his capital organization, chosen for himself. (Ps. 132:13) Jehovah shall “utter his voice from his holy habitation”. (Jer. 25:30) This he does by proxy through Christ Jesus, his great Judge, who is now at the temple. He utters his voiee by his Logos, the Head of the capital organization. He does not utter his voice from “the city which is called by my name”, for the reason that that city or organization is unholy and has been spued
out of the Lord’s mouth. God is against the unholy organization of “Christendom”, and it is against that organization he begins his “strange act”; and he begins that “strange act” by Christ Jesus, who utters the voice of Jehovah. “Christendom” is entirely of the earth, being completely removed from things spiritual. It is written: ‘At his voice the earth melted.’ (Ps. 46:6) That will be the effect upon the religious systems. They shall melt and pass away.
14	“He shall mightily roar upon his habitation [na-vah (Hebrew), meaning, ‘at home’; (Rotherham) over his home].” “Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation [na-vah (Hebrew): home].” (Ex. 15:13) Jehovah thus manifests himself as being on the side of his faithful people, that is, the temple company, wherein he resides and rests by his spirit. ‘ ‘ For ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.” (2 Cor. 6:16) His roar shall be against his enemies, and not against his own people, but shall be through them,
15	That will be the time of his triumph, and “he shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes ’ ’; that is, a shout of joy and vindication. The treaders of grapes make wine, which is of good cheer; but, on the occasion of treading, Jehovah by Christ Jesus treads out the blood of Satan’s “vine of the earth”. (Rev. 14:18-20) Such is the time of destruction to the enemy, and the time of vindication and joy to the Lord. The treading begins at “Christendom”, but does not stop until it embraces or takes in all the enemy. The treading is “against all the inhabitants of the earth”, and therefore all must be trodden in “the great winepress of the wrath of God”. “And he [Jehovah’s Word, Christ Jesus] treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.” (Rev. 19:15) “I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people [all the inhabitants of the earth] there was none with me; for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come. And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.”—Isa. 63: 3, 4, 6.
16	Desolation usually causes a tumultuous noise, and so Armageddon is described as such: “A noise [(Leeser) A tumultuous noise] shall come even to the ends of the earth: for the Lord hath a controversy with the nations; he will plead with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord.”—Jer. 25: 31.
” A tumultuous noise, which accompanies the battle of Armageddon, betokens wasting, destruction, and desolation. Furthermore the Lord, by his prophet, says
358
fflfe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
concerning his wrath expressed against the nations of earth: “Because the Lord hath spoiled Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered: because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken; every one of their bows is broken; for the Lord God of rccompenccs shall surely requite.”—Jer. 51: 55, 56.
18	That great and terrible destruction begins on the religious system and extends to all nations; and this ij further shown by the following prophecy, to wit: “But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of Kirioth [Moabite city] ; and Moab shall die with tumult [a great noise], with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.” (Amos 2: 2) The hypocritical organization called “Christendom” shall be first, and this is shown by the following prophecy: “Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy [‘Christendom’s’] people, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Beth-arbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.”—Hos. 10:14.
10	These scriptures show conclusively that the old “whore” must go down first. Relating to the same thing, says the prophet Isaiah: “ A voice of noise from the city [unfaithful ‘Christendom’, or ‘organized religion’], a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recoin ponce to hiscneinies.” (Isa. 66:6) Mark the clear distinction here between the voice of noise from “Christendom” and the voice of the Lori. The voice of the Lord is beau>’ful and harmonious and it is his voice from the tcm.de that fills'unfaithful “Christendom”, or organized religionists, with dismay, and the latter makes a great noise of confusion and tumult. The noise that begins at “Christendom”, a noise because of destruction, will go around the entire earth, with no nation being omitted, and it “shall come”, as Jeremiah states, “even to the ends of the earth.” The voice of the Lord from the temple is now being proclaimed and strikes dismay into “Christendom”, and this comes in fulfillment of his commandment: ‘This gospel of the kingdom must be preached to all the nations as a witness’; then comes the end in the great tribulation. (Matt. 24:14,21) The nations that are warned shall feel to the fullest extent the wrath of Almighty God. Comparatively only a few of earth’s population have heard, believed and given heed to the warning message of the Lord. Few have faith; and those who have no faith and who are in “Christendom” arc in that condition largely because the clergy, the Devil’s agents, have destroyed their faith. In harmony with this the apostle quotes from the prophet: “But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report [ (margin) believed the hearing of us] ? So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. But I say, Have they not heard? Yes, verily, their sound went
into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.”—Rom. 10:16-18.
20	The reason is assigned for this great tumultuous noise that accompanies the calamity, to wit: ‘ ‘ For the Lord hath a controversy with the nations.” The Hebrew word here for the word “controversy” is rib, and in other places is rendered “plead”. In the following texts it is rendered: “Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel; for the Lord hath a controversy [ (Hebrew) rib] with the inhabitants of the land [of ‘Christendom’].” (Hos. 4:1) “For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year of recom-pcnces for the controversy [rib (Hebrew)] of [in behalf of] Zion.”—Isa. 34: 8.
21	Further describing Armageddon, Jeremiah says: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, The children of Israel and the children of Judah were oppressed together, and all that took them captives held them fast; they refused to let them go. Their Redeemer is strong; the Lord of hosts is his name; he shall thoroughly plead [(Hebrew’) rib] their cause, that he may give rest to the land [of his faithful witnesses on the earth], and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the Lord, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.” (Jcr. 50:33-35) “Arise, 0 God, plead [(Hebrew) rib] thine own cause: remember how the foolish man reproachcth thee daily. Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thee incrcaseth continually.”—Ps. 74:22,23.
22	The na'ions of earth, ai d particularly of “Christendom”, ha\e scoriud the message of Jehovah and ha.'e ill-treated his witnesses, whom Jehovah sent to deliver his messages ; and for that reason the controversy is forced. The clergy of “Christendom” have raised the questions: “Who is Jehovah? Is his message true, or even worth listening to? Who gives these so-called witnesses authority to speak?” Jehovah will convince that proud and scornful crowd of hypocrites, and they shall know that it is Jehovah.
23	Now the nations are gathered before the Lord for judgment, and none are passed by unnoticed. Christ Jesus, acting for Jehovah, hears the cause and renders judgment. Concerning this the prophet Jeremiah says: “He will plead with [(Hebrew) shaphat; that is, judge and pronounce sentence, to punish, or to avenge] all flesh.” (Jcr. 25:31) The text is otherwise rendered: “Himself hath entered into judgment with all flesh.” (Hoth.) Again: “He holdeth judgment over all flesh.” (Lcescr) The pleading then will not be printed or written documents, setting out the issue, nor will it be by word of mouth, but will be the application of the facts to the law, and the execution of the decision rendered, and which is otherwise called God’s “act, his strange act”, or “sword” of execution. “For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the slain of the Lord shall be many.” (Isa. 66:16) The “sword” will begin with religionists and
December 1, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER
359
extend to the utmost ends of Satan’s visible and invisible organization. “And I will call for a sword against him [Gog] ; . . . And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations; and they shall know that I am the Lord.”-—Ezek. 38:21-23.
24	All the lawless ones shall perish; as it is written : “He will give them that are wicked [lawless (Hoth.)] to the sword, saith the Lord” (Jer. 25: 31): the “evil servant” class, all religious hypocrites, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy crowd, who have so cruelly persecuted Jehovah's witnesses. This will particularly apply to the wicked agents of the Hierarchy operating in Germany, New Jersey and all other parts of the earth who have so openly shown themselves to be “goats”, working against Jehovah’s witnesses. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy have been wanton and not only have scorned the message of warning but have willfully and wickedly persisted in persecuting God’s faithful ones who have carried the message of truth to them. The Hierarchy has no excuse and will find no way of escape. It is written concerning the Lord Jesus, the Executive Officer of Jehovah: “For he bearcth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil.” (Rom. 13:4) Jehovah’s witnesses, in obedience to God’s commandment and for the good of those to whom they have been sent, have carried the message to the people and the clergy of the Hierarchy, and the Hierarchy have refused to hear and have prevented many people from hearing. With malice the clergy have persecuted Jehovah’s messengers. All their wicked deeds the Lord counts as done unto hirnsclf; and the Lord Jesus, the great Judge, says concerning them, those on his left hand of his throne of judgment: “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels [Gog and all of his crowd].” “And these shall go away into everlasting punishment [cutting off].” —Matt. 25: 41, 46.
25	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allied clergy have had ample warning of Jehovah’s purpose. Although they claim to be the custodians of the Word of God, and the interpreters thereof, they ignore Jehovah’s Word of warning and continue to scornfully rule over the Catholic population and to browbeat and coerce many others. Some of the Hierarchy’s hired agents will read what is here said ; and those reading, let them take warning. You have been wanted, and therefore cannot plead ignorance.
28	Jeremiah spoke first to Judah and Jerusalem, and his words apply first to the unfaithful so-called “religionists” who practice what they call “the Christian religion” in the name of Christ Jesus, and which re
ligious organization is headed by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Through his prophet Jehovah now speaks to them and says: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, evil [calamity (lioth.)] shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.”—Jer. 25:32.
27	That calamity is the righteous judgment of Jehovah God executed with a vengeance and to the vindication of his holy name. Jehovah creates such evil or calamity, that is, he brings it upon those who merit punishment. (Isa. 45:7) That punishment will begin with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and will then extend to all other visible parts of Satan’s organization, taking in the numerous governments or nations and the parts thereof, to wit, the political, commercial, military and industrial systems of the world, and which are pictured in “all the nations” to which Jeremiah, at the command of the Lord God, handed the cup of His fury. The nations will then begin to crumble and fall, and from one to the other the calamity will pass on until all earthly things of Satan's crowd shall perish. The last “nation” to which the calamity comes, as God through his prophet declares, is Shcshach. “The king of Shcshach shall drink after them.” (Verse 26) This includes all of Satan’s organization invisible to the human eyes, that is, Gog, and all the angels of wickedness in the “land of Magog”, and thereafter Satan himself. First seeing his power and his supporters gone, he then must drink the cup of calamity. “And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air [things invisible; that is, Satan and his wicked angelic crowd] ; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done.”—Rev. 16:17.
28	By the Lord’s grace his people, in convention assembled at stated times, have publicly proclaimed the message by adopting and distributing Resolutions, and the last one of these was in 1928 and was labeled “A Declaration Against Satan and for Jehovah”. Jehovah directs his people, who arc faithful to him; and to him is given all the glory and honor. (Prov. 3: 5, 6) Without a doubt Jehovah directed the Resolution above mentioned, against the king of Shcshach, the Devil.
22	Continuing the description of the terrible battle of Armageddon, which will be a victorious fight by the Lord Jesus Christ and his armies, Jehovah, by his prophet, says: “And a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts [the uttermost parts (Zf.V.)] of the earth.” That terrible storm comes from beyond the utmost parts of Satan’s organization on earth, and therefore it is not Satan’s judgment but is raised up and comes from Jehovah God, by his Executive Officer, Christ Jesus. It is God’s storm, which wrecks Satan’s organization completely. Jehovah has recorded in his Word prayers suitable for his faithful servants to utter unto him, and this for the manifest purpose of showing what is God’s will and purpose concerning
360
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the enemy, and the proper course for his servants to take.
80 The eighty-third Psalm records a conspiracy formed by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy with other members of the Devil’s crowd and in which conspiracy all of “Christendom” participates. The prayer of the psalmist shows the purpose of Jehovah; as it is written: “So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, 0 Lord. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish: that men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth.”—Ps. 83:15-18.
88 The religionists are particularly reprehensible because they have the Word of God and might know its meaning if they would hear and obey the Most High. They claim to be servants of God, but have not served him, but, on the contrary, have served the Devil, and for that reason they are wicked or lawless, and of them the prophet says: “Behold, a whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked.” (Jcr. 23:19) “Behold, the whirlwind of the Lord goeth forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind [that is, a cutting whirlwind (marijin)] ; it shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked. The fierce anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have done it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it.”— Jcr. 30:23, 24.
EFFECT OF ARMAGEDDON
82 Jehovah has caused a number of his prophets to announce his purpose to clear the earth of all wickedness at the battle of Armageddon. This is not a symbolic, but a real cleansing. Why has Jehovah repeated this fact by several of his prophets and so many different times? Manifestly for the purpose of thoroughly impressing the fact upon those who would hear, that they may know and understand that it is Jehovah’s act. Human creatures are so inclined to forget, and God prevents man from having any excuse to plead ignorance. The destruction at Armageddon is not the vengeance of any one class of individuals expressed against another class. Armageddon is the battle of the Lord God Almighty, with Christ Jesus as the Field Marshal leading that fight to complete victory, and the slaughter will be so great that all will be convinced that it came from the Lord. “And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground. ’ ’—Jer. 25: 33.
88 Nor docs the Lord leave any doubt as to where the slaughter will begin. As Jeremiah was directed first to present the cup to the people that pretends to be the Lord’s servants, that is, “Christendom,” even
so the slaughter begins upon “Christendom”, and particularly upon its leaders and chief ones, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. In corroboration of this another prophet of Jehovah records: “And begin at my sanctuary,” my professed people; that is, organized religion, called “the Christian religion”. “Then they began at the ancient men [the high ones in the religious organization, the clergy and other so-called ‘dignitaries’] which were before the house [worshiping the sun toward the east]. And he said unto them, Defile [with blood] the house, and fill the courts with the slain; go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city [‘Christendom’].”—Ezek. 9:6,7.
84 The slain will not be just a few, but, as God by his prophet says, “the slain of the Lord shall he many.” (Isa. 66:16) During the World War the slaying was confined chiefly to Europe and Asia Minor; but when Armageddon begins and progresses, the slaying will be not only in “Christendom”, but, as stated by the Lord, “from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth.” (Jer. 25:33) It will necessarily include all the nations of the world, which arc upon the face of the earth (vs. 26), because such shall drink of the cup of this fury, as the Lord declares. The great deluge or flood in the time of Noah was a picture of the destruction that shall come at Armageddon; and the destruction in the flood wa> world-wide, and so shall it be at Armageddon. Jesus must have had this fact in mind when he said: “But as the days of No'e were, so shall also the coming [parousia] of the Son of man be. . . . The flood came, and took them all away: -o shall also the coming of the Son of man be.”—Matt. 24:37-39.
85 Weeping for the destruction of the wicked is now and always will be out of order. “They shall not be lamented”; because that is Jehovah’s commandment to the anointed people and to those of good will, v.iio alone will survive that day of slaughter. It is the will of God that those who arc on his side and fully devoted to him shall pray for the destruction of the wicked who oppose Jehovah and his kingdom; and the slaying of such wicked ones, instead of being a cause for lamentation on the part of God’s faithful ones, will be a cause of joy, because such sec the vindication of Jehovah’s name and his word. To the faithful ones it will be as meat or spiritual food; and such is pictured by the birds and animals of prey that come and feed upon the slaughtered ones. (Ezek. 39:17-20; Rev. 19:17-21) Nor will there be any hired mourners at the funerals, for the reason that there will be no funerals and none to hire to do the weeping. The prophet of Jehovah says concerning the slain that “they shall ... be ... neither gathered, nor buried” ; not merely because the slain will be of such numbers that to bury them would be impossible, but also, and that chiefly, because they are not worthy of a decent burial; and they shall not be accorded one. The survivors will be few, compared with the number of the
December 1, 1937
Stfe WATCHTOWER.
361
slain, and they shall not defile themselves by providing a burial for the wicked. It is Jehovah’s express will that the Devil’s crowd shall be further and completely reproached by not having a decent and honorable burial.
“ God will duly recompense them and, as is stated in his Word, they will get ‘like for like’ for what they have given the faithful servants of Jehovah. In 1918 in particular not only were God’s faithful people in the world, and the work in Jehovah’s name, killed, but they were not permitted to have a decent burial; as symbolically stated in the Scriptures: “And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.”—Rev. 11:9.
” The dead bodies of the wicked slain at Armageddon shall be left, exposed to putrefaction and be devoured by carrion birds and beasts in retaliation for mankind’s terrible violation of “the everlasting covenant”, which forbids the willful slaughtering of animals for selfish gain or pleasure. (Gen. 9:1-6) The wild beasts of the jungles have been hunted and slaughtered for no good reason whatsoever and without any excuse, and those who have cruelly violated the everlasting covenant by so slaughtering shall die, and their bodies, like those of the other wicked, “shall be dung upon the face of the ground.” (H.V.) That will be a crushing humiliation upon Satan’s selfglorified organization. Nimrod, who began the practice of religion at the instance of the Devil, was given an exalted place and honor amongst men because he was a slayer of wild beasts in violation of God’s covenant. Others since have tried to follow his example. God, in the exercise of his “strange act”, will express his indignation against all who have followed Nimrod’s course and who have ‘defiled the earth by breaking the everlasting covenant’. (Isa. 24:5) “For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. Their slain also shall be cast out [not buried], and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.”—Isa. 34: 2, 3.
“Jezebel was a type of the Devil’s organization, while Ahab pictures Satan, the husband; and what befell those two foreshadows what shall come to pass upon Satan’s organization and those who form it. It was written concerning Jezebel (and antitypically applies to Satan’s crowd): “The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jczrcel. Him that dicth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him that dicth in the field shall the fowls of the air cat.” (1 Ki. 21:23, 24) “And the earcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jczreel; so that they shall not say, This is Jezebel.” (2 Ki. 9:37; Ps. 83: 9,10) The religionists of “ Christendom ” have grossly sinned against God and shall pay the penalty; as it is writ
ten: “And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. ’ ’—Zeph. 1:17.
39	The “shepherds” are the clergy, who claim to shepherd the flocks or their respective congregations. These shepherds could not howl after they arc dead; and therefore they howl now, because God has decreed they shall howl: “Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock; for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel.”—Jer. 25: 34.
40	The howl here mentioned does not come from the pagan clergy, but comes from the clergy and “elective elder” class of “Christendom” and who call themselves the leaders and shepherds of the flock, and to whom Jehovah refers also as those who have assumed to use his name. They were foreshadowed by the Jew i ;h ecclcciastical crowd of hypocrites who practiced the Jews’ religion. For some time now the clergy have been howling and importuning selfish politicians and commercial men to help them to make a great fuss and to prevent Jehovah’s witnesses from telling the truth about them. The clergymen howl because the truth of God’s Word now proclaimed exposes them and puts them in the class where they properly belong, that is, of fraudulent hypocrites, and becair e truth is sweeping away the refuge of lies behind which they hide. Thej' will not attempt to publicly defend tinij lies, because they well know they have no defence; and therefore they choose to howl against God’s message and to say His witnesses arc bigots and should be silenced, because the message, say they, “shocks our religious susceptibilities.” They induce the politicians and courts of some jurisdictions to say: “The truth, as proclaimed by Jehovah’s witnesses, is subversive and seditious.” The clergy made similar charges against Christ Jesus and the apostles, and it is to be expected that the clergy of the present time will likewise accuse the faithful followers of Jesus. Jehovah says they will howl, and he is seeing to it now that they do howl.
11	For years those shepherds or so-called “clergymen” of the Catholic Hierarchy and other religious practitioners have been blind (and they arc still blind) to everything except their own selfish gain, and therefore Jehovah says of them: “His watchmen [that is, the pretended and unfaithful shepherds] are blind; they arc all ignorant, they arc all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter.”—Isa. 56:10,11.
42	Jehovah now commands his witnesses to rise up with others of his great organization and give battle to the wicked organization of Satan; and this work
332
fffieWAT CH TOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
proceeds, and the hypocrisy of the religionists is exposed and the people are to be made acquainted with the coming of the “strange act” of Jehovah. The clergy howl still more because of the proclamation of this message, and when Armageddon begins their howl will reach its climax.
43	Howling and in great mental agony, the shepherds wallow themselves in the dust. In the Authorized Version of the text the words “in the ashes” are supplied, and therefore Rotherham’s rendering of the text is correct: “And roll in the dust, ye illustrious [ones] of the flock”; (Leeser) “ye leaders of the flocks”. Those once arrogant and proud-crowing roosters, who have posed as noble persons, are like the ones described by the prophet in these words: “But their nobles put not their necks to the work of their Lord.” (Neh. 3:5) For many years now the clergy class have posed before the peoples as noblemen and as men endowed with authority and powers to bring to them spiritual nourishment, but at the present time they arc devoid of truth and they have no spiritual nourishment from the Lord; and they arc thus described by the prophet, to wit: “Judah moumeth, and the gates thereof languish; they arc black unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up. And their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters: they came to the pits, and found no water; they returned with their vessels empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads.” (Jcr. 14: 2, 3) After the old “whore” is burned, then those who have materially profited by associating with her will set up a great howl.—Rev. 18:8-19.
44	Speaking of what will come to pass, as though it already had come to pass, the Lord says, according to the Revised Version of this text (Jer. 25: 34), that the howl is general for the reason “the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions arc fully come”. “For your days for slaughter are fully, come, and I will break you in pieces.” (E.R.V., margin) “Because your days for being slaughtered arc fulfilled, therefore will I break you in pieces.” (Rotherham) Their slaughter and dispersion will be done by the “six men” symbolically described by Jehovah’s prophet, each one of which wielded “a weapon of his breaking in pieces” in his hand. (Ezck. 9:2, margin) The “six men” picture Christ and his army invisible to human eyes. To Christ Jesus Jehovah says concerning the enemy nations: “Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron ; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” (Ps. 2:9) “The Lord of hosts is his name. Thou [Christ] art my battle axe and weapons of war: for with thee will I break in pieces the nations; and with thee will I destroy kingdoms. I will also break in pieces with thee the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces captains and rulers. And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea, all
their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 51:19,20,23,24) Here it is expressly stated that God brings this calamity upon the religionists and their supporters as a recompense for what they have dene against him and his organization.
43	Then the prophet of the Lord describes how these religious leaders will fall. (Jer. 25:34) A “pleasant vessel” is one much desired by selfish creatures who use such things for selfish purposes or personal gain. According to the Hebrew this part of the prophecy says: “Ye shall fall like a vessel of desire.” (Margin) Satan is now using many “vessels” which arc willingly used for his purpose and which he desires for his purpose, and at the beginning of Armageddon he will see these vessels fall and be crushed, and this before he is cast into the pit. For years Satan has kept some of his “vessels” in positions where they claim to represent God and Christ Jesus. Those clergymen occupying such positions have posed as God’s representatives, while at the same time doing exactly contrary to God’s Word because they believed not the truth. Jehovah has permitted them to have plenty of rope to go on in their hypocritical and wicked course, and thus he has “endured [them] with much long-suffering” as “vessels of wrath fitted to destruction”. (Rom. 9: 22) That day of execution is near at hand.
NO ESCAPE
48 For many years the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergymen have assumed the office of shepherds of the various flocks, and have told the flocks that they were Christians, but who in fact have been merely practitioners of religion. The clergy have been able to keep the dupes of their flocks entirely blind to the truth, because the clergymen have taken refuge behind a great pile of lies. They have become very bold, arrogant and reckless, and they have said and continue to say amongst themselves: “We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.” (Isa. 28:15) They have assumed the position of stability, and hold that they arc invulneiablc. But Jehovah now says to them, through his prophet: “And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.”—Jcr. 25: 35.
41 With the beginning of Armageddon the shepherds will find that their avenue of escape is closed: “Then shall place of refuge vanish from the shepherds.” (Roth.) “And lost shall be the place of refuge for the shepherds.” (Leeser) Why shall their refuge disappear and their way of escape be gone? God has decreed that his hail (hard and unbreakable truths) shall sweep away the refuge of lies behind which the Roman Catholic and other clergy have found refuge; and when their lies are swept away, those shepherds will have no place to hide themselves and no refuge to which they can flee. God’s “strange work”, when finished, will have completely exposed them. Then
December 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
363
they cannot take refuge with the “ten horns” of the “beast” on which the old “whore” rides, because those “horns”, that is, the ruling force, will turn upon and rend the old “whore”; and those clergymen who survive for a time, later to be destroyed, will not be able to find any refuge anywhere by reason of the fact that they have been clergymen. On the contrary, they will attempt to hide their identity. They will quickly remove their “lace pants” and other glamorous garb and don a pair of overalls and say to the people who accuse them of being of the clergy: ‘We are not clergymen; we are keepers of the swine or of the cattle.’ (Zech. 13:4-6) Their accusers will know such clergymen as liars and will show them no mercy. No time then for the Roman Catholic Hierarchy clergy and their allies to find refuge with the Lord, nor will deathbed repentance do them any good. Burning of candles and splashing of holy water and pounding things with their fists will not bring them any aid. The so-called “last rites”, by which they have deceived many people, will be of no aid to them. They will have no one to administer such foolish ceremonies. Those fellows have never been among the ones who in the acceptable time of the Lord have said: “0 Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of aflliction, the [nations] shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit.” (Jer. 16:19) It will be the Jona-dabs that will then be able to apply this scripture to themselves, and they only of all the people of earth, aside from the remnant, will find refuge in the Lord.
43	And how about the “principal of the flock”? They will find no way of escape. The religious practitioners, who have embraced religion (so-called “Christian religion”) for personal and pecuniary gain, and have used the same and their positions in the organization to oppress the people, will be caught in the same dragnet that will destroy the clergy. After the destruction of the clergy, the “shepherds”, then the Godless “principal of the flock” will continue to fight against all who are on the side of Jehovah, and therefore they shall receive due recompense from the Lord. They will fail utterly to find any escape, but their end is destruction. (Rev. 19:19-21) Describing the “strange act” of Jehovah the prophet says: “Let none thereof escape.” (Jer. 50:29) All the “goat” class, whether they be of the clergy or be small practitioners in their flocks, shall suffer complete destruction according to the decree of the Lord. That decree is written and is certain to be executed.
49	Even now the clergy, or “shepherds”, and the ‘principal ones of their flocks’ are frightened because of existing conditions with which they are surrounded, and they make a great bluff in trying to accomplish their wicked designs. The flood of truth flowing to the people, according to God’s command, is cutting away the foundations of the Hierarchy and their tools,
and concerning such the prophet of Jehovah says: “A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard: for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture.”—Jer. 25:36.
30	First the clergy cry out, and then the howling of the “principal of the flock” follows. Jehovah orders them to howl, and they cannot get away from doing it, and the reason is, “Because Jehovah is laying waste the grounds where they fed.” (Roth.) The hail and flood of truth now being proclaimed throughout the earth is wasting the feeding places of the Hierarchy and other clergymen. Millions of honest and sincere persons of good will arc hearing the truth and arc fleeing from the bondage of “organized religion”, and such movement is drying up the once fat pasture fields of the clergy, and for this reason they set up a great howl and say: “Our religious susceptibilities arc shocked, and these people are bigots, and their message is subversive.” Even though millions of sincere persons flee from the wicked organization of religionists, many more millions of persons will remain, to be exploited by the Hierarchy and other religionists. The complete spoiling of the pastures of the religionists will take place at the beginning of Armageddon, that is, God’s “strange act”, when by his great Officer, Christ Jesus, he breaks the power of the religionists completely. Seeing their institutions quickly crumbling, the Hierarchy and the principal of the flock let out a tremendous howl of despair.
31	The execution of judgment brings desolation upon them: “And the peaceable habitations [the prosperous pastures (Roth.); homes (Hebrew) ; pasture-lai ds of peace (Leescr)] arc cut down, because of the fierce anger of the Lord.”—Jer. 25: 37.
32	So long have those of the Hierarchy and other hypocritical clergymen been entrenched in their refuge of lies that they have been quite at home there in their religious systems and have felt secure in their jobs, and that the people are for ever their pastures or fields which they may continue to commercialize and upon which to continue to live wantonly. The Scriptures strongly indicate that the Hierarchy and their supporters will come to the point where apparently they have succeeded in suppressing the witness work of Jehovah, and, feeling that they have triumphed over opposition, they will then think themselves secure and will say: ‘We arc in peace and safety.’ (1 Thess. 5:3) But their safety will be for a very brief period of time, because God will suddenly bring destruction upon them.
33	Says the prophet of Jehovah, “In silent desolation lie the pasture-lands of peace, because of the fierceness of the anger of the Lord.” (Leescr) “Then shall be silenced the piosperous pastures, because of the fierceness of the anger of Jehovah.” (Roth.) No more shall the clergy and the principal of the flocks lord it over the gullible people. Only those who have devoted themselves wholly to Jehovah have the prom
364
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ise of finding refuge in the day of his anger. In striking contrast with the calamity that is certain to befall the religionists Jehovah says to those who have found refuge in his organization: “I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee, I will surely gather the remnant of Israel, at once will I make them like sheep in distress, like a flock in the midst of its pasture shall they hum with men.”—Mie. 2:12, Roth.
“ Such have the promise that they shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger. (Zcpli. 2:3) As to the faithful remnant, they shall be safe in the land of the Lord God: “As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts, so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men; and they shall know that I am the Loud.” (Ezek. 36:38) “And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the Lord have spoken it. And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.”—Ezek. 34:23-25.
** What results from Jehovah’s “strange act”? “He [Jehovah] hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is desolate, because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and because of his fierce anger.” (Jer. 25:38) Jehovah has become as a fierce lion in the execution of his judgments. Jehovah is the Father of “the Lion of the tribe of Juda”, who executes His judgments and vindicates Uis name. (Rev. 5:5) Jehovah refers to himself as the One who is all-just, symbolized by a lion. He justifies and vindicates himself in righteousness by destroying his enemies, that the universe may be clean, and all who live shall do righteousness. —Zcph. 3:8; Hos. 13:6,7.
“Jehovah gives full warning to “Christendom” and others who associate with “Christendom”. He sends forth his witnesses now and proclaims to "Christendom” that warning, even as Jeremiah did in his day. He also caused Isaiah to proclaim his prophecy concerning the day of his fierce anger. (Isa. 13:1-22) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and her allies in religion have been warned, and yet they continue to mock God and to persecute his faithful witnesses. Having warned them, now Jehovah says to them: “Now, therefore, be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord God of hosts a consumption, even determined upon the whole earth.” (Isa. 28:22) Every part of Satan’s organization shall fall. As Jeremiah warned the people, so now the faithful ones on the side of Jehovah, who proclaim his truth, must continue to warn the people during the progress of Jehovah’s “strange work” and until its finish. To them Jehovah says, and they must say to others of good will: * ‘ Sly people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord.”—Jer. 51:45.
,T It is in this present day that Jehovah says to his people: “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.” The time has come for all who love Jehovah to boldly take their stand and perform their duties in his organization. Those who really love God will now obey this commandment and go forth fearlessly, and therefore with boldness in the Lord, and proclaim the truths, and thereby have some part in the tearing away of the mask of lies behind which the religionists now hide. This they must do in obedience to God's commandment, that the people may have opportunity to intelligently flee to the only place of refuge. In obedience to this commandment of Jehovah those engaging in this work are having some part in God’s “strange work”, which work must be completed before Iiis “strange act” begins. Everyone who is now wholly devoted to Jehovah must and will “lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us” (Hcb. 12:1,2), and, being blind to everything *-ave that of the kingdom of God and its interests, will joyfully and amidst increased opposition push forward in the battle and lift high the standard of the Lord. It is the day of battle and of victory, and let all those who love Jehovah rest in him with full assurance. As Jehovah God did to Shiloh, so shall he certainly do to “Christendom” and all other parts of Satan's organization in the very near future. Rejoice now that have a part in his “strange work” and thus a part in the vindication of his glorious name, and look forward with ever-increasing joy to his “strange act”, which will completely and for ever vindicate his name.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
U 1. Jehovah’s judgment day is appointed for what purpose! How is that judgment canied forward? When does tli.it judgment begin, and wheie?
I 2. How has the Roman Catholic Hierarchy distinguished itself as the outstanding example of the wicked institutions that have existed on the earth?
H 3. Why is “the city which is called by my name” so particularly marked for adverse judgment?
H 4. How have the religionists caused millions of honest persons to reject God and his Word and Christ Jesus the Savior, and greatly reproached the name of God and Christ Jesus?
K 5. Does Jehovah create evil? Why?
U 6,7. Explain whether the “city” mentioned in verse 29 is the new Jerusalem. How and when does Jehovah “begin to bring evil on the city”? When and how will he punish that ‘ ‘ city ’ ’ ?
I 8. The question, “Should ye be utteily unpunished?” is addressed to whom? Why are all these included?
K 9. Who arc “the heathen that are at ease”? and how have they “helped foivvard the affliction”? What is seen m the form of expression of Isaiah 34: 2, 3, 8 ?
If 10,11. What is the responsibility, collective and individual, of all of Jehovah’s people in carrying out the work of ‘prophesying’ as commanded at verse 30?
If 12-14. When and for what purpose will Jehovah “roar from on high”? How will he “utter his voice from Ins holy habitation”? How and why will he “mightily roar upon his habitation”?
If 15. Why is it stated that “he shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes”?
H 16-18. The “tumultuous noise” (vs. 31) betokens what? Its coming “even to the ends of the earth” is of what prophetic significance?
Pecembeb 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
365
7 19. Distinguish between the "voices” mentioned at Isaiah 66: 6. What is the message of the "voice from the temple”! The purpose of that message? Account for the "voice of noise from the city”.
If 20. "The Lord hath a controversy with the nations.” Why? What is that "controversy”?
T 21-23. How will Jehovah "plead with all flesh”, and why?
7 24. Who are the wicked? How and why will those here referred to be ‘ given to the sword ’ ?
J 25. Compare the claims of the clergy with their course of action. Does this prove that they have not had ample warning?
J 20-28. To whom did Jeremiah speak as recorded at verse 32? To whom do those words have prophetic application? "Evil shall go forth from nation to nation.” J low will this be brought to pass? How is "the king of Sheshach” involved in the warning and in tho drinking of the cup?
5 29,30. What is the "great whirlwind” here mentioned, and how is it "raised up from the eoasts of the earth”? Apply the prayer recorded at Psalm 83: 15-18.
K 31. What is the "grievous whirlwind” (Jer. 23: 19), and upon whom does it fall? Why upon them?
I 32. How, and why, has Jehovah so definitely and repeatedly foretold his "strange act”?
If 33,31. Where will the slaughter l>cgin, and how far-reaching will it be?
If 35. "They shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried.” Why? Show whether this is in harmony with other scriptures.
H 36-38. With related scriptures, show that the wicked will be getting Hike for like’.
If 39,40. Identify the "shepherds”, and the "principal of the flock”, prophetically addressed at verse 34. How and why do they ‘howl and cry’?
U 41. Apply Isaiah 56: 10,11.
If 42, 43. The * rising up against her in battle ’, by those to whom that command is given, has what effect upon the "shepherds” and the "principal of the flock”? How does Jeremiah 14: 2,3 have fulfillment?
1f 44,45. Explain the prophetic statement, (a) "The days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished.” (b) "Ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel.”
If 46-48. From what or to what will the "shepherds” have no way to flee or escape? Why shall their refuge disappear and their way of escape be gone? How about the "principal of the flock”?
f 49,50. How do the "shepherds” and the ‘principal ones of their flocks’ now feel and act because of the conditions with which they are surrounded? How lias the Lord been ‘spoiling their pasture’?
If 51,52. Apply verse 37.
U 53,54. Contrast the position of the cleigy and the ‘principal of the flocks’ with that of those who have devoted themselves wholly to Jehovah.
1f 55,56. When and how will Jehovah have "forsaken his covert, as the lion”?
1f 57. To whom is the commandment at Obadiah 1 given? Who will obey that commandment? How? To what end?
VENGEANCE
JEHOVAH lays responsibility for the present crime wave at the door of hypocritical religionists, and any attempt on the part of his “servant” class to hold back the truth of and concerning that religionist part of Satan’s organization would be a mark of disloyalty to God.
Anyone who now professes to be in the truth and a follower of Christ Jesus, and who fails or refuses to declare the vengeance of our God against Satan and his organization, thereby gives evidence that he is not anointed by the spirit of Jehovah but, in fact, is God’s enemy. All who arc anointed of the Lord arc specifically authorized and commanded to declare the day of the vengeance of our God. (Isa. 61:2) Such must declare the vengeance of God against Satan’s organization, and since Satan’s visible organization is composed of false religious leaders and the principal of their flocks, the anointed of God cannot prove faithful except by speaking the truth concerning them. It is not a question as to whether some might become offended and refuse to hear the truth.
The sole question for determination by the “servant” is: ‘What has my Lord commanded, and am I obeying his commandments?’ The “servant” must declare the truth regardless of whether anyone is offended and refuses to hear or many hear and turn to the Lord. Let the remnant or anointed “servant” class, therefore, keep always in mind that obedience to the commandments of God is what is required. Saul, once anointed as the king of Israel, did not lose his anointing by reason of disobedience, but he was cast away from the Lord and joined the Devil’s crowd. (1 Sam. 15:16-29) Those who arc anointed will not
lose their anointing and fall back into any “tribulation class”, but, if unfaithful to that anointing, such will be east away from Jehovah and destroyed with the Devil and his other followers.
“Organized Christianity,” under the influence of the Devil and practicing the Devil religion, is responsible for the great crime wave, particularly in America, where crime has increased most rapidly in recent years. Within a few years fifteen hundred were shot to death, many of whom were entirely innocent, upon the pretext that they had in possession or were using intoxicating liquor. This practice must be a stench in the nostrils even of many supporters of “organized Christianity”. The ancient Persians are said to have held an incense to the nose while worshiping the Devil or practicing Devil religion; and now likewise those who indulge in such Devil practice in the name of God and approve bloody crime and induce other crime, says the prophet, ‘put a branch to their nose,’ and this evil practice they do in the name of Jehovah and ‘have provoked God to anger’, and he declares that he will visit his anger upon them. ‘ ‘ Therefore will I also deal in fury’; mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.” (Ezekiel 8:18) The breaking of the everlasting covenant by the shedding of innocent blood at the instance of the leaders in “Christendom” is bad enough, but the worst of all is for them to do so and claim that God approves their action and that it is done in his name. This defamation of God’s name he declares shall not go unpunished.
Jehovah, by and through his chief executive officer, Christ Jesus, executes his commandments. Since the
366
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
prophecy of Ezekiel here considered has to do with the destruction of the city of Jerusalem, which foreshadowed the destruction of Satan’s organization, particularly “Christendom”, it is certain that the Lord Jesus Christ is in command acting under the direction of Jehovah God. This conclusion is abundantly supported by the 110th Psalm and other scriptures. Jehovah gave promise to the Lord Jesus that he would put the enemy under foot and that Christ Jesus must wait until the due time thus to do.
The period of waiting ended, and God sent forth out of his organization Christ Jesus and commanded him to rule amidst all his enemies. Necessarily that means that Christ must destroy the enemy, Satan’s organization. This is further supported by the words of the prophet: “The Lord [Jehovah] at thy [Christ Jesus’] right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the [nations], he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads [of Satan’s organization] over many countries.” (Ps. 110: 5, 6) According to another translator, “He will judge among the nations; there shall be a fulness of corpses, he crushcth heads on a widespread land.” (Leeser) Another renders the text: “He judgeth among the nations, full of dead bodies! [and] hath crushed the head over a wide land.” (Rotherham) "Whether the word “head” means the Devil alone or includes other heads, cither construction is in harmony with the Scriptures. The Devil’s organization is made up of divisions, eaeh division of which has a head; and this applies both to the invisible and to the visible. Sinec the destruction of the ciry refers to “Christendom” in particular, then the application to the leaders or “heads” thereof is proper and in harmony with other scriptures.
Christ Jesus comes forth to this work of judgment and is attended by a host of angels. “When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit npon the throne of his glory.” (Matt. 25:31) “The Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all.” (Jude 14,15) The inspection completed, as described in the eighth chapter of the prophecy of Ezekiel, then Ezekiel heard a loud voice that cried out: “lie cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them that have charge over the city to draw near, even every man with his destroying weapon in his hand.” (Ezekiel 9:1) The language used shows that the cry was a loud and threatening command, and that it was sharp and powerful, and that it had a striking effect upon Ezekiel’s ears. That thunderous command was not to Ezekiel, but was given to “them that have charge over the city [‘Christendom’]”, to destroy it, “those . . . that have charge to punish the city.” (Leeser) This work of destruction will not be done by the “servant” class on earth, whom Ezekiel foreshadowed, but, as the Scriptures show, it will be done by the Lord Jesus Christ and his holy angels
acting under his command. It was this angelic army of the Lord that fought against Satan and ousted him from heaven. (Rev. 9:16; 12:7) Undoubtedly in this army are also included those faithful overcomers whom the Lord has raised to life upon coming to his temple.
The commandment or cry which Ezekiel heard, therefore, was from Christ Jesus the executive officer of Jehovah. The cry or command directs the organization of the Lord to prepare for the final assault upon the enemy organization. They are told to draw near, not with their weapons sheathed, but with their weapons of destruction drawn and ready for offensive action. Those weapons that will be used for destruction by violence are held by the Lord Jesus Christ and the invisible members of the organization under him. The visible part of his organization on earth will do no part of the destroying. The work assigned to the earthly division, to wit, God’s “faithful servant” class, is to sing forth the praises of Jehovah’s name before and while the fight is in progress.
Those to whom the commandment was given responded, and Ezekiel beheld them approaching. “And, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which lieth toward the north, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand ■ and one man among them was clothed with linen, with a writer’s inkhom by his side ; and they went in, and stood beside the brazen altar.” —Ezek. 9: 2.
These six men that approached were fully equipped for the slaughter that must follow. Six is a symbolic number denoting incompleteness, while the number seven symbolizes or denotes completeness. Jehovah’s organization is one, and is therefore complete, and is pictured by the number seven. There were six men armed and one clothed with linen. The entire number of seven men manifestly represented Jehovah’s complete organization, both that which is invisible to man and that which is visible and on the earth. 'Pho six men represent all of the invisible organization, with ChrLt Jesus, and including the risen members of his body, cherubim, seraphim, and angels. The “one man” represents the anointed “servant” class on the earth, and which is the only part of the organization that is visible to human eyes. The fact that the division shovs six to one would further mean that the greater and more important part of the work assigned to the organization must be done by the invisible division, while the lesser work thereof is assigned to and must be done by the earthly division, represented by the one.
The six men had ‘slaughter weapons in their hands' (jE.E.) ; “every man with his weapon of destruction.” (Roth.) The marginal rendering of this authority is: “Dashing weapon [that dashes to pieces] ; shattering weapon.”
The prophet Nahum, prophesying concerning the preparation of God's organization to make assault upon the enemy, says: “He that dasheth in pieces is
December 1, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
367
come up before thy face.” (Nah. 2:1) This further and definitely identifies Christ Jesus as in command and as the one who cried with a loud voice and who was heard by Ezekiel. Six men approached from the way of the north, which is the appropriate direction from which judgment should and does come. Without doubt the six men in the vision represent ‘the armies which are in heaven', under the command of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and therefore that part of God’s organization which is invisible to man. This is supported conclusively by the fact that they proceed from the north, the seat of authority and judgment, and that they have charge over “Christendom” to destroy it, and that they are armed with weapons of destruction and are under the command of Christ Jesus, who is commissioned to dash to pieces Satan’s organization.
SLAUGHTER
JEHOVAH GOD now makes known to his witnesses the meaning of his prophecies. He sends forth his witnesses to give warning and to serve notice upon “Christendom” of her impending destruction. Facts that are well known, when applied to the prophecy, enable us to determine whether or not we have the correct understanding of the prophecy.
In the year 1918 the Lord Jesus Christ suddenly cainc to the temple of Jehovah. He came for judgment and as Jehovah’s great executive officer and to execute judgment..As such officer he gives commandment, saying: “Jehovah is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.”—Hab. 2:20, A.R.V.
Jehovah, as represented by Christ Jesus, is in his temple. This means that the people must be told of God’s purposes to judge “Christendom” and to destroy it. Otherwise there would be no occasion to command that all the peoples of earth give ear. It means that there must be a world-wide public witness work done by the ‘faithful servants’ of Jehovah. Jehovah’s standard for the people must be lifted up. This gospel of the kingdom must be preached as a witness, to the end that those who would hear may hear and take their stand on the side of Jehovah and his kingdom of righteousness. Such is not a “harvest” work, but it is a work of the Lord of ‘separating the sheep from the goats’; and his “servant” class is permitted to give the testimony which causes the people to take sides for or against Jehovah and his kingdom.—Hatt. 25: 31-46.
It was early in the year 1918 that, for the first time, the message was sounded: “Millions now living will never die.” Within a very short time after a public lecture on this subject was delivered, “the goats” got busy and shut up many of Jehovah’s “servant” class in prison and for a time effectually stopped the work. Then in the year 1919 Jehovah again revived his work and brought forth those devoted to him to engage in it. Shortly thereafter, to wit, in the year 1920, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society published a book under the title “Millions Now Living Will Never Die”. This book was printed in a number of languages, and millions of copies were distributed throughout “Christendom” and put in the hands of order-loving people. With the coming of the year 1922 the witness work of Jehovah was getting well under way, and within a short time there was a world-wide
witness given by public lectures on the subject “Millions Now Living Will Never Die”.
Furthermore Jehovah provided the radio to broadcast the truth, and for several years, in spite of much opposition, the message of the kingdom was more widely broadcast than any other information given by radio. Within the past few years the message of the kingdom of God, put in book form, has had a wider circulation and publication than any message ever issued by any other organization on earth. Many persons of good will who are under the power of Satan’s organization have received the truth and accepted it as true, and arc thus marked in their foreheads, that is to say, have been given an intelligent understanding of and concerning God’s purpose to establish his kingdom for the vindication of his name and for the blessing of the people. A great multitude of such arc giving heed to the message and taking their stand on Jehovah’s side. The duly of Jehovah’s “servant” is to obey the commandment and go throughout “Christendom” and do the ‘marking’. It must be remembered that this work of giving the testimony is not for the purpose of converting the people of the world and bringing them into some organization, but it is to make known the fact that those who desire to flee from the wicked organization of “Christendom” may do so and declare themselves on Jehovah’s side, and thus be in line to be brought through the time of trouble, when the slaughtering begins.
The work of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is not spoken of in a boasting manner from the standpoint of men, but those who are privileged to have a part in it do ‘boast in the Lord’ and give honor and glory to his name. They rejoice in the fact that the time has come for the establishment of God’s kingdom; and therefore faithful men and women are given some part in telling others of this good news.
The fact that the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is bitterly opposed by the “man of sin” and by the clergymen and the principal of their flock, who are members of the Devil’s organization, is further proof that the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is doing the work which Jehovah commanded should be done and which was foreshadowed in the vision given by Jehovah to Ezekiel. Individuals who have part in that work are greatly blessed, but no in
368
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
dividual is singled out and made more prominent than another. The “servant” of Jehovah is one. The “servant”, therefore, sees God’s purposes, and each one of the “servant” class sees eye to eye with the others, and they are going on performing this witness work according to Jehovah’s commandment. When it is recognized that this witness work or ‘marking’ is the work of Jehovah, and being done under his commandment, then those who thus recognize it will know that no power or opposition can stop it. The ‘marking’ work must be continued until it is completed; and when it is completed, the other order given by the Chief Commander, as heard by Ezekiel, will be performed.
Ezekiel heard Jehovah give order to the “six men”, which six men represent the organization of Jehovah (aside from the small number on earth) and are invisible to man. As soon as the witness work is completed, then the following order is due to be carried out, to wit: “And to the [six] others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite; let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity; slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women; but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the house. And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts w’ith the slain; go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city.”—Ezek. 9:5-7.
Please take note that the order from Jehovah is to slay, and to spare none, “but come not near any man upon whom is the mark,” that is to say, those who are on Jehovah's side are marked and are not to be slain. The slaughter begins “at the ancient men”, that is, with the elders and leaders, the clergy and the principal of their flocks. This slaughter is without regard to age or sex. “Organized religion” and the entire organization of Satan must be destroyed. Seeing that the slaying by the six begins with the clergymen, and none are spared, then surely the man with the writer’s inkhorn, that is, the “faithful servant” class, must not for pity or policy spare the clergy, when declaring the day of the vengeance of our God. It must mean that it is the duty and obligation laid upon the “servant” class to boldly declare the truth of God’s judgment against the hypocritical organization called “organized Christianity”. The “servant” class cannot be faithful in the performance of duty unless the truth is plainly and boldly told. Those who would oppose the bold proclamation of the truth, therefore, give evidence they arc not of Jehovah’s organization.
Verse eight of the ninth chapter of Ezekiel strongly indicates that the remnant will stand by after the witness work is completed and watch Jehovah finish the wicked organization. Ezekiel prostrated himself before Jehovah and propounded a question. The attitude of falling down or prostrating oneself before Jehovah is the proper one for the creature to take before the Almighty Creator. The question propounded
by Ezekiel while in that prostrate condition does not at all indicate that the “servant” class cries out in horror at the slaughter and begs for mercy, but rather that the “servant” speaks to Jehovah, as the prophecies show, to call forth a statement of Jehovah showing that the slaughter is entirely justified. Hence it is written: “And it came to pass, w’hilc they w’ere slaying them, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah, Lord God! wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem?” (Ezek. 9:8) The battle of that great day of God Almighty, at Armageddon, will witness the complete downfall of “Christendom”, and that without any quarter or pity from Jehovah. The reply given to Ezekiel from Jehovah proves this fact: “Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness; for they say, [Jehovah] hath forsaken the earth, and the Lord seeth not. And as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; but I will recompense .heir way upon their head.”-—Ezek. 9: 9,10.
Pho order-loving people of today plainly sec and well know that the nations called “Christendom” arc full of injustice and wickedness. Many of the clergy tell the people that God has forsaken them because of their indifference toward “the church” and their neglect to support the same, while other clergymen tell the people that there is no Almighty God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and that the Bible is unworthy of belief. God will not spare them but will fully recompense them for their wickedness. He will make a clean-up of the whole outfit, in order that all W’ho survive may know Jehovah is the only true God.
To each division of God's organization a certain part of the work of ridding the earth of Satan’s organization is assigned, and it will be required that each division be faithful in the performance thereof. In Ezekiel 9:11 it is written: “And, behold, the man clothed w’ith linen, which had the inkhorn by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast commanded me.” Manifestly the matter is so stated in this text of the prophecy to show that the “servant” class faithfully perform the work assigned to them and, w’hen it is done, in some  way make report thereof. That means that the  witness work must be done and  will be done, and every one who hopes to have the final approval of the Lord as one of his remnant will joyfully participate in the witness or ‘marking’ work. The faithful remnant will joyfully obey the commandments of Jehovah and will receive his approval.
This scripture further indicates that some of Ilie remnant will be on earth w’hen the work is done, and will w’itness Jehovah’s battle at Armageddon from their vantage point under his protection. These will maintain their integrity toward Jehovah, and by their faithfulness will be a testimony to the supremacy of the Most High and to the honor of his name.
fffe WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President	W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” -Isaiah 54:1 J.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the light to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followeis of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the estab-hshment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
UIS journal is piiblialicd for the purpose of enabling the people to know .hlmv'ih God and his puipo^es as expressed in the Bible, It publishes Bible iiistiuctiou specifically designed to aid .hliuvnli's witnesses and all people
of good will. It ananges Hyslciiiiitii' Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies oilier lileiature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for ladio broadcasting and for other means of public iiist nii-tinii in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to tint Bible ns authority for its utterances. It is entirely freo and iiepmato from all parties, sects or other woildly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehotah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but incites careful and critical examination of ils lontcnts in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not invlul;?' ill contioversy, and its columns are not open to pei.sminhtics.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, f 1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign,
*1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and Solth Africa. 7s. American remittances sliouhl be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South Afi lean and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the H'speetiio brunch oHiees. Keinittances from countlies other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian........40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontano, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathheld, N. 8. W., Australia South African........Boston House, Cape Town, South Af. ica
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of tho lllblo who by reason of InOrmltv, poverty or adversity nro unal’lo pay the subscription pruo may have The Watchtoirir lnv upon written iipplii item to lie* * publishers, made once each v*"ii. Mating the n'.ison for so re* questing it. We are glad to Ilins nld the needy, but the written application onee each year is icqiilieil by the postal legiil.nlon-.
Notice to Subscribers: At-kiiovv leil-ini’nt of n now or a renow.il sub scription will be sent oul, when iei|iiostcd. Change of iiddii-., when requested, may bo expecleil to appear on nddrcss label wiibm one month. A renewal bind, tcnii vine notice ot evpli.ition) nil be sent with the journal one moiilli before the subscription cvpius.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at IliooKl'jn, .V. Y,, under tho let of Match 3, SS13.
“ENEMIES”
This new book, written by Brother Rutherford, and first announced and released at tho recent general convention of Jehovah’s witnesses at Columbus, Ohio, is now available for all who are for Jehovah and his King and against his enemies. It is a grand work, of 381 pages, excellently bound, gold-stamped, with color illustrations and a c.ornpieliensive index. The initial edition is the autographed edition and contains, in facsimile, a letter written by the hand of the author and addressed to all the Lord’s servants. Due to the limited quantity of this author’s edition a contribution therefor of 50c a copy is asked to offset the special expense of publishing this edition.
1938 CALENDAR
The text for the calendar year 1938 is: ‘Be not afraid: the battle is God’s.’ (2 Chron. 20: 15) The calendar art picture was specially painted to fit this text and beautifully illustrates it and its action. Beneath the pictuic on the calendar base appears a letter from the president of the Society setting foith the seveial united service pci unis for the year and sei v mg as a ready refeience for the kingdom publishers. The calendar pad also indicates the dates of these testimony periods. Company servants should send in a combination order for all in the company wanting ealendais. Remit, with older, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five.
YEAR ROOK FOR 1938
The Year Hook for will embody the features that h ive made the issues for previous vents so valuable to all who declare themselves on Jehovah's side nnd who are actively intei ested in and participating in the publishing of his name ami his kingdom. The president’s leport contained therein gives an accurate and conipiehousiv0 account of the state of tho Lord’s work in the various lamia throughout the earth, show in; in considerable detail the activities and effoits put foith dm ing the service year just endevl and the results thereof. Then there is the year text lot- U> '■< mid a pointed comment thereon. This, together with well > liosen daily texts and explanntoiv comments thereon ftoin Th< II atchtinrcr, makes this Iter liooi. one of everyday help mid me for all the Loid’s faithful. The edition thereof is bunted, mid hence the eontnbution of .'si'.-per copy is received tlietefot. Company groups should combine individual orders and send s.iiuo >u through company sen ant, to reduce mailing expense.
PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS
For the next five or six months the president’s address w 11 be 4440 Braeburn Road, Kensington Heights, San Diego, Ci.ln.
THE KINGDOM INTERESTS
“Indeed, I say to you, That he mil appoint him over all his possessions.”—Matt. 24:47, Diaglott.
JEHOVAH is the possessor of all things in heaven and in the earth. From his boundless possessions he makes gifts to his creatures according to his good pleasure. Many centuries ago Jehovah God declared his purpose to establish the world in righteousness and to give it to a righteous ruler. That declaration dated from the time of the rebellion at Eden. Everything in God’s universe was righteous until that time, but covetousness induced Lucifer to become unrighteous and to lead other creatures into unrighteousness. Rebellion against God caused him to declare his purpose to establish a government of righteousness to 1x5 ruled in righteousness by the seed or offspring of his universal organization. From the time of that declaration until now, the thing which is of greatest importance amongst creatures is the completion and setting up of the promised kingdom. Creatures now on the earth are beginning to realize more fully than ever before that all their interests and welfare are centered in God’s kingdom. The primary purpose of that kingdom or government of righteousness is the vindication of Jehovah’s name; and secondarily it affords opimrtunity for creatures to find and enjoy life everlasting.
8 It may be truly said that the present day is the worst of times and the best of times: worst of times because never before has there been put forth as now such a desperate effort by selfish men to rule the world contrary to the Word of God. It is the climax time of wickedness. Now is the best of times because Jehovah’s time has come to put in operation his kingdom, which shall eliminate all wickedness and rule the world in righteousness. This transition is accomplished only by great conflict. The final conflict between wickedness and righteousness is at hand, and righteousness is certain to win. Therefore the kingdom of God holds the place of greatest interest in the mind of every person who loves the truth. All the nations and peoples of the world are now struggling, and they are in much distress and perplexity and know not how they may find a place of security; and this is due to the fact that they are blind to God’s gracious provision provided through his kingdom for those who seek righteousness and meekness.
8 Religion has been and is the chief instrument employed to make the people blind and to lead them into the ways of despair and destruction. Since the time that Eve was induced by the Devil to believe that she might become as wise as God, religion has been held before the eyes of men to hide from them Jehovah God and his provision for those who love to do right. It was religion induced by the Devil and practiced among creatures that made necessary the deluge by which the “world that then was” suffered destruction. Following the flood the Devil organized religion and induced the people en masse to worship the creature and to spurn and mock the Creator. (Rom. 1: 2o) The descendants of faithful Abraham were later organized by Jehovah into a nation and separated to himself as a people for his name, and this he did to prevent their downfall and to hold them in line until the coming of Christ Jesus, the Seed of promise. God gave to the nation of Israel his law. At the same time he gave to them a solemn covenant that if they would obey his law they should be unto him a peculiar people, a treasure, a people for his purpose. The downfall of that nation was due to the sole fact that they spurned God’s law and gave themselves over to the practice of religion which the Devil had introduced amongst them. The course taken and the fate of the nation of Israel find an exact counterpart in these modern days because Israel was a type, of which “Christendom”, so called, is the antitype. What befell Israel is certain to befall “Christendom”, and for the same reason.
4	Jehovah sent his beloved Son Jesus to the earth to declare the truth, particularly to the Jews, and to give them warning of the fate that awaited Jerusalem because they had given themselves over to Devil worship. The rulers failed to give heed to the warning, and the city was destroyed. Jesus Christ established in the earth the true worship of Almighty God, and he is therefore the author of Christianity, meaning that company of people who follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. His faithful apostles taught the truth and the true worship of Almighty God, but after they had passed into death the Devil used selfish men and again brought in religion and established the practice
371
372
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
thereof and misnamed the same “the Christian religion”, and which is more reproachful and dishonoring to the name of God than anything else that has ever been practiced amongst men. This is true because the name of Christ is applied to their unlawful practices. Among the peoples of Israel there were a few faithful men who remained true to God. Likewise in the land called “Christendom”, there have been and are a few faithfully obedient to God and who worship him in spirit and in truth.
5	About the year 1878 a few faithful men discerned that the time approached for the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, and they began to preach that good news. They were walking along with Babylon, Satan’s organization, yet were sincerely trying to gain and to walk in greater light. They separated themselves from the close association with Babylon, but they came out of that devilish organization with spots upon their garments; meaning that although they left Babylon they continued to practice religion and to observe religious forms. It is only quite recently that honest and sincere followers of Christ Jesus have been given by the Lord a vision of the hideousness of the Devil’s religion, and they have been permitted to see what great reproach religion brings upon the name of Jehotah. This is strong and persuasive evidence that the day of final reckoning is here when everyone who pleases God must forsake religion entirely and give himself wholly over to the worship of Almighty God in spirit and in truth. For that reason there is now a great conflict between religion and Christianity. Many have considered themselves Christians but in fact have been and are merely religionists. Many have looked upon present truth as the best kind of religion known to them, not discerning even now what it means to follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus. A small number, comparatively, arc realizing that no man can now practice religion and at the same time be a true follower of Christ Jesus.
8	How many today truly appreciate the kingdom of God under Christ? It is manifest that there are those who think themselves the true followers of Christ w’ho do not appreciate the kingdom, because they go on in an indifferent way and show no real faith in God and in his kingdom and no keen desire to serve the same. The fact that they take little or no part in the work that God commands to be done and that must now be done in obedience to his will is proof that their interest in the kingdom is at a very low ebb, if they have any interest therein at all. These who attend the assembly of God’s people hear the message of truth proclaimed and hear emphasized particularly the commandment that the kingdom must now be preached, and then they go their way and ignore the commandment of the Lord and fail or decline to take any part whatsoever in preaching this gospel of the kingdom, and thereby they show that they have no appreciation of the kingdom and will never be per
mitted to share its profits, unless they are quickly aroused and become truly active.
7	"Who, then, today are the ones who hear the truth concerning the kingdom and then boldly declare themselves on the side of the King and joyfully obey his commandments? These arc the ones who love God and his King and prove it by their actions. The fact that Jehovah has devoted centuries to making preparation for his kingdom, and the further fact that now he has enthroned his King, are proof conclusive that the kingdom is of paramount importance and that in this day God’s people on earth face the greatest responsibility and enjoy the greatest privilege that men have ever had. Everything pales into insignificance when compared with the kingdom of God under Christ. Because of the great importance of the kingdom this is the time when we must get understanding; which means, among other things, that we must have a proper appreciation of our relationship to the King and to his kingdom. In order to have such appreciation we must keep before the mind the truths that are now being revealed by the Lord and then give full heed and obedience thereto.
OUR RELATIONSHIP
8	The only great man ever on the earth, Jesus of Nazareth, was a modest man. He did not seek to make a reputation for himself, but, on the contrary, humbled himself in obedience to Jehovah God and suffered reproach and ignominious death; and this was a result of his faithfulness in doing the will of his Father. At all times Jesus stressed the magnitude and supreme importance of the kingdom. He proclaimed the truth, and declared that all who are of the truth must and will do likewise. (John 18:37) That is the criterion by which every man may determine whether he is of the truth or not. If he is not with enthusiasm supporting the cause of Jesus Christ and following in his footsteps, he is not of the truth. Jesus died for the kingdom in obedience to his Father’s will. God raised Jesus out of death and exalted him to the highest place in the universe, and this because of his faithfulness. Christ Jesus, then being the anointed King of the world, was fully qualified to begin his reign, but that was not God’s due time. To him Jehovah said: ‘Wail till I make thine enemies thy footstool.’ (Ps. 110:1 ; Ileb. 10:13) For nineteen centuries Jesus Christ waited, and then, when God’s due time arrived, Jehovah sent Jesus forth and said to him: “Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” It was then that Jehovah gave Jesus the nations of earth for his possession; as it is written: ‘I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.’ (Ps. 2:0,8) That great event took place, as shown by fulfilled prophecy, in the year 1914. It was then that the mighty King ousted Satan from heaven and began preparation for the final overthrow of that wicked one and his organization. What is now
December 15, 1937
ffUe WATCHTOWER.
373
the relationship of God’s faithful people to the great King, and their privilege and duty in connection with the kingdom? Unless we have a proper understanding and appreciation thereof, and unless we act accordingly, we shall miss the greatest privilege ever granted to creatures. For this reason the importance of the kingdom, our relationship thereto, and our duty in connection therewith, cannot be overstressed.
THE TEMPLE
* The temple of God, built not by hands of men, consists of those creatures from among men who have been begotten of God’s spirit and in whom the spirit of God dwells, and who are anointed and are made members of Jehovah’s royal house with Christ Jesus the head thereof. (1 Cor. 3:16; 2 Cor. 6:16) Zion is the name of the capital organization of Jehovah, otherwise called his “royal house”, and it is Zion wherein God makes his abiding place and through which he acts to carry out his purpose. (Ps. 132:13,14) ‘The coming of the Lord Jesus, and our gathering together unto him’ (2 Thess. 2:1), is his coming to the temple, lie comes to the temple as the great Judge that he may render judgment in behalf of the faithful dead and the faithful living. Those who have died in faith and proving their integrity, such as the apostles, are first awakened out of death at the coming of the Lord and arc gathered unto him, and then those faithful living ones arc gathered in. (1 Thess. 4:15-17) Prior to the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of Jehovah he fli-sl completed the work of ‘preparing the way before Jehovah’, and then he straightway appeared at the temple. (Alai. 3:1) Corresponding exactly to the time when Jesus offered himself as King to the Jews, God’s enthroned King comes to the temple, and all the scriptures and the facts show that this coming to the temple took place three and one-half years after Christ Jesus was enthroned, to wit, in the year 1918. There began the fulfillment of the prophetic announcement, to wit, “Jehovah is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.” (Ilab. 2:20, A./f.V.) Jehovah is at his holy temple representatively. being there represented by Christ Jesus, his Executive Officer.
“The Lord comes to the temple for the purpose of judgment, which judgment begins with the house of God; as it is w-Oten: “But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appear-eth? for he is like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap: and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.”—Alai. 3:2,3.
11	At the beginning of that judgment, in 1918 or thereabouts, there stood before Christ the great Judge a company of persons who had entered into a covenant to do the will of God and follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus. Many of those who there appeared be
fore the Lord were religionists, while others were truly the followers of Christ Jesus and therefore Christians. The religionists were moved by the spirit of selfishness and self-preservation, desiring to be saved and to have a high place where they might receive honor and glory. The true followers of Christ Jesus were determined above all things to have the will of God done in them, forgetting self and looking only to the faithful performance of their covenant. Up to that point they had shown themselves faithfully devoted to God, watching and praying for the appearing of the Lord Jesus and his kingdom and doing whatsoever they could to obey God's commandments and making known the King and his coming. Because of their faithfulness and devotion to the Lord when that judgment was had at the temple, they were cleansed and adjudged approved and were brought into the temple of Clod, being gathered unto the Lord Jesus. It is concerning these faithful ones that the Lord says: “Who then is [that] faithful and wise servant?” They had shown themselves faithful by earnestly endeavoring to do the will of God, and they had shown themselves wise in being guided entirely by his Word. The relationship of this faithful company to the King is this: They are made members of Zion for his service, and they are under the command of Christ Jesus, their Lord and Head; they are brought into the temple not merely that they might be saved and honored, but the primary purpose is as stated by God’s prophet in these words, to wit: “That they may offer unto the Loid an offering in righteousness.” (Mal. 3:3) Being cleansed in the fiery judgment, they are commissioned and commanded to offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness, which offering means that they must bear before the people the truth of and concerning Jehovah’s name, which is righteous, and they must proclaim the day of his vengeance upon Satan’s organization, which is a righteous judgment, and they must lift up the standard of .Jehovah and his King, that the people may learn the way to righteousness, and they must proclaim the kingdom is at hand, and which is the kingdom of righteousness. Such are now the people of God, a people taken out of the world for his name and anointed and commissioned to do a specific work as he has commanded them to do.
POSSESSIONS
12	Such approved ones now designated the “faithful and wise servant”, being brought into the temple, receive instructions from the Lord, which instructions they receive in the secret place, that is, the temple of God, and those instructions are secret to all exiept the temple company. To them the Lord Jesus now sars: ‘What I tell you in the dark tin the secret place), that speak ye in the light, and proclaim from the home-tops’; that is, publicly, fearlessly, and boldly make known. (Matt. 10:27) What must this faithful servant proclaim? Jesus answers that in these words;
374
f^e WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come.”—Matt. 24:14.
13	These are the ones taken out of the world for Jehovah’s name, and they must fulfill the prophetic utterance recorded by Moses long centuries ago, to make known the name of Jehovah in all the earth. His name and his kingdom must be made known to those who have a hearing ear, and they must be told that it is the only means of deliverance; and this testimony must be given before the battle of the great day of God Almighty. It is of and concerning that faithful temple company that Jesus uttered these words: “Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season'? Blessed is that servant, whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods [possessions (Diaglott)].” (Matt. 24:45-47) The relationship of the “faithful and wise servant” to the King is therefore clearly revealed.
u The “goods” or “possessions” mentioned by the Lord consist of everything on earth that pertains to the righteous government of Jehovah God and Christ the King. Those possessions or goods mean all the interests of the kingdom now pertaining to the earth and the peoples thereof. In this connection there are divers and numerous things to be done. The message concerning God’s name and his kingdom must be prepared and carried to the people, and God organizes his people into a compact company to perform this work. Some in the servant class must produce, cook and serve material food that other workers may eat; some must prepare copy for the literature to be printed; while others must operate machines to make ready the kingdom message in printed form ; some must prepare and some must operate sound machines which proclaim the message of the kingdom to the people; others must carry the printed message about and call the peoples’ attention thereto; and each and every one of the temple company, the “faithful servant”, takes advantage of all opportunities presented to proclaim the good news of the righteous government now being set up by Christ Jesus. The time is at hand when the Lord will clear out all unrighteous rule and unrighteous workers and will substitute a government of peace and complete righteousness that shall rule to the glory and honor of Jehovah’s name. The preliminary work to be done before this clearing out takes place is the work of making known God’s name and his purpose, that the people may learn about it and have due notice. That work exposes religion and all other wicked elements in the earth; and because it exposes the racketeer religionists, it is a “strange work” to all except those who are on the side of God and his King. It is God’s “strange work”, and it must now . be done. Jehovah, by the mouth of his great prophet,
grants that every one of the temple company shall do his part in making known the name of Jehovah and his kingdom. Is that commandment discretionary or mandatory? It is an imperative mandate, the responsibility of which cannot be sidestepped. Christ Jesus, the King, the great Prophet, gives the commandment, and concerning those who are of his temple company this is written: ‘‘ And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.”—Acts 3:23.
15 No creatures ever had a greater favor, and certainly not a greater responsibility, placed upon them. The Lord requires of the temple company full and complete faithfulness. That means faithfulness in performance and a correct report to the King. The Lord has entrusted his goods or possessions to the temple company, and to them he says: “To whom much has been entrusted, of him [the more] will be demanded.” (Luke 12:48, Weymouth) The opportunity to serve the King and his kingdom is, in another scripture, designated by the Lord as “talents”, handed to his servants, and which talents they must increase by faithful devotion and performance; and that is exactly what he demands of all who prove faithful. They must advance the kingdom interests. They are called and chosen, and now under the test they must prove faithful. In order to be faithful one must be entirely trustworthy and wholly dependable. Whatsoever may be assigned to one of the servant company, that duty he must perform and render the service report unto the Lord. One can deceive men by appearing to perform and yet doing his work in a loose and indifferent manner and hiding the facts from men; but the Lord looks even upon the motive that prompts the act of the servant, and no one can deceive the Lord. One who loves the Lord and really appreciates his position is anxious at all times to perform any and every assigned duty faithfully and timly as unto the Lord. If one cannot learn to be entirely faithful and dependable in small things, he will never be advanced to more important things. Concerning this Jesus said: “He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much; and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much. And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man’s, who shall give you that which is your own?” (Luke 16:10,12) The most important duty ever laid upon a man is that duty which is given to him in relation to the kingdom of God under Christ. Those who are in God’s organization and who are faithful make themselves blind to everything that is contrary to the kingdom interests. In doing our duty we cannot compromise with religion, nor shun to declare the whole truth, even though that truth may shock the religious susceptibilities of others. We are not to seek to go on in the way of least resistance, but it is the duty of the servant class to faithfully perforin his duty in proclaiming the kingdom, ‘hewing to the line, and letting the chips fall where they may.’
December 15, 1937
THE WATCHTOWER.
375
*• Those to whom the kingdom interests are committed and who perform the assigned duty in an indifferent or careless manner cannot properly seek some way of justifying their mistakes resulting from carelessness. If a task is assigned to one of the temple company and he performs in a careless and indifferent manner and then tries to justify his action, he is unfaithful and makes an unfaithful report and of necessity must be displeasing to the Lord. To profit by mistakes or carelessness one must acknowledge to the Lord his weakness and must be diligent in seeking to do the right thing and see to it that he doesnot act carelessly again. The Pharisees sought to excuse or justify themselves before the Lord in failing to do their duty, and Jesus said to them: “Ye arc they which justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.” (Luke 16:15) The same rule applies to others. If the servant of the Lord shuns his assigned duty or obligation and then tries to justify his action that he may have the approval of men, he is not faithfully performing his duty in the interests of the kingdom.
’’The paramount obligation laid upon the temple company is to show forth the name and praise of Jehovah God and his King. That is done by making known to the people that the only true God is Jehovah, and that his kingdom under Christ is the only hope for mankind. Jehovah has plainly stated the reason why he has laid this obligation upon his people and sent them forth to proclaim his name; and that reason is, that the world may know that soon God will exhibit his supremacy by destroying Satan ami his entire organization. The people must be warned and informed that Jehovah is the Almighty and is the only source of life. These things arc kingdom interests, and these kingdom interests must be given the closest attention by the “faithful and wise servant”. If you are of the temple company, you will be diligent in doing your part in making known the name and kingdom of Jehovah G'od, having in mind that God through his prophet says: “In his temple doth every one speak of his glory.” (Ps. 2!): 9) It follows that those who fail or refuse to make known these great truths to the praise of Jehovah’s name are not now in the temple.
OFFICE
,B The light of Jehovah shining in the face of Christ Jesus, the Head of the temple, is reflected upon and illuminates those who are of the temple company. (2 Cor. 3:18; 4:4) The temple company, therefore, is given a vision of the kingdom. They clearly discern that the King of the world is at his temple and that through him Jehovah is unfolding his prophecies and making them to be clearly understood by all of the temple company. Among the many prophecies the Lord has unfolded to his temple company in recent months are these, to wit: That the kingdom of God
consists of Christ Jesus and his followers, who prove true and faithful and entirely dependable even unto death; that such are his people taken out from amongst men for his purpose; that they are the sheep of his pasture; that the testimony concerning the kingdom is committed to them, and that they must deliver the same. Furthermore, he has revealed that the Lord has another company of “sheep” that he is now bringing, and which latter company will constitute the “great multitude”, and as these are brought forth they are made the companions of those who arc now of the temple company, that is, the “wise servant” class on earth. They see that it is the duty and obligation laid upon the temple company to go through the land and carry the spiritual food to those who arc hungry and thirsty for righteousness and that if they fail or refuse to thus minister unto the Lord’s “other sheep” they are unfaithful to God and to his King. Thereto.e the “faithful and wise servant” class delight to do good unto Jonadabs by carrying the truth to ti < m and by inviting them to join themselves to God’s organization and have the privilege of serving there. Those who do not now see the great multitude coming from all lands, kingdoms and people arc not of tic temple. John the revelator, who figuratively stood for those of the temple company now on the earth, spoke concerning the great multitude, and his words apply specifically to the temple company now, and which words are: *1 beheld, and, lo, a great multitude . . . of all nations, . . . before the throne, with palms in their hands, singing the praise of Jehovah and !:is King.’ (Kev. 7:9,10) When the John elass, that is to say, the temple company, now sec and appreciate these great truths and see the multitude coining, they delight to serve them in obedience to God’s will.
DUTY
io >p]ie “g00C]s” or “possessions” of the Lord, meaning his kingdom interests in the earth, the Lord now places in the charge and keeping of his “faithful and wise servant” and demands of that servant the protection and careful guarding and advancement of those kingdom interests. The enemy is desperately fighting against the faithful servant in an endeavor to defeat the purpose of the Lord and to destroy 1 h-kingdom interests. The servant therefore must gurid well, protect and advance the kingdom interests, lie must not be negligent, careless and indifferent, but must be watchful and cautions; he must be solicitous and deeply concerned about the welfare and advancement of such kingdom interests; therefore he must be anxious about the faithful performance of his duly and that he may perfonn and report to his Lord that his Lord may be pleased, and that the report may be to God’s glory. It is to those faithful ones the Lord says “Well done”, but not to the indifferent ones A careless, indifferent or “happy-go-lucky” peison cannot maintain his integrity toward the Lord, Faith-
376
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ful performance of duty is required by the Lord of his servant, and one cannot be negligent and indifferent and at the same time receive the Lord’s approval. From the time the kingdom interests are placed in the keeping of the “faithful and wise servant” and until the battle of Armageddon, such is a time of conflict, and when one is fighting the enemy he must be on guard, must be watchful, and see to it that he does not perform his duty in a careless and indifferent way and permit to slip by him opportunities for advancing the kingdom interests. Men have never before had such favors and obligations laid upon them, and the Lord will not permit these favors and obligations to be treated with indifference. The King’s business and his kingdom interests require the greatest degree of anxious care on the part of the “faithful and wise servant”.
HAPPINESS AND JOY
w Seeing that we are in a time of conflict and that to safeguard and give attention to the kingdom interests requires a constant warfare, and that we must be anxious about a true and faithful performance of duty, how can one be happy under such conditions? Present-day happiness is not essential to pleasing service unto the Lord. The “joy of the Lord” is very essential. Happiness and joy arc often improperly used as synonymous terms. The two words have very different meanings. Happiness is had by the creature who is in a state of peace and tranquillity, when he is at rest and in prosperity and cats the labor of his hands in peace. (Ps. 128: 2) He is happy when he has triumphed in a righteous cause. (Ps. 137:8,9) Likewise one is happy when he rests in security, prosperity and safety and is successful, and therefore fully satisfied. (Pss. 144:15; 146:5) Says the apostle Peter: “If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.”—1 Pet. 4:14.
M The one who is reproached because of his faithfulness to Christ Jesus has the evidence that he is pleasing to God, and therefore he rests contentedly in the love of God. In the text last above quoted the word “happy” means a supremely blessed state by reason of being in the family of God and in a favorable position with the Lord. It does not mean “hilarity”, by any means. Anyone who is careless and negligent in the performance of his assigned duty, and is chastised for that reason, and then sings and says: “Well, I have told the Lord all about it, and now I am happy,” that person is deceiving himself. To be sure, God knows everything. One’s mistakes cannot properly make him happy, but, on the contrary, will make him sober and thoughtful that he may profit thereby and make further progress. One can hardly be said to be happy, within the proper meaning of that term, when he is engaged in a real combat with the enemy.
JOY OF THE LORD
22	Jehovah’s witnesses, because of preaching the gospel of the kingdom in obedience to God’s commandment, are often assaulted, arrested and thrown into prison and subjected to ill-treatment while confined in filthy cells, and are there compelled to listen to the name of Jehovah being slandered and vilified, and surely they cannot be happy by reason of such condition; but these same conditions cause them to be joyful in the Lord. They know that they are right and are suffering because of righteousness, and that this is according to God’s will, and therefore they rejoice or delight to do his will. Jesus makes this clear distinction in the parable of the talents. To his servant, who has been faithful over a few things and who brines a faithful report to the Lord, he says: “Well done, good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.” (Matt. 25:23) Jesus thus invited the temple company to enter into his joy.
23	What is the joy of the Lord? and what docs it mean to be joyful in the Lord? It means an inward calm delight because of the knowledge of the fact that God’s purpose is about to be accomplished in the vindication of his name and that the person who is suffering indignities because of righteousness, and who continues faithful, may have a part in that vindication. When Jesus was faced with death by crucifixion upon the tree, knowing that he was about to die as an accursed sinner, he was joyful because he knew th.it such suffering would ultimately result in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. (Ilcb. 12:2) For centuries Satan had reproached the name of Jehovah, and now that reproach had fallen upon Christ Jesus because he had been faithful to his Father. (Ps. 69:9; Rom. 15:3) Jesus knew that it was the will of God that it should be so, and therefore he rested in calm delight that he was permitted to fulfill his Father s will and that he had the assurance that in due lime he would vindicate his Father’s name. That was the joy set before him when he was about to be crucified, and for that reason he endured the cross. (Ileb. 12: 2) When Christ Jesus was enthroned and came to the temple, he had reached the point of great joy because the time had come to vindicate his Father’s name. When he gathered unto himself the faithful followers, it was then, and still is, a joyful time, because it is the time for the vindication of Jehovah’s name; and therefore he says to the “faithful and wise servant” class, to whom he has committed the care of his “goods”, the kingdom interests: ‘Come, and participate in this great joy with me.’ In obedience to the commandment of the Lord the “faithful servant” now goes about the earth proclaiming the name of Jehovah and his kingdom under Christ; and because they do so they are subjected to all manner of abuse and ill-treatment, even as the Lord Jesus foretold they
December 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
377
would be ill-treated. Certainly they arc not happy because of ill-treatment, abuse and imprisonment; but they are joyful in the Lord, for the reason that this is evidence they arc following in the footsteps of Jesus and will have a part in the vindication of his name. Many of these faithful ones suffer bodily pain, and bitter tears are forced to How down their cheeks, but they rejoice in the fact that they are the Lord’s children and arc privileged to prove their integrity under adverse conditions, that they may have the approval of the Lord.
24	Suffering or tribulation is a condition precedent to entering fully into the kingdom; as it is written: “We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.” (Acts 14: 22) Therefore the apostle exclaimed: “Wc glory in tribulations.” (Rom. 5:3) Knowing that tribulation and suffering is a condition precedent to entering into the kingdom the apostle furthermore said: “Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church.”—Col. 1:24.
25	The true and faithful follower of Christ Jesus will not now confuse so-called “happiness” with the “joy of the Lord”. When one knows and appreciates the fact that he is suffering indignities and punishment at the hand of the enemy, and this because the witness of the Lord is faithfully and truly guarding, protecting and advancing the kingdom interests, that gives the servant real joy, that is, an inherent delight in doing the will of God that he may have God’s approval and thereby a part in proving that Satan is a liar and Jehovah is always right.
PRIVILEGE
20	When one enjoys a great privilege at the hand of Jehovah, that brings to him joy, even though it is coupled with much suffering. For this reason the apostle, under inspiration from the Lord, wrote, for the benefit of the “faithful servant” now on earth engaged in war on the side of the Lord, these words, to wit: “Only let the lives you live be worthy of the good news of the Christ, in order that, whether I come and see you or, being absent, only hear of you, I may know that you are standing fast in one spirit and with one mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith of the good news. Never for a moment quail before your antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them a sure token of impending destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation, a token coming from God. For you have had the privilege granted to you on behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer on his behalf; maintaining, as you do, the same kind of conflict that you once saw in me and which you still hear that I am engaged in.” —Phil. 1: 27-30, Weymouth.
2T Jehovah’s faithful witnesses can and do now testify that it is a real joy to suffer with Christ Jesus
and to have the assurance that those who do thus suffer with him for righteousness shall reign with him in glory. (2 Tim. 2:12) To the “faithful and wise servant” there has been committed, among other things of the kingdom interests, the testimony of Jesus Christ, and the faithful keep God’s commandments and obey them. For that reason the Devil and all of his invisible and visible instruments make war upon the faithful witnesses of Jehovah and try to destroy them. In this conflict the faithful witnesses are joyful in the Lord because they know that they arc in the right and that they arc backed up by Jehovah and his King, Christ Jesus. It is a great favor and privilege for anyone to have a part in the warfare of righteousness; as it is written : “For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with favour wilt thou compass him as with a shield.”—Ps. 5:12.
28 The kingdom interests, that is, the goods or possessions of the Lord, are closer and dearer to the heart of the “faithful and wise servant” than any earthly thing. The servant loves the kingdom interests and delights to advance the same and is determined that no earthly creature shall separate him therefrom or hinder him in the performance of duty. (Alatt. 10:37-39) As the “faithful and wise servant” advances the kingdom interests, another company of the Lord’s sheep join that servant. Such are the Jonadabs, who go to make up the “great multitude”. The Jonadabs flee to God’s organization under Christ Jesus and there find shelter and protection, and they delight to join the remnant in the battle for righteousness and to proclaim the praises of Jehovah and his King, and to them that is a blessed favor. They have heard the joyful sound of and concerning God’s kingdom under Christ, and of this it is written: “Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound; they shall walk, 0 Lord, in the light of thy countenance.” (Ps. 89:15) From every part of the earth, from all nations, kingdoms and tongues, there now come to the Lord those who will form the great multitude. The light of the King is revealed to them, and in the King they center their hopes, and they enjoy his favor, which is likened unto copious showers of rain descending upon the thirsty earth: “In the light of the king’s countenance is life ; and his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain.”—Prov. 16:15.
CALAMITY
20 There is now revealed to the remnant of God, the ‘elect servant’, and to their companions, that the greatest calamity that has ever befallen or ever will befall the world, is just ahead. They see that every nation of the earth is now torn with strife; hatred, ill will and malice arc in the saddle, and fanatics rule and oppress the people, while the people go mad and resort to wickedness. The mask is now being removed from religion, and it appears before the eyes of honest creatures that religion is the most monstrous and
378
QTe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
wicked instrument the Devil has employed to reproach Jehovah God and-to make the people blind and turn them into the way of destruction. An unprecedented economic depression has fallen upon all the nations; famine and pestilence, together with murder, stalk through the lands. Satan, knowing that his time is short, is actually hurrying the nations on to the great battle of Armageddon, expecting there to destroy all mankind. Never before has the world been confronted with such a terrible situation. Do these things make the people of God happy? No, not in the least; but they do bring joy to them because it is further and conclusive evidence that the day is at hand when wickedness shall be removed from the earth, when God’s kingdom under Christ shall triumph, and when the name of Jehovah shall be for ever vindicated.
30	The prophet Ilabakkuk was a type of God’s faithful servant class now on the earth, and Habakkuk uttered a prophecy, thereby putting these words in the mouth of the “faithful and wise servant”: “Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.” (llab. 3:17,18) Thus in prophetic language the Lord shows that even though this is the worst time the world has ever known, those who faithfully obey him rejoice in the fact that the day of wickedness is about to for ever end. The faithful ones who trust wholly in the Lord joy in his strength, and they say: “The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds’ feet; and he will make me to walk upon mine high places.” (Hab. 3:19) The feet of the hind arc sure and steadfast in perilous places and are swift to move and escape the darts of the enemy. Thus the “faithful servant” class is likened unto the hind. Although highly honored by the Lord in having committed to them his goods or kingdom interests and thus made to occupy the highest place amongst men, they are calm and rest in the Lord because they arc sure of their position, knowing that they stand upon the Great Rock, the Lord God, and his Chief Corner Stone, Christ Jesus; that they are in his fortress, and when pursued by the enemy they take the right course, their feet are swift to do the bidding of the Lord. Encompassed by a great horde of enemies, God’s people know that they shall receive full protection and salvation if they continue faithfully in his service. They delight to fight on his side, and therefore they are joyful in the Lord.
81	For many centuries the faithful followers of Christ Jesus have looked forward and waited for this very time. Now the Lord has gathered unto his temple the remnant of the faithful ones and made them his trusted servant and committed to them all his earthly kingdom interests, laying upon them the obligation of advancing those interests. He has unveiled to them
the hidden meaning of prophecy, and these revealed truths thrill the heart of each one of the servant company and they repeat the words of his prophet written long ago for their benefit, to wit: “I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.”— Isa. 61:10.
32	Although greatly suffering many indignities, as well as bodily pain, the joy of the Lord fills the heart of each one of the faithful servants. Clothed with the holy and righteous robe provided by Jehovah for his servant, these are sent forth to proclaim his name and his kingdom, and they rejoice to advance the kingdom interests. The voice from heaven gives to the servant this commandment: “Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.” (Isa. 62:10) Those who love God and his King will not now be indifferent to this commandment. They do now greatly rejoice to go to the sin-cursed nations, lifting high God’s standard of righteousness and truth, and point all persons of good will to the only hope for their salvation. They delight to uncover the racketeers and their racket in obedience to God’s will, to roll away the stumbling stones and point the people to the highway that leads to the kingdom of rest and peace. Because the faithful do joyfully obey the commandment of Ihc Lord, they arc beset by the enemy and caused to suffer, but they have the assurance that even these thing: shall work good for them, because the Lord has caused to be written in his Word this precious promise: “And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.” (Rom. 8:28) Fully trusting in his promise their joy in the Lord increases.
33	In some nations now ruled by fanatics and cruel religionists faithful witnesses for the Lord md his kingdom have been foully murdered, but these, even in death, have been granted the victory through Christ Jesus, because to such Jesus says: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.” (Rev. 2:10, A.R.V.) The Devil and his agents think to defeat the Lord by killing his witnesses, but Jehovah laughs at their folly and has them in derision. The arm of the Lord is not shortened, and nothing can hinder his onward progress. Concerning such faithful ones who die in faith and faithfully devoted to the cause of God’s kingdom, he says: ‘These shall not sleep [in death], but shall be changed ... in the twinkling of an eye.’—1 Cor. 15:51,52.
34	Those faithful ones have the assurance of an instantaneous resurrection to life and to immediate entrance into the presence of the Lord. Therefore prisons, persecution, bodily punishment, wickedly in-
December 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
379
flictcd upon these faithful ones, do not deter them from the Lord’s service. Faithful men of old sealed their witness work with their blood, and the “faithful and wise servant” class will follow the same course, if that be the Lord’s will. Let none of the faithful ones in the countries ruled by fanatics be deterred from service to the Lord and his kingdom interests by reason of such persecution.
35	For the past three or four years this wicked persecution in various lands has continued to increase against Jehovah’s witnesses. The “faithful and wise servant” has pressed forward regardless of such persecution. What now is the visible result of their faithful work? As John stood upon the shores of the isle of Patmos and beheld in prophetic vision the coming of a great multitude, so now the temple company behold the coming of a multitude seeking the way to God and his kingdom, and they have the satisfaction of having some part in carrying to these people the message of God’s truth that has opened their eyes. (Rev. 7: 9) Those Jonadabs are the “other sheep” of the Lord who are fleeing that they may find refuge in the “city” or God’s organization, and these arc joining in the proclamation of Jehovah’s name and his kingdom and arc saying: “Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.” Fanatical rulers, conscienceless police officers, and other persecutors of God’s people will not hinder the advancement of the kingdom interests. The Lord knows no defeat.
30	Let the people of the Lord now fully realize that this is the most weighty or momentous time in the history of man. The King of Righteousness, long ago promised and anxiously looked for, has come, lie is in his temple, separating the nations. As God’s commissioned Great Officer he commands all the earth to keep silence and hear the Word of the Almighty God. At the same time he commands his faithful servants to go and warn the people that they must seek to find the only place of refuge and salvation and find it in the Lord’s organization. The decree of Jehovah is about to be executed, at which execution Satan and all of his organization, invisible and visible, shall fall, to be immediately succeeded by the reign of the world’s rightful King. Upon the shoulder of Christ Jesus, the King of glory, shall rest the government of the world, and which government shall bring in everlasting peace and righteousness. Never before was there a government like his, and it shall abide for ever. Never before have men been honored and favored with the privilege of announcing such a government, and never will there be another such time. In this hour of greatest crisis the Lord has laid upon his faithful servant class the obligation to look after, guard well, make known and advance the present-day interests of his glorious kingdom. Never before was such favor conferred upon creatures in the earth, and never before have men been charged with such a
weighty responsibility. The eternal existence of the servant class depends now upon their faithfulness in performance of duty.
3	T This is not the time for hilarity, but is the time for sober thought, cautious, energetic and diligent forward movement. The servant cannot now slack the hand. It is the time for rejoicing in the Lord, and his people are doing that very thing. Faithful and careful performance of assigned duty will be honored and blessed by the Lord with increased opportunities, and thus the kingdom interest is advanced. Because the enemy has challenged the right of God’s government, this is a time of war, and Jehovah commands those of his organization to rise up against her, the enemy, in war. Therefore the “faithful and wise servant” and the “other sheep” of the Lord, “her companions,” must move forward united in one compact body. They must be at peace among themselves, and for that reason they arc commanded to continuously pray for peace within God’s organization. The murmurers and complaincrs, the slothful and indifferent, the idlers and fearful, must stand aside, because the Lord will no longer tolerate such indifference or any interference with the forward march of his army. The faithful servant must be blind to everything except the sc twice of the King and his kingdom interests. The faithful ones will give unstinted devotion, all their strength and their money and substance, yea, their all of everything, for the advancement of the kingdom interest. Thus faithfully performing their assigned duty, ultimately they will participate in the victory of Christ Jesus and shall behold the power and glory of the Almighty God, whose name alone is Jehovah and whose majesty and glory shall fill the universe and endure for ever.
38	God’s people now on the earth well know that the King’s reign has begun and that soon the earth will be made rid of everything that defiles and that every soul that breathes shall join in the praise of the Most High. This is the joy set before the Lord, and this is the joy of his people. He has now gathered them unto his temple and invites them to share his joy, his glory' and his riches. The condition precedent to receiving such boundless blessings is that the servant class must faithfully, watchfully, earnestly and truly guard and advance the kingdom interests, the goods or possessions of the Lord in the earth.
39	Never before was the scripture text so appropriate to God’s people on the earth, to wit: “With all thy getting get understanding”; that is to say, get a proper appreciation of our relationship to Jehovah and to his King and kingdom. (Prov. 4:7) There is but one Almighty God, who is the Giver of every' good and perfect gift; there is but one Lord and Master, Christ Jesus, the Redeemer of man, the King of the world, and Jehovah’s Vindicator; there is one company of faithful servants who are made members of Jehovah’s royal house, and who are the children of
380
ffne WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
God and joint heirs with Christ Jesus; there is but one great multitude that shall for ever serve Jehovah and his King and remain on the earth, and that is now being gathered into the fold of the Lord. Salvation to creatures is a blessed thing; but that which is of paramount importance is the kingdom of God under Christ, which will establish everlastingly on the earth peace and righteousness, and which will vindicate the Word and name of the Most High, who through his King, Christ Jesus, will give life to every man who loves and obeys him. Gaining the proper view of our relationship to Jehovah and to his King and kingdom, we can realize to some degree, at least, how blessed the privilege of now making known to those who mourn the goodness of Jehovah God and his King, who will bring indescribable blessings to every honest, obedient soul.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
fl 1. From whnt source, and for what purpose, docs Jehovah give gifts to his creatures? Account for Jehovah’s purpose to establish the world in righteousness, he having once provided for world dominion. What is the purpose of that kingdom ?
fl 2. How is the piesent day both the worst of times and the best of times?
fl 3. What was the beginning of religion, and what has been the purpose of religion? Give evidence that it served that purpose down to the time of the flood, and thereafter with the nation of Israel. Were those people provided with safeguard against such evil?
fl 4,5. How was Christianity established? What in this regard is the present condition of “Christendom”? Why? In what fact is it seen that down to the Lord’s second coming Satan had not succeeded in turning all men away from God? Account (a) for the great conflict between religion and Christianity, (b) For the escape from religion by comparatively few of those claiming to lie Christians.
fl 0. How is it seen that some of those claiming to be followers of Christ do not truly appreciate the kingdom of God?
fl 7. Wliat is the pi oof that the kingdom is of paramount importance, and that there are those who have a piopcr ap-pieciation of their relationship to the King and to his kingdom?
fl 8. By wliat criterion may it lie known whether one is of the truth? What was the outcome of Jesus’ faithfulness? Account for Jesus’ tuithcr waiting for nineteen centuries. What then took place? Wliat important instiuetiou for God’s faithful people is here seen?
fl 9. Of whom docs the temple of God consist? How related to Zion? How and for what purpose does the Lord Jesus ‘eome to his temple’? To what docs Malachi 3:1 refer? How is the time of the land’s coming confirmed? Harmonize this with Habakkuk 2: 20.
fl 10,11. Point out the fulfillment of Malachi 3: 2,3, and the relation thereto of Matthew 24: 45. How do those purified “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness”, marking them as God’s people for liis name and his purpose?
fl 12-11. To what does Matthew 10:27 refer? How is that command to be carried out? What gracious relationship is revealed at Matthew 24: 45-47? What are the “goods”
here mentioned? What is the nature of the ‘rulership’ here committed to the “faithful servant”, and how is it to be carried out? How definite is the responsibility committed to that servant?
fl 15. Apply Luke 12: 48. Luke 16: 10, 12. How only can those of the servant class be faithful to the duty now entrusted to them?
fl 16. What instruction for the servant of the Lord is seen at Luke 16: 15?
fl 17. What is the paramount obligation laid upon the temple company, and how is that duty to be performed? Why iias Jehovah laid this obligation upon his people? Apply Psalm 29: 9.
fl 18. How is the temple company given a vision of the kingdom? They are thus enabled to discern wliat important facts? Point out some of the many prophecies the Loid has unfolded to Ins temple company in recent months. What duty and privilege do the “faithful and wise servant” class now see? and how do they prove their appreciation thereof?
fl 19. Explain the necessity for great diligence now on the part of the faithful servant, in guarding, protecting, ami advancing the kingdom interests.
fl 20,21. How, in this time of conflict and with this important responsibility, can one be happy?
fl 22. Under what conditions, for example, can the faithful seivant have joy without happiness? Why?
fl 23. What is the joy of the Lord? Explain what it means to bo joyful in the Loid. What, then, is seen in the invitation at Matthew 25: 231
fl 24,25. Why is tribulation necessary or permitted? Wliat is the nature and the cause of the rejoicing theiein?
fl 26. What important instruction is ptovided by the Loid, through the apostle, at Philippines 1:27-30?
fl 27. Show that 2 Timothy 2: 12 and Psalm 5: 12 were written for those to whom is committed the testimony of Jesus Christ and who keep God’s commandments.
fl 28. How does the “faithful and wise seivant” regard the “goods” the Lord has committed to him? With what additional interest and companionship has the servant been favored? From whcie does this company come, and why do these now come forth and join the remnant!
fl 29. Describe the condition of the world today, and account for its being confronted with such a situation. Do these things make the people of God happy or joyful, and why I
fl 30,31. Show that Habakkuk pictured the faithful servant class now on the carlh; also that the wotds of Isaiah bl: 10 were written for them and for this very time.
fl 32. The command at Isaiah 62: 10 is given to whom? With what response on their part, and with what ic.-ult?
fl 33,34. Describe the present situation as inviting the nwiir-anco and comfort provided at Revelation 2: 10 and 1 Uuiin-thians 15: 51, 52.
fl 35. What is now the visible result of the faithful work of Jehovah’s witnesses? Has the wicked persecution affected the advancement of the kingdom interests, and whvi
fl 36 What facts mark the present as the. most momentous time in the history of man?
fl 37. The present situation calls foi what attitude and com sc of action on the pait of the “faithful and wise sen.mt” and the ‘ ‘ other sheep ’ ’ of the Lord ?
fl 38. What is now the joy of God's people? Their position? The condition precedent to their receiving the boundless blessings provided?
fl 39. Just what is the relationship of God’s people on the earth to Jehovah and his King and his kingdom? The importance of gaining the proper view thereof?
Let all the earth fear Jehovah:
let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. For he spate, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. Jehovah bringeth the counsel of the nations to nought; he maketh the thoughts of the peoples to be of no eflect. The counsel of Jehovah standeth fast for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations. Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people whom he hath chosen for his own tn-heiitance.—Psalm 33:8-12, d.B.F.
REPREHENSIBLE
GOD commanded his prophet Ezekiel to take a brick or tile and an iron pan and to use these in a mimic siege of Jerusalem. This the prophet was to do to show in living pantomime that Jerusalem would surely be besieged and destroyed. He was to portray this city upon the brick. The pan would represent the coverlet or shields behind which the besiegers would operate. Ezekiel lay upon his side during the mimic siege and the Lord laid bands upon him to keep him from turning. Also, Ezekiel was required to live on a restricted diet of bread and water during those days and to cat and drink under much adversity. (Ezek. 4:9-15) This foreshadows the fulfillment of God’s word spoken to the prophet: “Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem; and they shall cat bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with astonishment; that they may want bread and water, and be astonied one with another, and consume away for their iniquity.” (Ezek. 4:16, 17) Such conditions actually existed in the eity of Jerusalem at the time of the siege by the Babylonian army under Nebuchadnezzar.
This would seem to picture that just as surely as God’s covenant people would be put in bonds and on a restricted diet, spiritually and materially, for a season to bear the iniquitous practices of “organized Christianity”, just so surely would “organized Christianity” by the Lord’s judgment be made hungry for food and thirsty for drink, both spiritually and materially, and suffer and be destroyed. In the years 1918 and 1919 God’s covenant people were under restraint of bonds, bearing “organized Christianity's” iniquity, being “hated of all nations”, and many of them were imprisoned and compelled to exist upon scant food rations, while the church everywhere was being fed with meager spiritual rations because “Christendom” had restricted the work and communication of God’s people one with another. Those trying experiences awakened God’s covenant people to the real situation and set them wholly against “organized religion” and all other parts of Satan’s organization Particularly from and after 1922 God’s covenant people have assaulted “organized Christianity” with the weapons of truth provided by the Lord, and have continued so to do with zeal and vigor.
The cruel handling of God’s covenant people by “organized Christianity” during the World War has ‘turned for a testimony against them (“organized Christianity”]’ even as Jesus foretold. (Mark 13:9) Ezekiel made a picture of the siege of Jerusalem, and the siege actually began some time thereafter. Up to 1922 Jehovah’s organization was drawing up the machinery for operations before the walls of hypocritical “Jerusalem” or “organized Christianity” and was preparing for the siege. There was then much to the discredit of “organized Christianity” in the eyes of
3S1
the Lord, among which was the persecution of God’s covenant people during the World War; the Interchurch World Movement, launched by Big Business, with the clergy playing second fiddle, in the year 1919; also the approval by “organized Christianity” of the League of Nations, which is an “abomination” in the sight of the Lord; and the approval of the program of the International Arms Conference in 1921, and other things. In March, 1922, the “ammunition” factory of God’s covenant people was greatly enlarged, being established in more commodious quarters, in order that many books containing the message of truth might be made ready for the assault. Then quickly followed the world-wide witness by Jehovah’s witnesses by many public lectures’ being delivered on “Millions Now Living Will Never Die”, and also the introduction of the radio, which the Lord put forward to tell the truth to the people. Now the campaign has been in progress for several years and is growing more intensive and interesting each year.
During the mimic siege of Jerusalem God laid bands upon Ezekiel. During the siege of “organized Christianity” God has laid bands upon his people, which bands are the obligations of being his witnesses to give his testimony which he committed to Jesus Christ, and these bands prevent his people from turning to the right or to the left in their work. God’s “faithful servant” class now have their faces firmly set against Satan’s organization, and they have assaulted and continue the assault with God’s Word which he has put in their mouths and in their hands. They are in a real fight now, and no longer on short rations, spiritually or otherwise, even as it is written: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall cat, but ye shall be hungry; behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed.” (Isa. 65:13) Jehovah is making ample provision for his people, spiritually and temporally, even while all “Christendom” is suffering.
The sentiments of “organized Christianity” are well summed up in the recent comment of a well-known newspaper, as follows:
“Our world presents a strange and sorry spectacle. In the cities millions of people haven’t enough to eat. In the country millions of farmers, facing ruin, are feeding dirt-cheap wheat and corn to the hogs, because they haven’t a market. Around the world there arc hundreds of millions going almost naked, while cotton planters arc on the verge of starvation because they can’t get rid of their cotton. There is too much bread, too much sugar, too much coffee, too much cotton, too much silver, too much copper, too much oil, too much, almost, of everything. Yet 1,500,000,000 people—three-quarters of the population of the globe —half-naked and half-starved, are yearning for the barest necessities of life, but can’t afford them. What
382
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
a sickening indictment of our system! . . . The remedy is only to be found in a new order of things founded upon world peace. The principal nations of the earth arc going to have to get together on a plan to put an end to war, then turn their attention to policies, national and international, which will improve the living conditions of peoples everywhere.”
The people of Jerusalem, especially the clergy, scoffed at Ezekiel and prophesied man’s ability to bring peace and plenty. The conditions arc exactly the same today. After repeated proclamations of the truth; the distribution in "Christendom” of more than two hundred million books in many languages; the proclamation of the message of God’s kingdom by Resolutions, by radio and by other means, "Christendom” is absolutely blind to the cause of the trouble and what is the remedy. This blindness will continue until there falls upon "organized Christianity”, or "Christendom”, exactly what fell upon the city of Jerusalem, except on a far wider and greater scale. The Lord is causing his people now to proclaim the day of his vengeance upon "organized Christianity”. Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s great Executive Officer in the temple, is leading the fight to the glory and the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and when it is done the people shall know that Jehovah is God. His name shall be vindicated I
Among all the nations that arc on the earth or ever have been on the earth those nations composing "Christendom”, or "organized Christianity”, arc the most reprehensible. The Protestant countries of "organized Christianity” are even more reprehensible than the Catholic. It was because of enlightenment coming to view by the favor of the Lord that certain religionists organized Protestantism as a protest against the practice of Catholicism. The light, therefore, that has come upon Protestantism has been greater than that upon Catholics; and greater light brings greater responsibility. Protestants have had free access to the Bibb', while many Catholics have been denied this privilege. The Protestant countries have had the testimony of the truth given to them in their own languages, and their own Bibles have been used to cite the truth to them even more than any other peoples ever upon the earth. In addition to the prophecies with which the nation of Israel was favored, the nations calling themselves "Christian” have had the words of Jesus and of the apostles, and later millions of copies of the Bible have been published and placed in their hands. There appears to be no excuse for any of these lands called "Christendom”, and especially among those of the clergy and the principal of their flocks, to say that they never had an opportunity to know about the Lord.
The nations of "Christendom” have held themselves out before all other peoples of earth as models and have sent their missionaries into heathen lands
to induce the heathen people to follow the Christians as a model people. They have put forth much effort to convert the heathen nations to the so-called "Christian’s way of thinking” concerning religion. They have claimed to be God’s favorites, and without hesitation have taken his name upon their lips and called themselves by the name of his beloved Son, and at the same time their hearts have been far removed from him.
Jehovah God has sent his witnesses throughout "Christendom”, and particularly into the lands known as Protestant, to give a wide witness for the truth. Among all the men in these nations collectively called "Christendom” the most reprehensible arc the clergymen. These men claim to be the children and covenant-people of God and to be followers of Christ Jesus. They pose before the people as the only ones qualified and commissioned to interpret and teach the Bible. They have builded great church edifices and called these after the name of Christ and the apostles. They have put themselves forward as leaders of the people and have induced millions to follow after them; they have builded great schools of learning, which they call "theological seminaries”, or places for the education of young men to preach the gospel, and these they have sent forth labeled with the title of "Reverend”, "Doctor of Divinity,” or "Minister of God’s Word”. They arc therefore without excuse for the course they have taken and for their failure to know about God’s purposes. Regardless of all the favor that Jehovah has bestowed upon them, today the clergymen of "Christendom”, as a whole, arc against the kingdom of God, and among all those who oppose the preaching of the message of Ihc truth of and concerning the kingdom the clergymen arc the most violent opposers. They arc the ones who persecute and seek the arrest and imprisonment of humble men and women who carry the message of truth to the people. They arc the ones who busy themselves in attempts to prevent the radio stations from broadcasting the message of God’s kingdom. God will not permit these things to go unnoticed.
A large majority of the clergy repudiate the blood of Christ Jesus, which is God’s provision for the redemption of man, and they deny that his kingdom is God’s remedy for the uplift and blessing of the human race. They deny the inspiration of the Scriptures and freely tell the people that the Bible account of the creation, the fail of man, and redemption through the blood of Jesus Christ is merely folklore. They have openly joined hands with the Devil’s makeshift and fraudulent scheme, the League of Nations, and claim it as the substitute for God’s announced kingdom on earth. They have builded the greatest structure of hypocrisy ever known. Hypocritically claiming to be the followers of Christ, they have made themselves a part of Satan’s organization, and therefore the avowed enemies of Jehovah God and his king
December 15, 1937
WATCHTOWER.
383
dom. They have led the people away from God and into darkness, have acted as Satan’s chief agents, and have desecrated and defamed God's holy name; and now God’s day has come when he will have announcement made of his judgment and will cause to be executed his judgments against “Christendom” as written. “ Christendom, ” therefore, is in the stocks and is marked for the most severe drubbing any people or nation has ever received. It is upon “Christendom” that the Lord Jesus Christ declares shall be visited the greatest tribulation that was ever known since the world began, and it shall mark the last.
In chapter five of Ezekiel’s prophecy, the prophet by his shaved hair and beard predicts and portrays the distressing conditions of the siege and of the execution of Jehovah’s judgment against “Christendom”. (Read carefully Ezekiel 5:1-5.) Then Jehovah by his prophet tells professed “organized Christianity”, or “Christendom”, that they not only have failed Io walk in his statutes but have been guilty of wickedness greater than that of any other nation. “And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about her; for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not walked in them.” (Ezek. 5:6) The nations calling themselves “Christian”, having had the opportunity to know and to walk in the laws and statutes of the Lord, have failed to do so. Not only have they failed, but their clergymen and the principal of their (locks have deliberately led the people against the Lord.
“Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Because ye multiplied more than the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according to the judgments of the nations that are round about you.” (Ezek. 5:7) Because of their disregard of God’s Word, the persecution of his faithful witnesses and the desecration and defamation of his holy name, Jehovah says to “organized Christianity”; “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold 1, even I, am against thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of the nations. And I will do in thee, that which I have not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.” —Ezek. 5: 8, 9.
As famine, pestilence, pests that destroy the crops, and other like things now begin to befall the people, the clergy in their pulpits (which they claim to be in the house of God) and by means of the radio proclaim to the people that all their sufferings and calamities Jehovah God has brought upon them and therefore he is responsible; and this is added to all other acts of wickedness that they have committed. “Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord God, Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have any pity.” (Ezek. 5:11) The Lord declares that he will show no pity upon these deliberate defaincrs of his holy name. The people shall know and will know that Jehovah is the Lord God Almighty.
LETTERS
IMPRESSES FAITHFULNESS: EXPOSES WICKEDNESS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We wish to express to you through this medium our sincere love and deep appreciation for your untiring zeal and fearlessness in our warfare against the enemy.
Wo appreciate greatly the spirit of The Watchtower, how it impresses faithfulness to those devoted to our heavenly Father; how it exposes wickedness, yet void of bitterness toward those who oppose it. We cannot read its pages without having that desire to be in the forefront of the battle for the cause of truth.
Words fail to express our gratitude to our heavenly Father for the truths received from The Watchtower. Especially have the articles on the great multitude brought rejoicing, and unraveled some knotty points.
Wo pray for you daily, that you may be strengthened and guided by' the wisdom from above; and our wish is that you might bo kept to urge and encourage the Lord’s people to faithfulness until Armageddon is fought.
Yours in joyful service, Linstead company of J. vv’s, Jamaica, B.W.l.
LOVE JEHOVAH MORE THAN EVER
Dear Sip,:
We aro both thrilled with the good news that we have received through one of your subscribe:s. Wc have both been educated in Catholic schools, and lealize now that wc have lived in the dark. We have also lived in fear of hell, but now we both love our dear Jehovah God more than ever through this “Truth”. We thank you and wish you good [success] in continuing your marvelous and great work. We shall remain Jehovah’s faithful, --------------------------------------------------, Ohio.
OUR HEAVENLY FATHER IS GUIDING
Dear Brother Rutherford:
“Meat in due season’’ indeed is the June 1 (1937) Wat'h-tower.
My heart is filled with gratitude as 1 reside at the table ot the Most High and inquire m his temple. Dear Brother Rutherford, how Jehovah has blessed you and through you IIh people on earth! How wonderful to know our heavenly Father is ever watchful of his little ones, and is guiding them in the light way through Christ Jesus, nnd He through The Watchtowi r ! May he ever bless you as you seek to serve him. I hope to remain
Your sister in His service,
Ella M. Barber, Delaware.
FROM WHOM ALL LIGHT PROCEEDS
Dear Brother Rutheriorp:
Jehovah has made peace within our borders and has filled us with the finest of his wheat.
He has caused iiis pure river ot water of life to flow freely from the throne of his King, Christ Jesus; and thereby the strength of his remnant is renewed.
In the July 15 issue of The Watchtower he gives the wotkers of deceit “a new name”, which certainly is most appropiiate.
A great contrast between this and the name awarded his “covenant people” in 1931 is plain, and should make glad the heart of him “who hath the God of Jacob for his help”.
The subtle maneuveis of the enemy are visible only “in the light of his Glittering Sword”, which will smite the strongholds at Armageddon and will reveal to all the One from whom all light proceeds.
With fervent love and best wishes for a glorious victory, Clayton R. Mouris, A’ctxi York.
INDEX FOR 1937
JANUARY 1
Malachi (Tart 5) .................... 3
Jehov ah’s Charge ........-........ 7
Th** 'Due Witnesses ................10
Religion and CliiLstianity .........10
Duty of the Priests ...............12
Prosperity Inder God’s Kingdom ......13
See Great Multitude Coming (Letter) ....15
Radio Service .......................10
“Jehovah of Hosts” .................. 2
Calendar and Year Hook .............. 2
Announcing Company Meetings .........-	2
JANUARY 15
Malachi (PartG) .....................19
Soul, Immortality and	Heaven ........29
Letters .............................31
Jehovah Will Sustain	All	Faithful . 31
In the Rattle to the End .. .	... 31
Instruments for Breaking	Ptejudice 32
Service Appointments ................32
Memorial ............................18
“Jehovah of Hosts” ..................18
protection ..........................18
Year Hook for 1937 ..................18
MAY 1
“Song of the Harlot’’ (Part 3) .........—.131
Seventy*Year Period .....-...........131
Evil Servant .....................-....Ill
Good Hopes for 1937-1938 ............ 142
Smvice Leaders and Regional Servants 142
Letters ..........................-...143
Radio Service ....................- 141
“Glittering Sword” ...................130
Ai utageddon ....................-....130
Company Servant ......................130
New Portable Phonograph ..............130
MAY 15
Understanding ........................147
Relationship ........................119
Anointed ............................150
Proper Course........................15 I
Appearance and Depot tment ........  15G
Lett vis re Evil Set \ ant ...........159
Service Appoinlmtmts .................IGO
Conventions ..........................140
“Glittering Sword” ...................140
A i maycddon ............................... 1 Id
New Portable Phonograph ...............140
SEPTEMBER 1
His “Work” and His “Act” (Parti) ..259
Anat both .............-.........200
Command .........................200
The Gieatest Resurrection ........269
Abominations .....................271
Jehovah’s Provision Timely	(Letter) ..272
“King of Kings” ..................258
Vacation .........................25s
Columbus Convention ..............27s
Impostors.........................258
Announcing Company Meetings ......258
SEPTEMBER 15
Hi? “Work” and Ills "Act” (Part 2) ..275
“His Strange Act” ..............276
Why Armageddon ..................278
Warning to the People ..........281
Money ..........................  2b4
Resurrection from Hell ..........2><J
Service Appointments .............2sS
“King of Kings” ..................—	274
Portable Phonograph ..............274
Notice of Annual Meeting .........274
Help Renew lour Subscription .....274
FEBRUARY 1
Jehovah’s Provisions	(Parti) ........35
Prophet 1c J h amas	...............36
I’lajvis and Parts	...............37
The Dinimi .................  .....38
Second Part ....-..................41
Judgment ............................44
Phonograph Campaign ...............  45
Radio Service .......................48
Memorial ............................31
“Jehovah of Hosts” ..................34
Lncoicibd and	Piutcction ..........  34
FEBRUARY 15
Jehovah’s Provisions (Patt 2) .......51
Pharaoh's Dreams ..................53
Seven .............................55
Organizing ........................59
Must <Jbev Him ....................57
Th<‘ Famine .	 58
The Church m Ephesus ................60
Letters ....	 63
Service Appointments ..............  64
.Memorial........	  50
Help Renew Your Subscription ........50
JUNE 1
Adversaries ...	 163
Identifying the Enemy ...............163
Visible Organisation ................M»5
Witchcraft ..........................16G
Vi-ible Enemies .....................167
“Evil Servant” .......................PH
Lettcis ...............................175
Coin entions ..........................]G2
“Glittering Sword” .	 162
New Portable Phonograph .............1<»2
Announcing Company Meetings ..........162
JUNE 15
Opposing God (Parti) .................179
Sanctity of Life	  ISO
Jehovah God’s Witness!*** .......... 182
Why the Devil Lives .................1*5
Vision ...............................188
Letters ..............................19t
S<»i\ice Appointments ................192
Conv entions .	   178
Tianscription ? aclnnes, Sound Cars ....17b
New I'oj table I fionogi aph	.	 178
Advertising Watch Tower Programs ....178
OCTOBER 1
Hi? “Work” and His “Act” (Pint 3) ..291
Jeremiah’s Defense .............295
To Heathendom ...............  3im>
Questions for Study .-..........302
Watchman......................  )<>•>
“King ot Kings” ..................290
Notice of Annual Meeting..........290
Portable Phonogiaph ..............290
Remitlances ......................290
Concerning Mail ................  290
OCTOBER 15
His “Work” and Ills “Act” (Part 4) .... 3o?
“To All the People” .......................311
Warning the Remnant .......................H I
Question-, lor Study ......................JIG
Inspectors and Execut'oneis .................3B»
The Nations in the Winepress ............... 31s
Service Appointments .......................”-’o
“V indicator” ................................;<a
Enemies .......................................3<i > Ea/cty and Model Hind// ....................  Goo
Consolation ........................................300
MARCH 1
Jehovah’s Pr visions	(Pint 3) ........... 67
Another Test .........................  72
'Fhe Cup ....	.	.	.......73
To the I'aithlui hi AH	the Haith .........77
Endorsement ..............................77
Letters ................................  7S
Radio Sei vice ...........................SO
“Faithful Wan lor”	...............G(l
I Hfuitiid ami Piotfctivn .......................66
Mvnioi Lil ...............................GG
Impostors .....	 66
JULY 1
Opposing God /art 2; ...............195
“Rescuing >* n” ..................196
J>ev it and His Agen's ...........198
Put pose of H s Coining .........2<’l
Redemption .....................  202
Inspection, Preparation,	War .......201
Letters . .	 207
“Mount Pera/im” ....................19 1
Portable Phonograph ................194
Summer Campa gn ....................194
Conv cations ....................   194
NOVEMBER 1
Ills “W’ork” and Ills "Act” (Part 5) ....323 Enlarged Pututc .	.	. ..327
Work ot tlie I aithful Potltayvd .......32	I
Parsing the Cup ........................J	hl
Tdolateis	.......................J.,2
Rebellious ...............................3.51
Inliers .................................'Jib
indicator” ............................322
Ent mu s ................................3.22
ami	Model	Etudy	......................322
Consolation	................................322
MARCH 15
JULY 15
Jehovah’s Provisions (Part 4) .........
Invitation ..........................
Responsibility ......................
Doom . .	........................
No Life in Hell .......................
Sen he Appointments ...................
“Faithful W.iitior” ...................
New’ Poi table Phonograph .............
Memorial .	..	.	.......
Advertising Watch Tower Pi ngrams .....
Announcing Company Meetings ...........
83 85
88 92 01 9G
82 82 82 82
82
Racketeers (Parti) ....................211
Greatest Racket .....................212
Subtle Scheir? ......................215
Piotenses ...........................216
Conventions .......................  220
Letters .............................223
Service Appointments ..............  224
“.Mount Perazim” ....................210
Poitabie Phonograph .................210
Summer Campaign .....................210
Help Renew Your Subscription ........210
NOVEMBER 15
Hh “W’ork” and IBs “Att” (Part 6) . .339
Catholic Action ..................3l<»
Begin with Religionists ...........311
Who Is Next9 ......................312
The Gathering Storm ...............3 17
Besieged ............................350
Servne Appointments ................352
“Vindicator” .......................358
Enemies ..................................................33s
Year Hook for 1938 .................33s
1938 Calendar ......................33S
APRIL 1
“Song of the Harlot”	(Part 1) ........ 99
“Ships” ...........................102
Dumfounded ........................105
Fear or Faith? ......................107
Time of Inspection ..............-...108
Letters .	 110
Radio Service .......................112
New Portable I honograph ............. 98
Advcithhig Watch Tower Programs .... OS
Transcription .Machines, Sound Cars .... 08
Electric Signs.......	......... OS
AUGUST 1 Racketeers (Part 2) .............   227
Numbers and Wealth ...............228
Purgatory .........................  228
Images .....................-........232
Wlrv Must Jesuv Die? ................  235
Phil idelphia .......................  237
Letters ...............................239
“Mount I’erazim” ......................226
Vacation .............................226
Summer Campaign  ...................226
Conventions ........................22G
APRIL 15
“Song of the Harlot” (Part 2) ..........115
Apparent Fulfillment .................12i
Historical ...........................121
Prophecy .............................124
Sardis ...............................12G
Lettons ...............................127
Service Appointments ..................128
“Glittering Sword” ....................114
Armageddon ...........................Ilf
New Portable I’lionograph ............114
Help Renew Your Subscription .........114
AUGUST 15
Companions ........................  243
Who May Serve ....................247
Noah............................   ”47
Joseph's Halt Brethren ......„.....”49
“Ten Men” ........................251
Sheep Made Manifest ..............251
Feast of Ingathering..............252
New Name and Morning Star Promised 253
Sound Equipm Experiences (Letter) 256
Service Appoint n^nts ..............”56
“King of Kings’ .	 242
384
DECEMBER 1
IBs “Work” and His “Act” (Part?) ....355
Effect of Armageddon .............360
No Escape .......................3«i2
Questions for Study .............3<‘l
Vengeance ......................... 3b5
Slaughter ..........................>67
“Vindicator” ...................... 354
Enemies ..........................  371
leer Hook for 1938 .................. 351
1938 Calendar .......................354
DECEMBER 15
The Kingdom Interests ....................371
Our Relationship ..................  372
The Temple ..........................373
Pos.-cshions ........................373
Duty ...............................375
Happiness ami Joy .................376
Priv iloge......................   377
Calamity .......................   377
Reprehensible .......................381
Louers ..............................3s3
Index for 1937 ..................... 384
President’s Address .........-........... 370