From Our Readers
Watching Television
I would like to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Stop Watching So Much TV?” (February 22, 1985) I am 14 years old, and I am a TV-aholic. I watch TV six hours a day. But after I read your article, I decided to cut down because it stopped me from doing my homework and my Bible reading. Thanks again.
M. L., Canada
Your Voice
My voice has always been troublesome. An operation carried out three years ago on my vocal cords produced but little results. I am always being told that deep breathing is what I need to do, but no one has ever explained to me how to go about it. The fine article “That Marvelous Gift​—Your Voice” (August 22, 1984) is an answer to my prayers. Now I understand how my respiratory system works and what I need to do in order to bring about some improvement in my voice.
M. L. S., Brazil
An Unborn Child
“I became pregnant and resigned myself to the fact that there was no alternative but to give birth in the normal way. I even regretted getting pregnant. Today I cried. I will take care of the child inside of me and be happy to give birth to it. Thank you very much.” These are the words of a young mother who approached me at the close of my lecture at the university. I had read the “Diary of an Unborn Child” (July 22, 1984) during the lecture. I was deeply moved by this serious article and give thanks for it. Since it came out I have used it in public places more times than I can count.
H. W., Japan
Religious Tolerance
I would like to thank you for your varied, well-chosen, and upbuilding articles. As a schoolteacher and mother, I particularly appreciate the “Young People Ask . . . ” series. Your scientific articles also provide interesting information that I do not hesitate to pass on to my pupils, for I am sure that your articles are objective and honest. The only thing that upsets me a little (although I understand your reasons) is the way you constantly tear down other religions. Although I am neither a Catholic nor a Buddhist, I feel ill at ease with such articles and avoid them.
F. S., France
We try to follow Jesus’ example. He stated that the way to life was through a narrow gate and urged his disciples to avoid the broad way to destruction. He exposed forms of religion that would be in vain, and this in no uncertain terms, as Matthew chapter 23 clearly illustrates. Moved by genuine interest in the welfare of all men, we try to point out religious practices that are contrary to Bible teaching and would hinder the one practicing such things from getting onto the way of everlasting life. (Matthew 7:13, 14; 15:8, 9; 16:6, 12) With the aid of the Bible, we try to follow the example of the apostle Paul, who wrote: “We are overturning reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God.”​—2 Corinthians 10:5.​—ED.

