Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Good News From Norway
MANY fine experiences are being had by the over 9,500 Kingdom proclaimers of the good news in Norway. Honesthearted ones recognize the Bible message proclaimed by Jehovah’s Witnesses as the truth and an answer to their prayers, as noted in the following experiences.
□ A young couple prayed to God to help them find a purpose in life. One week later Jehovah’s Witnesses called, and the wife invited them in. The husband had been warned against the Witnesses, so he went out of the house to wash his car. The wife was born in Lebanon and had a language problem, so the Witnesses showed her Jehovah’s name in her Arabic Bible. Two weeks later the Witnesses returned, and the husband once more went outside to wash his car. The Witnesses asked the wife if she thought her husband could be present the next time they came so that he could interpret, and she promised to ask him.
On the third visit, the car was so clean that the man did not feel he could use it as an excuse to leave, so he stayed and asked several questions to find out the difference between the Witnesses and the State church. The visit lasted three hours, and a brochure was placed with the couple. When the Witnesses left, the wife went to bed but the husband started reading the brochure, looking up all the scriptures. In the middle of the night he woke his wife up and said: “You have to read this.” She got up, and they read together until five in the morning. Realizing they had found the truth, they wept for joy and prayed to Jehovah, using his name. A regular Bible study was started with them, and they began attending meetings. He gave up his job with the military, and they resigned from the church and stopped smoking. They are now baptized and happily serving Jehovah along with their brothers and sisters throughout the world.
□ Two sisters in their house-to-house ministry in Norway met a woman who showed interest. She invited them back and asked if she could invite other women. On the next visit, four other women were present. One of them was very active in the church. She stated that ever since she was young, she had wanted to obey Jesus’ command to make disciples. This had led her to Africa with her husband on a foreign-aid project. All the women had many questions, and it was arranged that the sisters would visit them every two weeks. New neighbors were invited, and some continued to come while others stopped attending, but the active church member appreciated that she was learning the truth. One day, when the minister of her church stated that he would support war and that he believed the Trinity doctrine, she withdrew from the church. She started attending the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses and soon began sharing in the preaching work. Shortly thereafter she was baptized. Finally now, after 30 years, she can delight in truly obeying Jesus’ command to make disciples.​—Matthew 28:19.
Jehovah is blessing the brothers in Norway in their sacred service as well as those listening to the good news!

