Young People Who Serve God
DO YOU find it unusual that fine young people would give of their time, without any pay, to come to your door to talk about God? Does it seem surprising, in an age of growing unbelief, that children join with their parents in talking to others about marvelous Bible promises of a happy future?a
In most of the 60,000-and-more congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the earth, you will find many young people. They do not go to a weekly Sunday school or catechism class. Rather, these young people benefit from and even participate in congregation meetings. Little ones may offer simple comments. Preteens participate in the Theocratic Ministry School. Many teenagers spend school vacations helping neighbors to learn about God and his marvelous promises for the future.
There is really nothing new about such youthful activity. The Bible tells of faithful young men and women, as well as youths and small children, who set outstanding examples in serving God.
The Bible book of Psalms foretold a “company of young men,” as refreshing and numerous as “dewdrops,” in godly service. It also told of “young men” and “virgins” praising the name of God. (Psalm 110:3; 148:12, 13) Likely, some young people were among those present when God’s holy spirit was poured out on believers at Pentecost 33 C.E. On that day about 3,000 embraced the Word and were baptized. The apostle Peter said this startling event was a fulfillment of Joel’s prophecy: “Your sons and your daughters will prophesy and your young men will see visions and your old men will dream dreams.”​—Acts 2:4-8, 16, 17, 41.
Other Biblical examples of people who served Jehovah God in their youth include Samuel, righteous King David, the well-known Bible prophets Jeremiah and Daniel, as well as faithful Timothy. This issue contains three articles dealing with some of these Biblical examples. You will see from the articles why youths, as well as persons who are older, take serving God seriously and why they spend so much time helping their neighbors to do the same.
[Footnotes]
A 1985 Gallup survey found that only 12 percent of Americans born since 1946 said they had a “great deal of faith” at age 16.

