From Our Readers
Battered Husbands?  I find it disturbing that you ran the item “Battered Husbands” in “Watching the World.” (July 22, 1993) “Abuse,” which includes mere verbal threatening, is not the same as “battering,” which is criminal violence. As for a higher percentage of women than men admitting to abuse, studies show that women are more honest about admitting to such things than are male abusers, who tend to deny their actions.
K. K., United States
We appreciate these observations. The item in question reported on a study claiming that 40 percent of women admitted to abusing their spouses, as opposed to 26 percent of men who admitted to wife abuse. As our item acknowledged, however, the study used a broad definition of “abuse” and did not restrict it to physical battering. The title of our item was thus somewhat misleading. As to which form of battering is the most prevalent, our February 8, 1993, issue reported from “Parents” magazine: “More than 95 percent of reported cases of [severe] spouse abuse involve a man battering a woman.”​—ED.
Smell  I have always thought that if I had to lose one of my senses, I would choose my sense of smell to be the one to go. But after reading your article “Our Versatile Sense of Smell” (July 22, 1993), I had second thoughts. Your articles about our marvelous human body always help me to deepen my love for Jehovah.
D. H., Trinidad
Eyeglasses  Thank you for publishing the article “A Look at Eyeglasses.” (July 8, 1993) It contained good advice. Before reading the article, I had the bad habit of putting my glasses down on the lenses. They would get full of scratches. I tried contact lenses, but they made me dizzy. So having no choice but to wear glasses, I will put your advice into practice!
T. C., Italy
Kidney Stones  I am writing to thank you for your timely article “Kidney Stones​—Treating an Ancient Malady.” (August 22, 1993) Shortly after receiving my copy in the mail, I was found to have kidney stones. Thanks to your article, I was better able to understand my ailment and to prepare for my surgery.
V. T., United States
Racism  Just a note to say thank you for that wonderful series of articles “Will All Races Ever Be United?” (August 22, 1993) I think you handled this delicate subject in an excellent manner. It was tactfully put together, yet you gave no one, but absolutely no one, any excuse for selfishly indulging in the sick disease of racism.
D. G., United States
Former Priest  Thank you for printing the experience of Alinio de Santa Rita Lobo, “Why I Left the Priesthood for a Better Ministry.” (September 8, 1993) The story was one of discovery​—and by someone with many academic credits to his name. In our ministry as Jehovah’s Witnesses, we often build an understanding of the truth, piece by piece. But in this case someone did the reverse​—picking apart false teachings, piece by piece, separating truth from church-​based traditions. It was very faith strengthening.
B. C., United States
Emigrating  Many thanks for the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Move to a More Prosperous Country?” (April 22, 1993) I had always thought that in order to progress, it was necessary to move. I’ve now learned that it’s a very serious decision and that many factors have to be taken into account. That article also taught me to know my true needs and that the things we really need to be happy can be found in any country.
M. R., Dominican Republic

