The History of Ice Cream
ICE CREAM has come a long way since its early days. The ancient Romans invented sorbet. This semifrozen dessert, made from snow, fruit, and honey, could sometimes be found on the tables of the rich. Sorbet production was perfected over a long period of time, evidently reaching its zenith at the hands of Arab chefs during the Middle Ages. The words “sorbet” and “sherbet” are probably Arabic in origin.
It could be said that the classic sorbet, made mainly of water, is the predecessor of modern-​day ice cream. A turning point was reached with the use of milk, eggs, sugar, and flavoring, producing a creamy, tasty mixture. If you had lived in the 1600’s at the court of the French king Louis XIV, you would have witnessed ice cream’s high-​society debut. At that time there was some controversy among doctors and other scholars as to whether ice cream was good for the digestion or not.
How was it possible to make ice cream when there were no refrigerated ice-​cream machines? At first, two containers made of wood or pewter were used, one inside the other. The ice-​cream mixture was prepared in the smaller one, and the space between the two was filled with ice and salt. After the ingredients were combined, the mixture was left in the container, and the ice cream was ready. Where did the ice come from? Centuries ago people discovered that ice could be made and stored by gathering snow in the winter and packing it into pits that were covered with straw and with oak branches. In the 19th century, ice-​making machines were invented and used for mass production. At home the ice was preserved in iceboxes made of wood and cork.
This century has seen much refinement in ice-​cream-​making techniques. Refrigerators, ice-​cream machines, and other equipment now facilitate both industrial and domestic ice-​cream production, with improved standards of hygiene.
The Art of Ice-​Cream Making
A skilled ice-​cream maker has to know his trade, which means he must be a confectioner and a cook, sometimes an artist, and a bit of a chemist and bacteriologist too. What makes ice cream so thick, creamy, and delicious? Well, take industrially produced ice cream as an example. During production, fats and dense vegetable extracts are added to thicken the mixture. Blended in also are the right quantities of eggs, sugar, and, if necessary, natural coloring and flavoring, such as cocoa, coffee, and fruit. There is also peanut-​butter ice cream.
After the mixture has been well amalgamated at 160 degrees Fahrenheit [70°C.], it is brought to a temperature of 190 degrees Fahrenheit [90°C.] in an effort to kill any germs that may have been present. After it is cooled to 40 degrees Fahrenheit [4°C.] for a few hours, it sets. The second stage of the process is freezing. The temperature is reduced rapidly to 15-20 degrees Fahrenheit [-6°C. to -10°C.], while the mixture is slowly stirred. This allows air into it, one of the factors that contribute to ice cream’s typical, creamy texture.
Many centuries have passed since the Romans enjoyed their sorbets and since ice cream was introduced at the court of Louis XIV. But the next time you enjoy your favorite frozen dessert, whether a sorbet or an ice cream, thank those ancient Romans for coming up with such a refreshing idea!

