Announcements
● At congregation book studies late in May we will begin to use the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? Study question booklets for this book are now available and may be ordered by congregations for 5c each. Also, if some publishers do not have a personal copy of the book, you may need to order some of these.
● Literature offer for April: Watchtower subscription (with any 384- or 416-page book free to new subscribers) for $2.00; or subscriptions for both Watchtower and Awake! (with two 384- or 416-page books free to new subscribers) for $4.00. A half-year subscription with a pocket-size book may be offered for $1.25. If the subscription is not accepted, a pocket-size book along with two magazines may be offered for 45c. For each subscription to a semimonthly edition of the magazines, publishers will submit $1.85; pioneers, $1.00. (Regarding how congregations request credit on the larger books, see page 2 of Our Kingdom Service for January.)
● Offer for May: The entire month will be devoted to tract distribution. This tract complements the book Life Does Have a Purpose, and the book may be offered where interest is shown. The tract may also be placed with people when magazines are being offered.
● Congregations may now order a supply of the booklet Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood. We will not have any further special campaign with the booklet, but it would be good for publishers to have copies in their book bags in the event that they meet persons who raise questions on this subject.
● If the Secretary moves from the congregation, or must be replaced for some other reason, the body of elders should meet as soon as possible and determine which elder should be recommended to the Society to replace him. Please provide his full name and address, the name and address of the previous Secretary, and the congregation name and number. Please also provide this same information for the PERMANENT SHIPPING ADDRESS. If this is the same as the Secretary’s name and address, please so state. If the circuit overseer will visit within a couple of weeks, you could wait for this if you desire.

