Do You Treat Them as Individuals?
1 How long has it been since you tried a fresh approach to householders in your territory? Even if we use the same presentation at each door, we are giving a witness, and that is important. But some publishers have learned to adjust what they say to fit the individual householder. They observe that, as a result, more people listen, and they personally find greater enjoyment in their field service.
2 Recently we wrote to a number of pioneers and circuit overseers and asked how they give a witness on an “individual” basis. We’d like to share some of their replies with you.
HOW TO GET THE DISCUSSION STARTED
3 The way that they introduce themselves varies. One sister says: “Hello! My name is . . . and I’ve stopped for just a minute to share a very encouraging thought with you.” Another says: “I have a very interesting message to share with you concerning the Bible as a practical guide. It will take only five minutes.” They know that before they can do much adapting of their presentation, they need to catch the householder’s attention.
4 In some areas the brothers find that there is better response if, instead of mentioning God or the Bible in their opening statement, they briefly refer to some basic human desire or a problem that is on the minds of many persons. But a circuit overseer says that, when other approaches do not bring good results, he gets right to the point. Without any preliminary greeting and with his Bible in hand, he says: “I’m stopping by with this little gem from the Bible.” Then he reads Psalm 119:105.
5 Most of these experienced brothers and sisters agree that being warm and having a friendly smile is important.
BE OBSERVANT
6 Of course, each householder is different. But how can you find out what the interests of the individual are?
7 A circuit overseer suggests being observant: “Is the householder elderly? Are there toys in the yard? Are there bumper signs on the car indicating their personal crusades​—political, religious or environmental? Does a window sticker say they are a ‘block parent’? Are they poor in worldly assets, or rich? Are there burglary devices on the door, or big guard dogs to safeguard possessions? Any of these things can give indication of what will be of special interest at that door.” Don’t make just passing mention of these things; tie your discussion back to them a number of times, the brothers recommend.
HOW TO GET ACQUAINTED
8 Even more important than observing things is taking note of the reaction of the individual, says another Witness. At one door, as soon as she mentioned God, she observed that tears came to the eyes of the woman. Instead of going on, she asked, ‘Is there some problem?’ Indeed, there was. The woman’s son had been murdered two weeks ago, and she just could not understand why God had permitted it to happen. The publisher was able to help her​—a little bit that day, more later.
9 A pioneer who has been in full-time service since the early ‘40’s frequently learns quite a bit about the persons to whom she talks, and she makes good use of it to help them. How does she do it? She writes: “From door to door I very often use this: ‘Hello! I’m so glad to find you at home, because we are neighbors. [Here I tell them where I live in the city, as I think this is important, since most people in the city don’t know others and are very apprehensive.] We both are concerned with the well-being of our families, isn’t that so? How’s everybody at your house? [Here I learn of illnesses, problems, and if they’re alone.] Isn’t it too bad that more people don’t care what happens to others these days? [I often insert some recent specific local case.] What do you think the problem is?’” If they will talk, she listens.
USING THE BIBLE
10 But now we want to direct the discussion toward the Bible. How? Well, this pioneer says that, when the householder’s comments bring certain problems to light, she asks: “Do you think God expects us to look to him to straighten things out, or is it just up to us?” Even if the response is negative, it is not hard to say: “That’s how many people feel, but I read something here in the Bible that would interest you.” Now, which scripture are you going to use?
11 Well, which promises in the Bible are especially precious to you? Share one of these with the householder. If you have difficulty in remembering where they are, then write down a few choice ones. Don’t worry that perhaps you won’t know what to say. Trust in Jesus’ promise that the holy spirit ‘will bring back to your mind’ the things that you have learned from him. (John 14:26) Simply be willing to share these things. Do it in the kind and loving manner that was characteristic of Jesus, and those who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life” will listen.​—Acts 13:48.
12 You know that not everyone is going to listen. Not everyone listened to Jesus. So don’t feel that you have failed when the householder cuts you short. Instead, thank Jehovah for the privilege of speaking in his name. Now, try another home.
13 The brothers find that once the householder sees that the Bible really does deal with his own problems in life, he often is grateful for literature that will help him to learn more. During April we are going to be offering the Watchtower subscription, along with one of the 384- or 416-page books, for $2.00. And we know that during the year they will get a lot of excellent information that shows what the Bible says about situations of many kinds: marriage, raising children, coping with economic pressure and discouragement, the lasting solution to health problems, and much more. It can really help the individual to appreciate how the Bible can be a light in his own life.
14 Never forget, the householder is an individual. Get acquainted. Then use what you have learned to help him.
15 Did you get some helpful ideas from what these brothers and sisters in full-time service do? Then review them before you go out in the field service during the coming weeks. May it add much to your finding joy in aiding others as you serve Jehovah.

