Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING APRIL 2
 7 min: Song 65. Announcements.
20 min: What Is Our Attitude Toward Preaching? Audience participation.
When Jesus witnessed to others, what was the message he emphasized? (Luke 8:1) What message did he foretell would be proclaimed during conclusion of present system? (Matt. 24:14) God’s purpose has not changed; the message to be proclaimed has not changed. Ask audience: Why is it vital to the public that we keep on preaching the Kingdom message? Why is it important to our own spirituality that we not be indifferent about doing so? (Rev. 3:14-16) As shown in the Branch Letter (pars. 2, 3), who might really appreciate it if we invited them to go with us in field service? Not knowing the date when the “great tribulation” is to begin does not diminish the urgency. Do not forget Revelation 18:21, also Luke 21:34-36. Let’s all be zealous in our service to God.
 8 min: Our Topic and Literature Offer for April. Ask audience what the Topic for Conversation for April is
Discuss details as to literature offer. Ask why it is beneficial to offer Watchtower subscription, what there is in the magazines that can help people with their problems, how this can give them hope.
25 min: “Do You Treat Them as Individuals?” Not actually studying article with congregation, but using ideas from it, conduct the following:
Demonstration: Publisher making house-to-house calls. (As indicated below, involve the audience.) Publisher greets householder, emphasizes badness of world and presents a prepared talk. (Use current Topic for Conversation.) After a minute or so, interrupt to ask audience for their impression. What would make opening remarks more positive, upbuilding?
Demonstration starts again, publisher says something that is more positive (see par. 3 of article), but makes no effort to involve the householder. Stop publisher again; commend. Ask audience what we know about the householder’s interests. How could we find out? (Pars. 6-9)
Publisher tries again. Gets householder to comment; she mentions something about her own life. Before continuing, ask audience how they would fit discussion to householder. What would they show this person, to emphasize that the Bible is a practical guide?
Instead of demonstrating this aspect further, ask audience what they would point to in the Bible to show that it is a practical guide in other common situations. (For example: Crime, poverty, pollution.) List texts on a chalkboard. Add comments from paragraphs 11, 12.
Briefly show how subscription might be presented to the householder.
Encourage publishers to apply what has been discussed. Song 66 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 9
20 min: Song 111. Local announcements. Talk, with some audience participation, on article “What Do You Do with Your Magazines?” With first paragraph, encourage audience to relate what they actually have been doing with magazines, not necessarily what they should do; do not belittle. Then build appreciation for practical value of material in magazines. Encourage audience not only to read the magazines but realistically to consider suggestions given in paragraph 8. Introduce next part as example of how to apply these suggestions.
25 min: Lively discussion of article “Human Kindness Essential for Happiness,” in February 15, 1978, Watchtower. Have a book study group familiar with entire article and prepared to offer comments from audience, not just prepared for preassigned questions.
Pars. 1-3: What human kindness is, and how experience cited illustrates it. Would you have acted differently, or what would you have done?
“Applied in Everyday Living”: Ask wives: What “little things” do your husbands do that you particularly appreciate? Husbands: What kindnesses on the part of your family do you appreciate?
“In the Christian Congregation”: How should we view the ones who have special needs? How can we help?
Section on “Benefits.” Invite comments.
Ask: Have you enjoyed what we just did? Why not do it with family? Urge audience to read and use what is in the magazines.
15 min: Have audience name articles that they feel can fit particular persons on return visits, and explain why. (Could arrange one or two beforehand.) Arrange to have experiences related by individuals who are successful in using magazines in field service. Encourage all to read and make full use of magazines. Song 55 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 16
15 min: Song 96. How Important Is It to Follow Up?
A major part of our work is making disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Briefly interview some local publishers, ones who were aided because someone patiently called back on them.
Comment briefly on how many return visits congregation made last month. How many publishers have shared in making return visits during four out of the past six months? (Obtain figures from congregation records.) Is there need to give greater attention to this activity?
25 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Making Return Visits.” Use material in paragraphs 1, 2 for brief introduction.
Instead of simply studying paragraphs 3, 4, ask congregation: “How do you decide whether to make a return visit on a person? When might it be beneficial to call back on a person even if he did not accept literature? Has anyone actually done that? When do you set aside time in your schedule for making return visits? How much of your service time do you use in making return visits and conducting Bible studies?”
Instead of simply asking questions on paragraphs 5-7, demonstrate conclusion of a house-to-house call, showing how to apply one of the suggestions. Then ask the audience for further ideas as to (1) how to lay the groundwork for return visits, (2) what notes to make on their house-to-house record, (3) what preparation they make, and so forth.
Demonstrate paragraph 8. Ask audience for observations.
Raise problem: What if householder is too busy? Demonstrate suggestion in paragraph 9. Then ask audience what they recommend for any who are having difficulty in finding people at home when they call back.
Make this a spontaneous discussion, drawing on experiences of congregation. Use material in article as basis for the demonstrations and for your own additional comments.
20 min: Aid Persons with Whom We Already Have Some Contact.
Comment on local attendance at recent Memorial. Are they continuing to show interest in Jehovah’s provision for life? Can we help them? Invite the audience to comment on the following:
Did a member of your family come, one who does not usually attend meetings? What can be done further to encourage such ones? (Why not invite one of the elders to call now, to get better acquainted, perhaps to offer a study, if that seems appropriate?)
How can we aid persons who attended, with whom studies are regularly conducted, but who have not continued to come to meetings? (Might arrange for the book study conductor to visit them, to commend them for progress, to encourage them to continue associating with the congregation.)
Were there some in attendance who used to be regularly associated, who were baptized, but who are not active now? How could we help them? (Might they need a study again to build them up spiritually? Offer the help.)
Let’s plan this week to have some share in making return visits. Song 81 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 23
15 min: Song 61. Announcements, including local field service arrangements. Discussion with audience about importance of being at the convention this year, using some points from first section of assembly insert. Ask audience for suggestions on how to overcome obstacles to one’s attending. (For example: Secular obligations, travel expenses, ill health, “I’ll just go for the weekend.”)
30 min: Elder discusses with audience insert section under “Praising Jehovah with Good Conduct.” Read designated scriptures and any paragraphs that elders feel may apply locally. How should our conduct reflect on Jehovah’s people? (1 Pet. 2:12) How has the type of conduct spoken of in Ephesians 5:3, 4, 18 brought reproach on us in some cases? (¶4) At assemblies what can happen when children are allowed to be on their own? (Prov. 29:15; ¶5) How can we avoid leaving a poor impression with innkeepers and homeowners? (¶6, 7) What responsibility do we all have in order to fulfill the principle of Proverbs 27:11? (¶8) How can we take the lead in “showing honor to one another” in the matter of saving seats? (Rom. 12:10; ¶9, 10) Apply Ecclesiastes 5:1 to our paying attention. (¶11)
15 min: Briefly consider points in insert from “Volunteer Service” to end. Have brothers from audience prepared to ask questions of one handling part: “What happened to the Volunteer Service forms?” (Briefly explain new arrangement and why.) “Will there be a cafeteria?” “Will we use those tear-off tickets to pay for food again?” “I always enjoy the orchestras. Will we have them again this year?” Summarize remaining headings with a sentence or two each, especially noting unusual Friday field service arrangement. Song 91 and prayer.

