“Victorious Faith” International Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
DOES that theme whet your spiritual appetite? Does it also stir up fond memories for many of you who have been privileged to attend previous international conventions? How faith-strengthening it will be to join with our brothers from other lands at one of the 24 large conventions arranged for the continental United States and Canada. You will be truly happy that you have put forth the effort to be there all five days for the bountiful Scriptural instruction and guidance in serving Jehovah faithfully in the days ahead.
Past international conventions have often had outstanding special features, and this one will be no exception! There will be no morning session on Friday. Instead, the morning will be devoted to a unique field service arrangement throughout the convention city. All are urged to share in this.
So, leave no stone unturned in your efforts personally to attend the 1978 “Victorious Faith” International Convention. You will reap rich rewards for doing so. The following information is being provided to assist you to benefit fully from the convention.
PRAISING JEHOVAH WITH GOOD CONDUCT: As in the case of those with opposing mates, the Bible shows that even opposers can be won to the truth without a word. How? By our good conduct of which they are eyewitnesses. (1 Pet. 2:12; 3:1, 2) Many favorable reports result from the good conduct of Jehovah’s people at conventions. Some have been so impressed by what takes place that they have embraced the truth. (1 Cor. 14:23-25) What an impelling reason for us to watch carefully what we say and do!​—Phil. 2:1-4; John 13:35.
2 One city mayor stated: “Yours was a most orderly session, and the delegates certainly brought a great deal of credit to themselves while they were here.” Good manners and actions motivated by love also go a long way in enhancing the enjoyment of the convention for everyone in attendance. And, above all, such faithful conduct honors our loving heavenly Father, Jehovah, bringing his smile of approval upon us.​—Prov. 27:11; Heb. 13:16.
3 By far the majority of Jehovah’s Witnesses at such large conventions have proved themselves to be fine Christians. Yet, sadly, in recent years a few disorderly ones have cast a poor reflection on the rest of Jehovah’s people. Even though only a few engage in these things, the good name of all of God’s people and of Jehovah himself is involved. Some of the matters that will now be mentioned may seem shocking to you, but we thought you would want to be aware of these problems so that, if possible, we all can help to avoid them in the future.
4 A few of our brothers have had a tendency to become less careful in conduct when away from their home congregation. Often their lack of Christian restraint occurs away from the convention site, while associating after assembly sessions at motels and dormitories, eating establishments and other places. Some have even arranged to rent clubrooms and bands or go to discotheques in the evening. In some instances, a lack of self-control while engaging in worldly dancing has resulted in great reproach, even leading to immorality. Parties in motel and dormitory rooms have, on occasion, become boisterous and unruly to the extent that excessive drinking occurs and numerous liquor bottles and debris are left for maids to wonder about and clean up the next day. (Eph. 5:3, 4, 18) In one instance a brother called the management about a loud, boisterous, late party going on in the room next door. What would you have done when the management said, “They are Jehovah’s Witnesses”?
5 Reports also show that parents, at times, have allowed their children to stay alone at motor inns while they have gone out for periods of time; also, to use swimming pools unattended, even after closing time for the motel pool. Some parents have not intervened when their children ran, yelling and screaming throughout the motel, when they used elevators for play, sometimes resulting in serious damage, or when they set off fire alarms or threw rocks into pools and at cars in parking lots. Such conduct has been a real irritation to some worldly motel guests and managements, as well as our brothers staying there. Is it wise or Scriptural to leave children, dedicated or not, on the loose either at the stadium or at our lodging places? Loving, responsible parents will keep their children with them and be companions to them, at all times knowing where they are and what they are doing. The resulting good conduct of our children can bring much praise to Jehovah. (Deut. 6:6-8, 25; 31:12; Prov. 29:15) One brother commented: “When we had evening sessions, publishers were too tired to party and the children usually went right to bed.” Now there is opportunity to use the evenings to review the program with our families and to associate with some of our brothers in quiet, orderly Christian fellowship. Those who use the time in this way are spiritually upbuilt and have no regrets.​—Ps. 133:1; Eph. 5:15-19; Phil. 4:8, 9.
6 Sadly, reports show that there have been some cases of individuals who have been less than honest in obtaining rooms. As one innkeeper said, “Two people register, five occupy the room, plug in hot plates, and call the office for more towels.” Innkeepers in at least six cities have reported that persons attending our assemblies have done this. Because of these bad examples, a few motel managers have even said that they do not want Jehovah’s Witnesses back and would rather have anyone else stay there. What a sad contrast to the favorable expressions usually heard.
7 We appreciate it very much when our brothers and others hospitably open their homes to visiting delegates for our conventions. Those of us who request such accommodations should remember that we are their guests and should act accordingly, not taking undue advantage of such Christian hospitality. Rooms listed in private homes do not include the use of the kitchen, or provision for animals. Also, those who request accommodations in private homes should never bring a disfellowshiped person with them. The convention will not assign any disfellowshiped person to a private home. Keep in mind, too, that such rooms listed at reasonable cost or free of charge are available only as an aid to attend the convention, and not to go to some vacation spot or tourist attraction in the area. If a person is going for such activities, it is only fair to others that he stay in a motel or hotel. Rooms listed in private homes will be available only during the convention and not for periods before or afterward for personal activities.
8 Remember, Jehovah’s Witnesses are not loved by the world. (John 15:18, 19) Our actions are therefore given extra scrutiny. Worldly people would like to have an excuse for pointing an accusing finger, but we want to work hard to turn their scrutiny to praise for Jehovah by keeping our conduct far above the standards of the world. (Prov. 27:11) Since any who travel or stay with us while attending a convention are identified by worldly people as Jehovah’s Witnesses, what can be done to help these individuals to conduct themselves properly? Every Christian, especially elders, parents and mates, should feel personally responsible to aid disorderly ones among us, dedicated or not, to change their conduct while with us by kindly helping them to act properly. If elders or parents are not present and cannot be readily found, then any Christian present could calmly and kindly point out that our reputation and Jehovah’s name are involved. By assisting everyone with us to appreciate this, no doubt we will regain our fine reputation in those areas where it has been damaged.​—2 Cor. 1:12; 6:3, 4; 1 Tim. 3:7.
9 A good opportunity to bring praise to Jehovah is right at the convention itself, by taking the lead in “showing honor to one another,” treating others as we would like to be treated ourselves. (Rom. 12:10; 13:8-10; Matt. 7:12) Such loving consideration of others can outstandingly be shown in the matter of saving seats. It has been observed that magazines or other items often have been placed on blocks of seats, sometimes extremely early in the morning. Some of these seats were never occupied during entire sessions, forcing others to stand. At other times seats are not available because some use them for storage purposes. Would it not be the Christian way to keep our things under our own seat, on our lap, or in the checkroom? Instead of thoughtless actions, why not rather bring honor to Jehovah by lovingly offering seats to elderly or infirm persons who need them?​—1 Cor. 13:4-7.
10 This year, in view of the above, convention attendants are being instructed to allow persons without seats to occupy any empty ones that are needlessly being saved. This will be 10 minutes before a session begins. Of course, a balanced view will help us to realize that at times it is necessary to save a seat or two for good reasons​—family members who are volunteer workers, interested persons who will arrive soon, or a trip to the washroom. But if you need to meet someone, why not arrange ahead of time to meet at a certain time and place before or after the sessions so that you will not have to save seats for each other?
11 When we realize that the stadium facility actually becomes a large Kingdom Hall for us, it should move us to show deep respect for Jehovah by being in our seats as family groups when each session begins and ends so that we can hear the entire program, including the prayers. Just as we, whether young or old, would not inconsiderately roam in the corridors at the Kingdom Hall or wander outside, talk to others, or leave in a mass exodus ahead of everyone else, we should not do so at a larger place of worship either. In this way we show respect for Jehovah’s spiritual table.​—1 Sam. 15:22, 23; Eccl. 5:1.
VOLUNTEER SERVICE: To share in serving your brothers at an assembly, it will no longer be required that each individual turn in an Application for Volunteer Service. In fact, none of these forms will be sent out to the congregations this year. Already the convention committees for each city are functioning and the various department heads have been selected. All these brothers, as well as individuals they have selected to work with them in their departments, have been busy asking various brothers in the congregations and circuit assembly organizations to share in the work with them. Of course, some larger departments such as Attendant, Food Service, Cleaning, Auditing, and so forth, will still need many more volunteers. This is where you will be able to contribute to the success of the convention when the convention organization gets in touch with your congregation. They will write to your congregation’s Convention Coordinator, who is coordinating other convention matters for the congregation as well. He will be given a form for each department still needing volunteers, and will announce the need. Your name can then be listed on the form for the department you would like to work in for the entire convention. After processing these lists, the Volunteer Service Department in the convention city will send a form to the congregation’s Convention Coordinator showing where and when those working in each department should report.
2 Of course, for those who may be able to volunteer for only one time, such as when your congregation is asked to share briefly in cleaning a small section of the stadium after the afternoon sessions, your help will still be needed. The convention organizations this year, as in the past, will still be selecting congregations to share in this one-time work in several departments. So, you will be able to volunteer for this with your family and others in your congregation, even though you are unable to work all five days. In order to arrange for this, the convention organization in your convention city will advise your congregation of the need and have your elders select a capable captain for the group who will work along with you in caring for the assignment. The Convention Coordinator will receive the necessary correspondence in plenty of time to work out the details.
3 It is hoped that this new arrangement will make it easier for you to volunteer and to find out well ahead of time what you will be doing and where to report for work. Of course, even if you are not able to volunteer ahead of time, if you are able to help, please just go to the Volunteer Service desk at the convention and they will let you know where help is needed and guide you to that department. Truly, there is much pleasure in lovingly serving your Christian brothers as you volunteer individually or as family groups, with even younger ones working along with their parents or older members of the family.​—Acts 20:35; Ps. 110:3.
FOOD SERVICE: In view of the changing lifestyles and eating habits in this country over the past few years, as well as the change to daytime sessions at conventions, much thought has been given to just what is necessary in the way of physical food in order to care for the needs of those in attendance. Especially has consideration been given to what might be done for the thousands of faithful, hardworking volunteers who, over the years, have devoted their time preparing necessary physical food so that the rest in attendance could enjoy the bountiful spiritual food. In the past such dear ones have often had to work so many hours that they themselves have heard very little or none of the program.
2 After considering all these factors, the Society has decided to simplify the entire food service operation so that nearly everyone, including those working in the Food Service Department, will be able to hear and benefit from the spiritual program. Hence, instead of serving a cafeteria meal at any convention in this country, there will be a fine tasty menu served out of conveniently located refreshment stands. Hot items such as chicken, fish, hamburgers, hot dogs and coffee, and cold items, including large sandwiches, fruit bags, Danish pastry, potato chips, chocolate and vanilla pudding, orange juice, soft drinks, milk, and so forth, will be available. There will be plenty to eat and it can be easily obtained throughout the stadium so that, if you wish, one or two members of the family can obtain all the hot or cold food needed and bring it back in a bag. This type of menu prepared with modern mobile kitchen equipment owned by the Society will make it possible for the vast majority of food service volunteers to hear the spiritual program as well as serve the physical needs of their brothers.
CONVENTION TICKETS: For a number of years now at our conventions, $1.00 tickets in 10c segments have been successfully used for purchasing food at the conventions. In many ways, including safety of funds, sanitary benefits when handling food, and speed, since no change-making is required, this system has proved much more acceptable than using money. In order to use these tickets to the best advantage, it would be appreciated if, to the extent possible, you would comply with the request to order a supply of tickets ahead of time for the first two or three days of the convention. This will help to eliminate crowds waiting in long lines at the cashiers on the first day. Then you can go later at your leisure to obtain more tickets as needed.
2 Since each ticket is printed to show it is worth 10c, all the menus at the conventions will show how many tickets are required to purchase each item, rather than showing a price. This should speed things up considerably and increase accuracy. Your cooperation in using the tickets will be appreciated and contribute to the smooth operation of the convention feeding program.
MUSIC: Special music for the interludes and for audience singing is being prepared by the Society with the aid of many brothers throughout the country who are talented musicians. This means that there will be no live orchestras this year, but the specially prepared music will be presented by tape to give real unity to this important feature of the program at all the international conventions.
May Jehovah truly bless your efforts to finalize your arrangements to be in attendance at the “Victorious Faith” International Convention along with your brothers.​—Heb. 10:24, 25; Rom. 1:11, 12.
[Box on page 6]
International Convention Reminders
ROOMING: Any desiring rooms who have not as yet sent in a Room Request form should fill one out neatly and accurately and turn it in to the congregation Secretary or the Convention Coordinator. He will carefully check it over, sign and mail it to the rooming address noted on the back of the form for the convention city where you will attend. If you receive a rooming assignment and later have to change your plans, please immediately advise (1) the landlord and (2) the convention Rooming Department so the room may be reassigned.
  There will be no trailer camps at the U.S. conventions, but the Rooming Department for each convention will gladly furnish available information on any commercial facilities.
FIELD SERVICE: Why not begin planning now to have a joyful share in the outstanding special field service morning that is being arranged for Friday at each convention city? You will be blessed by engaging in this activity, distributing literature, some of which is being printed especially for this occasion. A very simple presentation will be used, so even young ones and new publishers will find it easy and enjoyable. More information on this stimulating activity will be published in Our Kingdom Service for May.
BAPTISM: At most locations, the immersion will be on Saturday. Those who wish to symbolize their dedication by water baptism should review the 80 questions and also chapter six in the Organization book with the elders prior to the convention. Bathing suits and towels should be brought by each one who plans to be baptized.
PROGRAM TIMES: Plan to enjoy the entire program, which will begin Wednesday and Thursday mornings by 10:00 and will conclude at approximately 6:00 p.m. Of course, on Friday the entire morning will be set aside for the special field service campaign mentioned earlier. Thus, the actual program at the stadium will begin on Friday afternoon at 2:00. On Saturday and Sunday the program will begin by 9:15 a.m., and it will conclude at 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. We encourage you to arrange your schedule so you do not have to leave the convention prior to the conclusion at 4:30 p.m. on Sunday.
PIONEER IDENTIFICATION: This year, instead of sending a special Convention Pioneer Identification card to each regular pioneer, as in the past, we are asking all regular pioneers to bring to the convention their current Pioneer Identification and Assignment card that was issued when they were appointed as regular pioneers. You may present this card to the proper cashier on the first day of the convention and receive $15.00 worth of convention tickets for obtaining food. The cashier will simply date stamp the back of your Pioneer Identification and Assignment card to show that you received the tickets. If a free copy of any literature release item is available to pioneers, you may go to the bookroom and someone there will simply write the number of that release in ink on the back of your card to show that you have received your free copy. Treat the card as carefully as cash. It cannot be replaced at the convention. All those in special full-time service (traveling, Bethel and special pioneers) will continue to receive the Convention Pioneer Identification card as in the past.
LAPEL CARDS: No doubt all will enjoy wearing the cards as a means to advertise the convention and to get acquainted with other brothers and sisters in attendance. Congregation Secretaries, please have the international convention lapel cards and holders ordered on the Literature Order Blank starting April 15. The lapel cards are 1c each and the celluloid holders are 5c each.
A WORD OF CAUTION: Regardless of the convention you attend you should lock your car at ALL times and NEVER leave anything showing in a parked car. Keep your belongings locked inside the trunk if possible. Also, beware of pickpockets. They often mingle in large crowds. For the same reason, do not leave anything of value unattended on seats at the convention.

