
You Can Trust the Creator!









“All men were made by the same Great Spirit.”​—CHIEF JOSEPH




BY 1879, Chief Joseph of the Nez Percé people in North America was so disappointed with government authorities that he said: “I am tired of talk that comes to nothing. It makes my heart sick when I remember all the good words and all the broken promises.”
Many of the Native people in North America feel the need for help from someone trustworthy. For example, Lone Man of the Teton Sioux said: “I have seen that in any great undertaking it is not enough for a man to depend simply upon himself.”
Is there anyone dependable who can bring about justice for all people? Yes! We can trust the Creator.



THE ONE WHO KEEPS HIS WORD

The Creator has spoken to mankind, and his words are written in a book. (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) In this book, the Bible, he has promised to make all things new. (2 Peter 3:13) The One above never forgets his promises. He said about his people: “Can a wife forget her suckling so that she should not pity the son of her belly? Even these women can forget, yet I myself shall not forget you.” (Isaiah 49:15) Chief Joseph said: “We were taught to believe that the Great Spirit sees and hears everything, and that he never forgets.”
The great Spirit has given himself a name that inspires confidence. He is “Jehovah, the Creator of the extremities of the earth.” (Isaiah 40:28) The name Jehovah means “He Causes to Become.” He has that name because he becomes whatever is necessary to fulfill his promises. What qualities of Jehovah make him trustworthy?



WHY TRUST THE CREATOR?

Love: The land is an expression of the Creator’s love for mankind. Geronimo, an Apache chief, commented: “I was warmed by the sun, rocked by the winds and sheltered by the trees as other Indian babes. . . . I can go everywhere with a good feeling.” The Creator will keep his promises because he loves the people of every tribe and nation. The Bible says: “Jehovah is good; his loving-kindness is to time indefinite, and his faithfulness to generation after generation.”​—Psalm 100:5.





“How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made.”​—PSALM 104:24




Wisdom: Many human leaders want to help those in need, but they lack the wisdom to do so. In contrast, Jehovah wisely provides for every living thing. (Psalm 145:16) Standing Bear, a chief of the Dakotas, said: “The hand that fashioned the continent also fashioned the man for his surroundings.” The Bible says: “How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of your productions.” (Psalm 104:24) The Creator’s wisdom assures us that he can do what he promises.
Justice: Chief Joseph said: “All men were made by the same Great Spirit.” Surely, then, the great Spirit will see that justice is done for all peoples. Of him, the Bible says: “All his ways are justice.” (Deuteronomy 32:4) In addition, the Creator “is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) The Creator’s justice gives us confidence that he will keep his word.
Power: Some human leaders have good intentions but lack sufficient power to help people. The Creator has no such limitation. Of the stars, he says: “Raise your eyes high up and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who is bringing forth the army of them even by number, all of whom he calls even by name. Due to the abundance of dynamic energy, he also being vigorous in power, not one of them is missing.” (Isaiah 40:25, 26) The Creator’s power guarantees that he can do what he says.
The Creator’s qualities inspire confidence in his promises. Ancient King Solomon said: “There has not failed one word of all his good promise that he has promised.”​—1 Kings 8:56.



WHAT HAS THE CREATOR PROMISED?

Jehovah, the Creator, has provided his Son, Jesus, as Ruler to bring about justice for all mankind. Jehovah says: “Look! My servant, on whom I keep fast hold! My chosen one, whom my soul has approved! I have put my spirit in him. Justice to the nations is what he will bring forth.” (Isaiah 42:1) Jehovah’s appointed King will provide help even for oppressed people. We read concerning Jesus: “Let him save the sons of the poor one, and let him crush the defrauder. . . . He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper.”​—Psalm 72:4, 12.
The Creator originally designed the earth to be a paradise of peace. Soon he will bring his purpose to completion. The Bible says: “He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” Can you trust the Creator’s promise? He states: “These words are faithful and true.”​—Revelation 21:4, 5.








TRUST THE CREATOR’S WISDOM






Jehovah says: “If only you would actually pay attention to my commandments! Then your peace would become just like a river, and your righteousness like the waves of the sea.” (Isaiah 48:18) From the Creator, you can learn the best way of life. If you study the Bible, you will learn about the real purpose of life, how to get along with others, and how to find happiness.​—Micah 6:8; Luke 6:27-31; 11:28.
The Creator tells the truth about questions that no one else can answer, such as: Why do good people sometimes suffer? What happens when we die? And will the dead live again?
The Creator has always proved himself trustworthy. Will you respond to his love by learning more about him? Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to show you what the Bible really teaches. “Trust in Jehovah and do good . . . Take exquisite delight in Jehovah, and he will give you the requests of your heart.”​—Psalm 37:3, 4.








