From Our Readers
Raising Children  As an elementary-school teacher, I greatly appreciated the articles on “Your Children​—Doing What’s Best for Them.” (September 22, 1992) One of the greatest challenges teachers face today is dealing with children whose parents are simply too busy to take a real interest in them. At a recent annual Parents’ Night at our school, I shared some of this issue’s observations. The parents found our discussion insightful and thought provoking.
M. P., United States
You scored a bull’s-eye. They were simply the best articles I have ever read. Not only did you show bad examples but you also pointed out remedies.
M. R., Germany
The articles were well-written, but I must take exception to your explicit reference to child abuse. It shocked me.
F. M., Canada
It is indeed shocking to read of the abuses perpetrated by adults on innocent, defenseless children. And while we appreciate that some readers may find reading about such matters distasteful, parents need to be informed about the very real dangers children face today. (Compare 2 Corinthians 2:11.) We therefore felt an obligation to be specific in such matters, doing so in as tasteful a manner as possible.​—ED.
Proms  I found the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Go to the Prom?” (March 8, 1993) to be informative and helpful. However, were you encouraging Christians to throw large, formal gatherings?
N. P., United States
The article was not encouraging the organizing of large-scale social events. We merely acknowledged that a graduation from secondary school is a significant event. Some Christian youths and their parents may therefore choose to share the joy of this occasion with others. Encouragement was given to keep any social activities in this connection ‘modest, of reasonable size, and well organized.’ See “The Watchtower” of August 15, 1992.​—ED.
Olive Oil  Thank you for the fine article “Versatile Olive Oil” in the October 8, 1992, issue. I work in a hospital as a dietician, and I counsel people on low-fat, low-cholesterol diets. This article was very accurate and useful in my teaching.
D. S., United States
Profanity  My daughter, who is almost 15 years of age, came home from school and told me that she faced a problem because most of the children in her school regularly use bad language. She wanted to know what was actually wrong with using swearwords in everyday speech. We tried to explain but felt we did not adequately do so. That evening when I picked up the December 8, 1992, issue of Awake! I was stunned to see the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint​—Why Profanity Is Not for Christians.” I took it to my daughter’s bedroom immediately and read it with her. She now feels confident in answering someone who asks why she does not swear.
P. P., England
New World  The series “A New World That Satisfies All” (October 22, 1992) was one of the best in recent years on this subject. The scriptures cited and the beautiful illustrations aroused in me a feeling of deep appreciation. I believe it will touch the hearts of many readers.
I. Z., Italy

