From Our Readers
The World Since 1914
I must highly commend you for your articles “The World Since 1914.” (March 8 through June 22, 1987) These have enabled me to understand why the nations were maiming, killing, persecuting, and bringing woes upon themselves. The actual brain behind the scene​—Satan the Devil.
O. P. I., Nigeria
I have been reading with keen interest your series of articles about the world since 1914. For the first time in my life, I am given a bird’s-eye view of the history of our generation in just a few issues.
E. E., Côte d’Ivoire
Luther’s House in Shambles?
I am appalled! (“Why Is Luther’s House in Shambles?” September 8, 1987) I have close ties with my relatives still living in Germany. I am 40 years old and Lutheran. My grandfather was a Lutheran minister and both of my sisters are married to Lutheran ministers. What appalls me about your articles is that you seek to discredit my faith and the faith of my forefathers. How dare you! Most of the problems you mention are the problems of nearly any congregation on the face of the earth. I have had numerous theological discussions with my brothers-in-law, Bible class teachers​—all Lutherans. Never have I encountered anyone who is wishy-washy or hodgepodge or any of the other defaming adjectives you chose to use.
R. D. B., United States
It was stated at the beginning of the series that the condition described, while dealing with the Lutheran Church in Germany, was representative of the true state of Protestantism in most parts of the world. The description of Protestant theology as being “hodgepodge” and “this as well as that” was quoted from outside sources and is generally acknowledged by many Protestant spokesmen in Europe. Our purpose in publishing the material was a sincere effort to help readers of all faiths to analyze their beliefs in the light of Bible truth. Jesus said: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) Even the well-known German Lutheran clergyman Dietrich Bonhoeffer emphasized in his sermons: “In religion only one thing is of essential importance, that it be true.” “It [the church] must strive for purity of teaching.” ‘On Judgment Day, God will certainly ask us: “Have you listened to my Word and kept it?”’​—ED.
Thank you so much for your articles “Why Is Luther’s House in Shambles?” They expressed my sentiments exactly. You must keep in mind that my father was a Lutheran minister until he was pensioned two years ago, my mother was a teacher of religious education, and until 18 I was surrounded by the activities of a Lutheran parsonage. But even when I was only 11 or 12, unanswered questions, hypocrisy, and a certain spirit of hopelessness caused me to feel strangely empty. After a wearisome search for the truth, I finally found what I longed for back there as a child, people who really love God and obey his laws, Jehovah’s Witnesses.
D. B., Federal Republic of Germany

