Jehovah’s Witnesses Around the World​—India
INDIA! This vast subcontinent is home to 1 of every 6 humans on this planet. All told, over 1,000 languages and dialects are spoken in this varied land. The people are predominantly Hindu, 83 percent of them, while 11 percent are Muslim, with Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, and nominal Christians making up the remainder.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have been enjoying outstanding success in India in recent years. They have found sheeplike people who are willing to take a firm stand on the side of Jehovah’s Kingdom, despite all manner of pressures and opposition.
For example, a girl in an orthodox Hindu family had been crippled by polio since childhood. The suffering she underwent made her think about God and the purpose of life. She looked into many religions for an answer but found no solace. As a result, she lost her faith in religion, though not in God.
About this time two Witnesses met this girl in their house-to-house ministry. “I was moved to tears when I heard them read Revelation 21:4,” she recalls. She accepted many of the Watch Tower Society’s publications and agreed to a home Bible study despite her mother’s opposition. The girl made many changes in her life, boldly faced opposition from relatives, and became a baptized Witness. She says: “I have come a long way, and it has been a very difficult way. But Jehovah God has always been with me and given me great peace and joy.”
Firm for Pure Worship in School
A young sister was asked by her teacher to go to a Catholic church along with the rest of the class. The sister politely refused, saying that she was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and would not worship anyone or anything other than Jehovah. The teacher said that when all others went to the church, she should go also. But the sister stood firm and said that since the ones going to the church would not be praying to Jehovah, she could not see how she could be in attendance there.
Because of the girl’s firmness, her teacher wanted to know more. So the following day the sister gave her a Watchtower article on the worship of Jehovah. Impressed by what she had read, the teacher then exempted her from all religious activities at school. The sister was able to place ten magazines with her and the other teachers.
Obedience to God’s Law on Blood Rewarded
Recently a viral fever broke out in epidemic form in some parts of the state of Kerala. This disease severely damages the kidneys and leads to the need for dialysis. Blood transfusions are commonly administered. In one city 14 people were admitted to the hospital with this disease. One of these patients was a Witness, an elder in the local congregation. He was told that blood transfusion was the only available treatment. The elder explained his Scriptural beliefs and firmly refused blood. (Acts 15:28, 29) After much argument the doctors said that he would die because of his rejection of a blood transfusion.
The other 13 patients received blood. Tragically, all of them died within a few days. The brother was the only survivor! Hospital authorities were very surprised. The medical staff was greatly impressed by the regular visits made by members of the congregation. After he was discharged from the hospital, the brother went to thank the doctors, but they said: “Why do you thank us? Thank your God, Jehovah. He is the One who saved you. Please pray for us also to your God, Jehovah.”
[Box on page 24]
COUNTRY PROFILE
1994 Service Year
PEAK NUMBER WITNESSING: 14,271
RATIO: 1 Witness to 65,266
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE: 38,192
AVERAGE PIONEER PUBLISHERS: 1,780
AVERAGE BIBLE STUDIES: 12,453
NUMBER BAPTIZED: 1,312
NUMBER OF CONGREGATIONS: 410
BRANCH OFFICE: LONAVLA
[Picture on page 25]
Branch office, Lonavla
[Picture on page 25]
Witnessing in connection with the “Everlasting Good News” convention in 1963
[Picture on page 25]
Preaching to a vendor outside the Red Fort in Delhi

