VOL. XV. OCTOBER 1, 1894. NO. 19. 

BISHOP FOSTER'S NEW GOSPEL. 



ON Sunday, September 23rd, Bishop Foster 

preached before the Pittsburg Annual Conference 

of the M.E. Church, over whose sessions 

he has presided. We give extracts from 

his discourse as reported by two of Pittsburg's 

daily papers, as follows:— 

"If I could concede for a moment that the 
world as I know it, and I know it from rim to 
rim, having traveled in all its lands, having 
seen its dissolute, despicable millions, having 
seen it in shame and filth, and if I were 
compelled to think that my God, whom I worship, 



would by any possible method of condemnation 
send down to hades 1,200,000,000 of my 
brothers, that know not their right hand from 
their left, and save a few of us who are a little 
better perhaps in our morals, I would not go into 
heaven if I could. I could not worship such 
a God as that. I would join the hosts of hades 
in rebelling against such a God. Our God is 
not a God of that kind. God is love, and is 
trying to save men."— Pittsburg Dispatch. 

"If I believed that God would send down to 
a hopeless eternity 1 ,200,000,000 of my brothers 
who are little worse than I am, I would not worship 
him. I have seen the world all over, know 
it from rim to rim, have seen its desolate and 
despicable people, and these I speak of hardly 
know their right hand from their left. God won't 
condemn all these. He's saving all men that he 
can. If I thought he would condemn all these, 
I would join the forces of the devil in hell, in 
rebellion against such an act."— Pittsburg Post. 

The accounts of the two reporters are sufficiently 
alike to insure us that no serious mistake 
has been made as to the tenor of the Bishop's 
expression. But surely it is a remarkable expression, 
coming as it does from the foremost bishop 
of the M. E. Church. The bishop is, as he 
declares, well posted upon the condition of the 
vast heathen world— four- fifths of the living 
human family. He is well posted also respecting 
the missionary machinery for the civilization 
and conversion of these millions. He knows 
that while it was never before so complete as at 
present, yet, even now, the natural increase is 
proportionately far greater than the ratio of 
conversion. The bishop sees no hope for the 
heathen through the preaching of the gospel, 
and hence "flies the track," and leaves the 
Bible plan of salvation,— faith in Christ's redemptive 
work, a faith that comes by hearing 
of the word of God, the Gospel of salvation, a 

R1710: page 307 

gospel which is the power of God unto salvation 
to every one that believeth.— Rom. 10:17; 1:16. 
Why should this intelligent man, a leader of 
thought amongst a very intelligent class of Christians, 
thus leave the gospel of the Bible? a gospel 
which declares: "Without faith it is impossible 
to please God;" "He that believeth shall be 
saved, and he that believeth not shall be condemned;" 
"He that hath the Son hath life, 
and he that hath not the Son shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth on him;" "Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 



saved;" etc., etc. Why should he, as above, 
preach another gospel— the gospel of the merit 
of ignorance? The gospel of salvation without 
faith?—the gospel of salvation by works?— the 
gospel of a salvation without a Redeemer? for, 
if the heathen are to be saved because God could 
not do otherwise than save those who "know not 

R1710: page 308 

their right hand from their left," or to keep the 
bishop from joining "the forces of the devil in 
hell in rebellion against such an act," then 
Christ's death was in vain: it certainly is no 
factor in the gospel which the bishop is preaching 
(of a general heathen salvation in ignorance 
of the only "name given under heaven or 
amongst men whereby we must be saved,") even 
though his text was, "When the fulness of time 
was come, God sent forth his Son." 

The reason is that the bishop's intelligence 
has outgrown his theology. He has spent more 
time and honest mental effort in viewing the 
world from rim to rim and studying its social 
and moral questions than he has spent in studying 
his Bible from cover to cover with an honest 
desire to learn God's explanation, in it, of 
his purposes for the blessing, of the world of mankind 
through faith in Christ! 

The bishop's new gospel will strike a responsive 
chord in many hearts— in the hearts of 
missionaries who know better than others how 
little they really accomplish;— in the hearts of 
worldly people, who will say, That is what I always 
believed; faith never saves anybody; it is 
works or nothing;— in the hearts of worldly 
Christians, who will say, that relieves me greatly; 
I believe that our great religious leaders are 
advancing far beyond the old-fogy faith ideas 
of the past, to see that it is not what we know 
or believe merely, but what we do, or God's 
free grace, that saves us. The modern agnostic 
and higher-critic will say, That is the way to talk; 
it is time people were being taught to cut loose 
from those narrow expressions of the Bible which 
so evidence the narrowness of the minds of the 
Lord and the apostles. Indeed, almost all classes 
will be prepared to welcome the bishop's new 
gospel. 

How strange that all of these are so averse to 
the Scriptural explanations of these questions 
which trouble the bishop and all men who are 
even beginning to think! How strange that 
those who will applaud the bishop's new gospel 
will entirely overlook one feature of it, which, 
if true, would certainly stamp it as bad tidings 



to all the holy ones who through patient perseverance 

in well doing have cultivated faith, 

trust, hope and love, and developed character 

from grace to grace and from glory to glory! 

What would these, who, through the faith that 

overcometh the world and by much tribulation, 

enter the Kingdom of Heaven, think of it, if 

within the pearly gates, where they had anticipated 

so much of love and pleasure, they were 

to find the hundreds of millions and billions of 

ignorant, degraded, depraved and characterless 

of heathendom pouring in upon them and outnumbering 

them to such an extent that a saint 

would be a hundred times harder to find in 

heaven than now on earth! To say the least, 

they would be astounded; and if an explanation 

were asked, and Bishop Foster were given the 

opportunity to reply, and had not changed his 

opinion, he doubtless would say that, after having 

done all he could for them on earth without 

success, and fearing that the bishop would join 

the forces of the devil and thus make a bad 

matter worse, God did not know what else to do 

with the heathen than take them to heaven. 

Would that the good-hearted, but benighted, 
bishop would face about and see the Millennial 
dawn, the increasing light of the Sun of Righteousness 
now shining forth! He then would 
see what he does not see now, that God's plan 
as presented in the Bible is transcendently more 
reasonable, more benevolent, more just and more 
practicable than any which he or other human 
beings could possibly concoct or outline. 

What would he see? Briefly this: That God's 
time for giving the heathen to Christ (Psa. 2:8) 
is in the Millennial age and not in this Gospel 
age; that when God undertakes the work 
of causing the knowledge of himself to fill the 
whole earth, it will be done; for his Word shall 
not return unto him void, it shall accomplish 
that which he pleases and prosper in the thing 
whereto he sent it. (Isa. 55: 11.) He would see 
that this knowledge of God is to reach, not only 
the very ignorant heathen of foreign lands, 
but, as well, the very ignorant of civilized lands; 
for "all shall know God from the least to the 
greatest." He would learn that the Millennial 
age will not only be a time for gaining knowledge 
of God, but a time when the obedient will 
be blessed with restitution to all the privileges 
and qualities and powers of mind and body lost 
by disobedience by Adam for himself and all 

R1710: page 309 

his posterity;— redeemed by the Second Adam's 



sacrifice for sin, once for all. He would thus 
see that the Millennial age will be the great 
purgatory time in which the world in general 
will be permitted, if they will, to wash at the 
fountain opened in the House of David for sin 
and uncleanness (Zech. 13:1);— by faith in the 
blood of Christ to be made every whit whole, 
and fit for the fellowship of angels and saints. 

The bishop would learn, moreover, that nothing 
unclean or unholy can enter God's presence 
and be acceptable with him, and that, as the 
Church is now called to be saints and to practice 
holiness ("without which no man shall see 
the Lord"), so it must be with the heathen 
when, during the Millennium, they are called, 
taught and released from the blinding influences 
of Satan. Only the pure in heart shall ever see 
God or enjoy the bountiful provisions prepared 
for those who love him. 

Then Bishop Foster would be prepared to 
learn something respecting God's purpose in the 
call of the Church, and what is the hope of her 
calling. (Eph. 1:18.) Soon he would see that 
as God selected one class of servants during previous 
ages, to be used in his great plan for the 
future blessing of the world, so during the Gospel 
age he has been selecting a household of 
sons to be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, the 
Lord and Head and Redeemer, in the Millennial 
Kingdom and its work of binding Satan 
and opening the eyes of the world so long 
blinded by Satan.-Gen. 12:3; Heb. 1 1:40; 
Acts 15:14; Rev. 20:1-4. 

Soon the Bishop would be not only studying 
this blessed gospel of the Bible, but circulating 
these truths amongst his friends, and in every 
way preaching the old gospel, the old theology 
—that "Christ Jesus by the grace of God tasted 
death for every man," that he "gave himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time;" 
and that eventually the "true Light" will lighten 
"every man that cometh into the world." 
-Heb. 2:9; 1 Tim. 2:4-6; John 1:9. 

We will comment on further quotations from 
this remarkable sermon in our next issue. 



R1710: page 309 

"THOU HAST THE WORDS OF ETERNAL LIFE." 



"From that time many of his disciples went back, and 
walked no more with him. Then said Jesus unto the 



twelve, Will ye also go away? 
"Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall 
we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life." 
--John 6:66-68.- 

THERE is just a tinge of disappointment in 
our Master's words here recorded— "Will 
ye also go away?" Accustomed to look for 
a reason for every action and word, we inquire, 
Why did the loss of a number of followers make 
our Lord feel sad? Was he ambitious for a 
large following? Did his confidence rest in 
numbers? Did he say to himself, Now what will 
the Pharisees say when after three years of my 
teaching they see me deserted by many of my 
followers? Was it that he feared the deflection 
might curtail his revenues? No, it was none 
of these things; for he had already made himself 
of no reputation. He had already said to 
his disciples, Woe unto you when all men speak 
well of you, for so did their fathers to the false 
prophets. He had also the power by which two 
small fishes and three barley loaves could be 
made sufficient to feed five thousand people. 
And he already knew that his faithful followers 
were to be, in all, but a "little flock," and who 
of the multitude believed not.— Verse 64. 

Why then, did his words express sadness at 
the loss of a number from his company? It 
was because he was true and noble and sympathetic, 
and loved his friends, and seeing the 
hour approaching when the Shepherd would be 
smitten and all the sheep be scattered (as it was 
afterward fulfilled when "all forsook him and 
fled"), the lonely sadness crept over him and 
found expression in the words, Will ye also go 
away? Love of sympathy, fellowship of friends, 
etc., are not weaknesses, but, on the contrary, 
are elements of a true character. But it would 
have shown weakness had our Lord allowed 
the turning back of his disciples to have influenced 
or swerved his course from the path of 
sacrifice marked out for him in the Father's 
plan. No such weakness ever manifested itself. 
On the contrary, but a few days after, when 
Peter who here spoke so nobly, attempted to 
dissuade our Lord from sacrifice, he promptly 

R1710: page 310 

answered, Get thee behind me, adversary, thou 
savorest not the things of God, but of men. 

R1711 : page 310 

The Apostle Peter's words, "Lord, to whom 



shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal 

life," are full of meaning. He had known what 

it meant to seek God's favor and everlasting life 

through keeping the Law, and, like most of the 

Jews of the humbler class, had been discouraged, 

finding himself condemned both by the 

doctrines of the Pharisees and by his own conscience. 

Doubtless, also, he knew something 

of the various heathen philosophies respecting 

a future life; and, if so, he knew them to be 

merely human speculations or guesses. 

But for three years he had known Jesus and 
heard his words on this subject of eternal life. 
His teaching was not speculative guessing as to 
what might be. "He taught them with authority, 
and not as the scribes." Nor did he teach 
them to hope for eternal life through the keeping 
of the Law (which they knew to be an impossibility). 
His teaching, on the contrary, was 
different from that of every other teacher. He 
taught them that he had come into the world, 
not to be served or honored and titled, but to 
serve men and to finally give his life a ransom 
or purchase-price for the forfeited lives of all 
who lost the right to life in Adam's trial and 
disobedience. (Matt. 20:28.) His teaching was 
that as a result of this ransom-sacrifice, which, 
by divine love and arrangement, he was about 
to give for all, all shall have the opportunity of 
everlasting life through obedience under the 
gracious terms of the New Covenant; and that 
to this end not only they, but also, "All that 
are in the graves shall hear the voice of the 
Son of Man, and come forth, and they that 
hear [obey] shall live"— attain perfect life. 
(John 5:25,28,29.) Peter had heard this simple 
and beautiful gospel— this, the only real good 
tidings of everlasting life; he recognized Jesus 
as the Messiah sent of God to be the Life-giver 
to the world, the true light that shall ultimately 
lighten every man that cometh into the world. 
-John 1:9. 

What wonder, then, in view of this, that Peter 
answered as he did, "Lord, to whom shall we 
go? Thou hast the words of eternal life." 
Peter's faith and hope had found in the doctrines 
of Christ a foundation and anchorage which 
they could not find elsewhere. 

And the same is true of all intelligent believers 
to-day, in proportion as they have heard 
and understood the wonderful words of life, of 
which Christ's death is the central theme, the 
hub, whose spokes are the love and favor 
of God, including all his exceeding great and 
precious promises reaching to the circumference 
—everlasting life. Having once seen the truth, 



having once heard the good tidings—the words 
of everlasting life— for what would they exchange 
it? 

Looking abroad, we still find the philosophies 
of Confucius, Buddha, Brahma and Zoroaster, 
but they satisfy us not. We hear the wisdom 
of this world speculating about an evolution 
which it surmises has already progressed from a 
protoplasm to a tadpole and from a tadpole to 
a monkey and from a monkey to a man and 
which it hopes, guesses and tries to assure itself 
will continue to progress to planes of being 
still higher than man. It assures us that whether 
there was or was not an intelligent God at the 
beginning, there will be millions of wise and 
powerful gods eventually, when they get evolved. 
But our hearts turn from such wild speculations 
back to the wonderful words of life spoken by 
him who spoke as never man spoke before or 
since. In those words is the rest and peace which 
the world can neither give nor take away. 

Following the instructions of this same great 
Teacher, we are learning more and more 
about this eternal life which he has provided 
for all. As meat in due season he has 
taught us that this gift of eternal life is only for 
those that love him;— that a little flock of the 
ransomed world, called and proved worthy by 
their loving obedience during the Gospel age, 
are to be his joint-heirs in the glory, honor 
and immortality of the divine nature, and that 
he with these will in the next age, the Millennium, 
bless all the families of the earth with 
the knowledge of and opportunity to attain restitution 
to human perfection with everlasting 
life conditioned only upon faith and hearty obedience 
under the New Covenant, sealed with 
the blood of the ransom-sacrifice. This is the 
same gospel as of yore: these are the same words 

R1711 : page 311 

of everlasting life, only amplified and magnified 
as we get nearer to their grand consummation. 
In the harvest of the Jewish age, it was after 
our Lord had spoken to his followers the 
"words of eternal life" that he permitted "offenses" 
to come to sift them as wheat, saying, 
"It must needs be that offenses come." Those 
trials came to prove which were ripe wheat and 
which chaff and undeveloped wheat. Two classes 
specially were sifted out— the merely curious 
and slightly interested class, and a consecrated 
class which had not much depth of character, 
represented in our Lord's parable (Matt. 13:5,6,20,21) 
as the stony ground hearers, which 



received the message with joy, but not having 
depth of heart-soil and earnest love and consecration 
to the truth, when tribulation or persecution 
arose they were at once offended, and 
turned back and walked no more with the Lord 
and the faithful. 

The same is true now, in the present harvest 
of the Gospel age. Blessed have been our eyes, 
for they have seen many of the "deep things" 
in the divine plan of the ages; and blessed 
have been our ears, for they have heard with 
wonderful clearness the lessons of the great 
Teacher— the words of glory, honor and immortality 
—words of eternal life. And now in 
the Lord's order we are to be ready for trials 
and sittings. Now, again, offenses must needs 
come to prove all, and to turn back those who 
are not consecrated and those who have no 
depth of character, who are unwilling to bear 
the reproaches and afflictions of the Christ. 
So it was with Gideon's typical army. All who 
shall be owned of the Lord as joint-heirs with 
Christ must be a select class, a peculiarly zealous 
people;— and no wonder: Marvel not 
therefore at the fiery trials which shall try you, 
as though some strange thing happened unto 
you. In fact, that is the very purpose of the 
permission of offenses and divisions: "that 
they which are approved [by God, because they 
endure the tests and stand fast in the truth] 
may be made manifest among you."— 
1 Cor. 11:18,19. 

Those who will stand the test here will be 
just like those for whom Peter spoke in the 
previous harvest testing. Should any feeling 
of faintness or discouragement come over them, 
they will also ask, "Lord to whom shall we 
go?" Looking about them they see the delusions 
of Spiritism and various doctrines of devils, 
and the blindness and contradictions of reason 
as well as of Scripture among agnostics, and in 
the various denominations of Christendom. The 
glance is sufficient for the class which the Lord 
desires to select. They could not go away, they 
could not be forced to leave the army of the 
Lord. Truly, where should we go? Our Leader, 
and he alone, has the words of eternal life. 
Since we have heard his words, all other gospels 
have lost their charm. We will abide with and 
follow the great Captain of our salvation: in 
his words and in his love and in his service we 
live and move and have our being as the elect 
of God. 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word. 
What more can he say than to you he hath said, 



You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled." 



R1712: page 311 

JUDGMENT-ITS USE AND ABUSE. 



"Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment 

ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure 

ye mete, it shall be measured to you again."— Matt. 7:1,2. 

A VERY unlovely disposition in the eyes of 

God, and of all fair-minded men, is that 

which assumes the obligation of sitting in uncharitable 

judgment upon all the affairs and 

conduct of fellow-men, either within the Church 

or outside of it. 

That our Lord referred to this abuse of judgment, 
and not to the legitimate use of that 
noble faculty, is very manifest from succeeding 
verses (3-5), which warn against the hypocrisy 
of condemning others for faults no greater than 
those which exist in one's self, but to which 
self-love is wilfully blind; and also from 
verses 15-20, which bid us beware of wolves in 
sheep's clothing, or, in other words, to use 
sound judgment in discriminating between the 
truly consecrated and faithful children of God, 
whose hearts are pure and free from guile, and 

R1712: page 312 

those who studiously cover up a wolf-like character 
with the outward professions of godliness, 
in order to deceive and lead astray the unwary. 

"By their fruits ye shall know them," said 
the Lord; and to use candid and unbiased judgment 
in comparing their fruits— of character, 
conduct or teaching— with their professions and 
with the Word of God, is necessary to the safety 
and protection of the Lord's people. This, 
therefore, is a very legitimate use of judgment; 
and those who, disregarding the Lord's warning, 
either recklessly or wilfully, fail so to exercise 
judgment, expose themselves to the deceitful 
snares of the great adversary. The wolf is not to be 
tolerated, nor his sheep's clothing respected: he 
has no rightful place in the assemblies of the true 
sheep until his character is changed by repentance 
and submission to the will of God. His 
presence can only bring reproach upon all associated 
with him, and sow the seeds of error 
and discord; and, learning the shibboleth of the 



saints, he will deceitfully make merchandise of 
their holy things and demand that Christian charity 
should let him alone in his nefarious work. 

Alas! many simple ones, ignoring the Lord's 
counsel, weakly yield to this demand, to their 
great detriment spiritually. They give that 
which is holy unto the dogs and cast their pearls 
before the swine; and the wolf is often tolerated 
out of respect for his sheep's clothing. It 
is not real charity to such characters to permit 
them to pursue their course unmolested; nor is 
it true loyalty to the cause of Christ. To firmly 
and candidly let such persons know that we 
recognize their character and refuse to fellowship 
or company with them until a change of 
heart is manifested, and to positively and openly 
resist their influence, is the noblest and truest 
charity, both to them and to the cause of Christ 
in general, though such a course will assuredly 
bring persecution in some shape. 

To deal thus candidly and fairly may in some 
cases wake up the erring to a sense of their 
wickedness, and, by making it unprofitable to 
them, may lessen the temptations to continue 
the evil course. At all events, it gives the 
sheep and lambs of the Lord's flock warning of 
the dangers to be expected from such sources. 
To encourage or assist such, is to become partakers 
of their evil deeds. (2 John 11.) Nor 
would Christian charity demand that the wicked 
or the profligate should be protected against 
the natural rewards of their evil course. To 
thus aid them is only to interfere with the divine 
arrangement by which sin brings its own 
retribution for the correction of the sinner. 
Thus, for instance, if when a profligate son 
spends his substance in riotous living, an unwise 
father makes up his loss and starts him anew, 
not allowing him to realize the evil effects of 
his course, the son misses the lesson and proceeds 
to greater lengths in an evil course. The 
love of God is not thus unwise: if it were, he 
would not permit the great time of trouble, now 
impending, to come upon the world. But he 
will permit it, and when the judgments of the 
Lord are thus abroad in the earth, the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness. 
(Isa. 26:9.) It is not our part, however, to 
bring evil upon the evil-doers; for vengeance 
belongs to God. Nor would it be contrary 
to the spirit of the Lord to show pity and to 
alleviate the dire wants of those in distress from 
their own folly. This would not interfere with 
the needed lesson, but, on the contrary, would 
tend to soften the heart and make it more susceptible 
to the lesson. 



While the legitimate use of judgment for wise 
and holy ends is plainly taught in this sermon 
of our Lord, the first verse of this chapter expressly 
commands that we should not reckon 
ourselves as the competent judges of men's 
hearts, to uncharitably condemn them on our 
own responsibility. But when their course of 
conduct is in manifest opposition to and defiance 
of God's law, as in cases of disguised 
"wolves," "swine" and "dogs," the condemnation 
of that law, which is God's judgment, 
not ours merely, should always be recognized. 

As a matter of fact, if we have the spirit of 
the Lord, our judgment will coincide with his 
—approving what he approves, and condemning 
what he condemns: we will judge righteous 
judgment, which makes every possible allowance 
for the infirmities of the flesh, the strength of 
temptation and the imperfections of knowledge, 
and which, ever bearing in mind that 
we also are far short of perfection, never forgets 

R1712: page 313 

the golden rule— "Whatsoever ye would that 
men should do to you, do ye even so to them; 
for this is the law and the prophets."— Verse 12; 
Lev. 19:18; Matt. 22:40; Rom. 13:8,9,10; 
Gal. 5:14; 1 Tim. 1:5. 

Verse 2 makes very imperative the application 
of this golden rule in such cases— "For with 
what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; 
and with what measure ye mete, it shall be 
measured to you again." Oh, if men and women 
would always consider these things, how much 
uncharitable judgment and evil-speaking, and 
how many bitter words, would be spared! If 
each could recognize in the other the spirit of 
love and candor, how quickly wrongs could be 
righted! If reproofs were always expressed in 
the spirit of the golden rule, how much more 
effective they would be than when they are colored 
with the glare of hatred and revenge! 

"How wise are God's commands! 

How sure his precepts are!" 
Let us ponder them well, and cultivate more 
and more in our own hearts the spirit of God's 
love and kindness— the spirit of his holy law. 



R1711 : page 313 

"IF THOU KNEWEST THE GIFT OF GOD." 



"If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith 
to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked 
of him, and he would have given 
thee living water."— John 4:10. 

THE woman of Samaria failed to recognize in 

the weary sojourner who sat by the well, 

the anointed Son of God, whose presence in the 

world at that time had been foretold by all the 

holy prophets for four thousand years previous. 

And few indeed, even of those who knew of his 

claims and his teachings, as well as of the divine 

testimonies at his birth and baptism— that 

this was the beloved Son of God and the bringer 

of good tidings of great joy to all people (Luke 2:9-14; 

Matt. 3:17)— could appreciate this fact, 

because of the meek humility which bore no 

similarity to any thing that men were accustomed 

to call great. Even John the baptist 

sent and inquired, "Art thou he that should 

come, or look we for another?" 

No wonder that the woman of Samaria did 
not recognize him. And, not recognizing him, 
how could she realize her privilege of service to 
him as a gift of God. Had she known and 
been able to appreciate her privilege of giving 
a cup of cold water to the only begotten and 
well-beloved Son of God, how gladly would she 
have rendered the service requested! And not 
only so, but had she realized who it was that 
requested the favor, she would have seen her 
opportunity of applying to him for the water of 
life, the great salvation. 

But the woman did not know the gift of God 
so close at hand. Thinking of the stranger 
merely as a Jew, and one of a class who refused 
to have any dealings with the Samaritans, the 
request for a drink of water seemed only to 
arouse a measure of the old animosity of her race 
against this one, whom she probably thought 
of as one willing to receive a favor in his extremity, 
but at other times regarding her and 
her people as too far beneath him to have any 
dealings with her. 

The Lord recognized the foundation for this 
feeling of animosity, and did not resent it, but 

R1712: page 313 

patiently led her first to suspect, and then to 
realize, that this was indeed the Christ; and she 
went forth joyfully to proclaim this truth, and 
to bring others to him. This woman was a sinful 
woman, and a type of thousands of others, 
men and women, who would act very differently 



if they only knew. If the Jews had only 
known, they would not have crucified the Lord 
of glory. (1 Cor. 2:8.) That which prevented 
them from knowing was the god of this 
world, who blinded their eyes and prejudiced 
their minds so that they could not believe. 
(2 Cor. 4:4.) Consequently they failed to 
perceive the gift of God in their privilege of 
service to Christ and of receiving from him the 
water of life. 

The same is true also to-day of the world in 
regard to the body of Christ, the Church. They 
do not know that the Lord has his representatives 
in the world. Like their Lord, these are not 
invested with the glory of this world, but they 
are despised and rejected of men, and are not 
known as the future judges of the earth. But 

R1712: page 314 

those who do know them should appreciate the 
privilege of service, since the Lord has said, "Inasmuch 
as ye have done it unto one of the least 
of these, my brethren, ye have done it unto 
me." (Matt. 25:40.) Whatever, therefore, we 
do for the least of God's people we are doing 
for him. How this should make us appreciate 
our privileges of service one to another! 

But if the world knows us not, and has not 
yet learned to appreciate the refreshing water 
of life we have to bear to them, it is no cause 
of surprise. If they failed to recognize the 
Master who was perfect, how could we expect 
them to recognize us, in whom are many imperfections 
still, although in God's sight through 
grace we are reckoned holy? If the god of this 
world has blinded the eyes of many, it is our 
privilege, as it was that of the Master, to help 
remove the blindness and let the glorious light 
of the gospel of peace shine in upon their minds. 
Let us offer the water of life to all as opportunities 
may present themselves. In so doing 
we also will be blest, as was the Master.— 
John 4:31-34. 



R1713 : page 314 

"AGREE WITH THINE ADVERSARY QUICKLY." 



"Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in 
the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver 
thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the 



officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily, I say 
unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come 
out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost 
farthing."-Matt. 5:25,26. 

"When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, 
as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou mayest 
be delivered from him; lest he hale thee to the judge, 
and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and 
the officer cast thee into prison. I tell thee, 
thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast 
paid the very last mite."— Luke 12:58,59. 

WE are asked whether these Scriptures can 
be understood to teach that those who 
do not make peace with the Lord in the present 
life will be held under compulsion to make 
full payment for all their debts by purgatorial 
sufferings in the Millennial age, and then be 
released to everlasting life. 

We reply that we cannot so understand them, 
because such a construction would be in contradiction 
of the Scripture teachings respecting 
the wages of sin. Since the penalty, or "wages 
of sin, is death," to pay that penalty to the uttermost 
farthing would mean everlasting death, 
—extinction. And if these Scriptures be so applied 
they would necessarily mean, Thou shalt 
never come forth! 

But viewing these statements from the standpoint 
of their contexts, we regard them differently. 
In Matt. 5: 17-20 the Law is held up 
as the great standard of authority, at that time 
the accuser of all; for it was the accuser of the 
Scribes and Pharisees, outwardly the most religious 
and devout Law-keepers. The attitude 
of every Jew should have been one of penitence. 
Realizing that they had all sinned and come 
far short of the requirements of the Law Covenant, 
they all should have been in a very 
contrite state of heart, ready and anxious to 
confess their shortcomings and to compromise 
the matter, if possible, whilst yet in the way 
with their accuser (adversary), the Law, and 
before final sentence would be pronounced. 

Had the Jewish Church realized their condition, 
thus, they would have been glad, yea, anxious, 
to hear the message which Christ had for 
them. Confessing their inability to comply 
with all the terms of the Law Covenant, they 
would have been pleading for mercy, and 
would have been prepared to hear of God's 
provision for them in "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sins of the world." 

Those who did thus plead for mercy did receive 
Christ as the sent of God— the way, the 



truth and the life,— the deliverer from the condemnation 
of their Law Covenant. These were 
delivered into the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free, and became sons of God under the 
New Covenant which Christ sealed with his 
blood— his death. 

But those who did not realize the situation, 
who discerned not the time of their visitation 
(Luke 19:44) as a nation, were blinded. Only 
the "remnant" of that nation, which made 
peace quickly, in the way to judgment, were delivered. 
(Rom. 9:27-29; 11:5,7-11.) And 
upon that nation, except the remnant, which 

R1713: page 315 

made peace in the way, the full weight of their 
judgment fell— they were blinded and cast off 
from divine favor for a "double," for a period of 
disfavor equal in length to their previous period 
of favor, 1845 years. Thus they were forced 
to pay the "uttermost farthing;" for, as the 
Apostle Paul states the matter,— "wrath is come 
upon them to the uttermost."— 1 Thes. 2:16. 

The context in Luke's account (12:54-57) 
strongly supports the foregoing. There our 
Lord's words reported are, "Ye hypocrites, ye 
can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; 
but how is it that ye do not discern this time?" 
—Why do you not know that you are living in 
the day of visitation and testing, and that you 
as a people are even now en route to judgment. 
Why do you not confess that you are unable to 
keep the Law Covenant, and, instead of boasting 
in the Law, why do you not seek and obtain 
the mercy which is just at the door? It is 
because you are proud and hypocritical, and 
draw nigh to God with your lips while your 
hearts are far from him. It is because you are 
not Israelites indeed without guile or hypocrisy. 

In this light the above texts may be briefly 
explained thus:— Addressing the Jewish nation, 
our Lord said, "Agree with thine adversary [the 
divine Law which condemned all to death 
(Rom. 7:10); i.e., admit the justice of its 
condemnation, because you have come short of 
its righteous requirements] quickly, while thou 
art in the way with him [while the offer of 
mercy is made to you as a nation, through faith 
in Christ who by his sacrifice offers an atonement 
for you], lest at any time the adversary 
[the Law, whose demands you fail to meet, 
though you claim to meet them] deliver thee to 
the judge [to the just judgment of God], and 
the judge deliver thee to the officer [to some 
power that would execute the penalty], and thou 



be cast into prison [into a position of disfavor, 
—such as that nation has experienced ever since 
their rejection of Messiah. As a nation they have 
been cut off, blinded, and imprisoned ever since 
they rejected Christ and said, 'His blood be 
upon us and upon our children']. Verily,... 
Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till 
thou hast paid the uttermost farthing [until the 
privileges of the Gospel age, the high calling, 
first offered to Israel, shall have ceased, having 
been bestowed upon the worthy Gentiles, and 
the worthy remnant of Israel who heeded this 
counsel. Then their blindness will be turned 
away; but they will have paid the uttermost 
farthing in the forfeiture of the chief blessing, 
which was offered to them first, but which they 
rejected]." 

THE UNMERCIFUL SERVANT. 

--MATT. 18:23-35.-- 

This parable has no relationship whatever to 
the foregoing: we treat it here merely because 
some of its expressions resemble expressions 
quoted in the above, and to avoid any confusion 
thereby. 

The parable shows the conduct of an earthly 
king. He was generous temporarily, and forgave 
the debtor, allowing him time and opportunity 
to keep his word and pay the debt in full. But 
when he heard how ungenerously that debtor 
had unmercifully abused and refused compassion 
and extension of time to a still poorer man, who 
owed him a much less amount, the king was indignant 
and withdrew his mercy, cancelled the 
extension, and put the debtor into the hands of 
exactors until his debt in full should be paid. 

This king's conduct does not in all respects 
represent our Heavenly Father's course; but in 
some respects it illustrates it. Our Heavenly 
Father does not forgive us our sins, nor grant 
us an extension of time in which to pay the 
price of our transgressions. He, on the contrary, 
"heareth not sinners;" but, having committed 
all judgment unto the Son, the Heavenly 
Father refers all supplicants to him— the way, 
the truth and the life. The only access and 
reconciliation to the Heavenly Father will be 
by the Son, who bought us with his own precious 
blood, and in whom alone we may have 
forgiveness, the remission of sins. Those who 
come unto the Father by him are already 
acceptable to the Father, in the beloved— i.e., 
reckonedly— but they will not be fully and actually 
presented until the Son shall have cleansed 



and perfected them, that he may present them 
blameless and unreprovable in love before him. 
--See Col. 1:22; Phil. 2:15. 

The parable does, however, express or illustrate 
the Heavenly Father's attitude on the point 

R1713: page 316 

in question. He also would be indignant that 

one for whom he has in Christ provided complete 

forgiveness, and not merely an extension of time 

for payment, should be unmerciful to a fellow-servant; 

and he will do to such as did the king 

in the parable. He will exact the full debt 

from the unmerciful, showing him no mercy 

who showed no mercy toward others.— 

Matt. 7:1,2,12. 

This will mean the death-penalty upon the 
unmerciful— the second death— "everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord and from 
the glory of his power." 

Nor should we expect otherwise; for he who 
is not merciful and sympathetic has not the love 
of God— has not the spirit of Christ. And "if 
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none 
of his." And only those in whom love instead 
of selfishness shall become the mastering sentiment 
have the promise of life everlasting on 
any plane of being. "Blessed are the merciful— 
they shall obtain mercy!" 



R1713 : page 316 

ALEXANDER CAMPBELL'S VIEWS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-As many readers of 
the WATCH TOWER, like myself, are warm admirers 
of that renowned champion of the Bible, 
Alexander Campbell, and are always interested 
in anything from his pen touching the mysteries 
of the Book, I beg leave to give below a scrap 
from his writings on the Prophecies, directly 
bearing upon the thoughts uppermost in our 
minds, and showing the drift of his investigations 
in that line. He says:— 

"What now if we should attempt to prove 
arithmetically, the certainty of the prophecies 
concerning the final consummation of all things? 

The expectation of Christendom is notorious. 
It is this: that sometime soon, perhaps in the 
present century, a new order of things in the 
political and religious relations of society will 



commence; that it will pervade the whole human 
family; that after its full introduction, it 
will continue a thousand years; and that soon 

R1714: page 316 

after its completion, the present state of things 
will terminate and the multiplication of human 
beings cease forever. Without going minutely 
into detail, such is the general expectation of 
Christendom built upon those writings called 
prophecies. 

Well, now, should we prove by an arithmetical 
calculation the certainty of such conclusions 
relative to the final consummation— what 
will the skeptics say? The premises or data 
are these: the present population of the earth 
is estimated, say, at one thousand millions. Now 
I will leave it to them to furnish the data, or to 
state what the population was two, three or four 
thousand years ago. They may even furnish 
me data from the census of any nation of Europe 
for two, three, four or five hundred years back. 
It will give the same result. We shall take the 
Bible data until they furnish another. According 
to the Bible data the whole human family, 
about four thousand years ago, was composed 
of eight individuals, four males and four females; 
and to keep our calculations in whole 
numbers, we shall evacuate Europe and America 
of all their population and place them in Asia 
and Africa on the population there, which will 
fill that half as full of human beings as can subsist 
upon its surface. We have now got, say, 
the half of our globe empty and the other 
half full. Now, the question is, if eight persons 
in four thousand years fill the one half of 
the earth as full as it can subsist, how long will 
one thousand millions be in filling the other 
half? If in despite of wars, famines, pestilences 
and all waste of human life, under the corruptions 
of the last four thousand years, such has 
been the increase of human beings, what would 
be the ratio of increase were all these to cease, 
and peace and health and competence be the 
order of the day for one thousand years? Why 
there would not be one half acre of land and 
water upon the face of the globe for every human 
being which would live at the completion 
of the Millennium or the seven-thousandth year 
from the creation, what I contemplate from 
these oracles to be about the end of the present 
state of human existence. Either then some 
devastation must empty the earth of its inhabitants 
or the human race be extinguished. Logic 
and arithmetic compel us to the former conclusions; 



but when we add to logic and arithmetic 

the prophecies of holy Scripture, we are 

compelled to embrace the latter. I think no 

prophecy ever admitted of so certain a calculation 

or so exact and definite a computation; in 

fact no other oracle in the annals of the world 

is proved by arithmetic so inevitably and unanswerably 

as I conceive this to be." 

Query: Did not Brother Campbell see Restitution 
at least dimly? E. A. SADDLER. 

We fear that Brother Campbell saw the future 
but dimly. Instead of being "extinguished" the 
obedient will be granted everlasting life, and 
only propagation will cease.— EDITOR. 



R1714: page 317 

A NEW BRANCH OF THE SERVICE 

--FURTHER EXPLAINED.- 

Some have been in doubt whether or not to 
respond to "Another Branch of the Work," in 
Sept. 1 TOWER, and "Introducing Tower Tract 
Society Representatives," in Sept. 15 TOWER; 
because, while willing and anxious to donate some 
of their time to special service, and believing 
that by the grace of God they possess (and are 
growing in) the eight qualifications for special 
ministry mentioned, they are so situated, with 
families dependent upon them, etc., that they 
could give but little time to the service and 
could rarely go away from home,— unless the 
Tract Society could pay their home, as well as 
their traveling expenses. 

We fear that we have been misunderstood by 
a few. It is not our purpose to start or to encourage 
a paid ministry. The funds at our command 
would be but a drop in the bucket for 
such an enterprise; and even if it were otherwise, 
we should doubt the wisdom of such a plan. 
One or two special representatives might be advisable, 
and they should be persons of remarkable 
humility and very clear in the truth- 
otherwise they themselves might be injured as 
much as others would be benefitted by them; 
but we would not think it advisable to divert 
to this branch more than a small part of the 
limited Tract Fund receipts now being expended 
in tract work, in the preparation of translations 
of DAWN in foreign languages, etc. 

Voluntary service from all, at the sacrifice of 
some earthly comforts, conveniences, etc., 
seems to be the Lord's order of development. 



Those who do not serve from the love of the 
Lord, his people and his truth should not serve 
at all,— their service will do harm. He who 
serves from love, and according to his opportunities 
for sacrifice, will have his opportunities 
enlarged and his talents increased. He who does 
not so serve will not serve long, but will be 
speedily gathered out— into outer darkness, error: 
for he will "gather out of his Kingdom 
all things that offend, and them that do 
iniquity." 

We had specially in mind certain brethren 
whose business calls them from place to place, 
and who we had reason to believe possessed 
the eight qualifications specified; and several of 
these have responded, glad to spend their 
Sundays and many of their evenings in visiting 
and helping the Lord's "little ones." We have 
accepted all so offering who have responded 
satisfactorily; and we trust that this branch of 
the service will accomplish much good during 
next year; for it will require some time to prepare 
lists of TOWER subscribers in so many towns. 

But do not forget that the Colporteur work 
offers an open door to one of the most effective 
branches of the Lord's service. Those unincumbered 
can give their entire time thus, and 
pay their way; while those who can give but a 
few hours a week can be used also. And for such 
as are unincumbered, but too diffident and 
bashful to succeed as regular Colporteurs, we now 
have a new plan of work to suggest. "Go ye 
also into the Vineyard!" 

It is not our design to supplant the DAWN 
and tract work, as a means for reaching the 
Lord's sheep with the "meat in due season;" 
for we know of no better method,— none nearly 
so good. The new branch of service is designed 
to "strengthen the brethren," to help 
them over difficulties and to lead them more 
and more to apply the truth and its spirit in 
their daily lives. 

The form of certificate mentioned in our last 
issue is an old one, and is not quite satisfactory 
to us. We have gotten up what we believe is 
a better one, instead, a copy of which will be 
given in our next issue. 



R1714: page 317 

OUR LORD'S VISIT TO NAZARETH. 



IV. QUAR. LESSON 1., OCT. 7, LUKE 4:16-30. 

Golden Text— "See that ye refuse not 
him that speaketh."— Heb. 12:25. 

In this lesson the special point of interest 
is our Lord's reference to his authority and 
commission from God, through the Prophet 
Isaiah, to preach the gospel of his coming 
Kingdom. This commission is contained in 
Isa. 61:1-3; but it will be observed that the 
Lord read only to the middle of verse 2, and 
then closed the book and sat down, saying, 
"This day is this scripture fulfilled in your 
ears." It was fulfilled in him, as the Prophet 
declared, he having received the anointing 
of the holy spirit. Therefore he had come 
to them with divine authority to declare 
unto them the good tidings of great joy unto 
all people. 

The question naturally arises, Why did 
he not read the entire commission? The 
answer is obvious: it was because the remainder 
was not fulfilled in that day. It 
was time then to preach (1) the good tidings 
of the Kingdom to all who were meek 
enough to receive it by faith from the humble 

R1714: page 318 

and unpretentious Nazarene; (2) to 
bind up the broken-hearted; to tell those 
in trouble that by and by the Kingdom 
would bring order, peace and joy out of 
present confusion and trouble; (3) to proclaim 
liberty to the captives and the opening 
of the prison to them that are bound— 
What captives? Surely not those lawfully 
detained for criminality in prisons of the 
state. No, but for all the dead race still lying 
in the prison-house of death— the grave: 
The hour is coming when all that are in the 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 
man and shall come forth (John 5:28,29); 
and (4) it was time then to proclaim the 
acceptable year of the Lord— the year or 
period of acceptable sacrifices: the "better 
sacrifices" than bulls and goats, the sacrifices 
of Christ and his body, the Church. 
(Heb. 9:23.) That was the beginning of the 
Gospel age— the time appointed as the great 
atonement day* for the world, the time of 
special favor to the called and faithful and 
chosen who should follow in the footsteps 
of their leader and head, Christ Jesus, and 
eventually become joint-heirs with him of 



the coming Kingdom. 

This was all of the commission that was 
due in the beginning of the age. It was 
not yet time to proclaim— "the day of vengeance 

R1715: page 318 

of our God," nor to comfort all that 
mourn— the whole "groaning creation" 
(Rom. 8:22), nor "to grant unto the mourners 
in Zion, to give unto them beauty for 
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the 
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." 
Had he read the entire commission, 
he could not have added the words, "This 
day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." 
This latter part of the commission was 
not due until the harvest or end of the 
age; and while the entire commission belongs 
to the whole body of the Anointed— 
the Christ, head and body,— the latter part 
must of necessity be declared by those 
members of the body living in the last times 
—the harvest or end of the age, from A.D. 
1874 to A.D. 1915. 

It is upon this generation that "the days 
of vengeance" are coming; and it is this 
generation therefore, that should hear the 
voice of warning. It is in the midst of 
the great afflictions of the now impending 
time of trouble "such as never was since 
there was a nation," that the "groaning 
creation" is to learn that it is the chastening 
hand of God upon them, who wounds 
to heal, and that by means of this great affliction 
he is subduing all things unto himself. 
And when the judgments of the Lord 
are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of 
the world will learn righteousness. (Isa. 26:9.) 
Thus in due time— the end of the harvest 
and time of trouble— "all that mourn" 
will be "comforted." Then the whole world 
will have learned to be still and to know 
that the Lord's reign of righteousness is begun 
—the Kingdom of God established in the 
earth.-Psa. 46:10. 

The last proposition of this commission 
also belongs to this harvest period. During 
this time is the gathering together of the 
elect from the four winds— from all parts 
of the great nominal Zion, the nominal 
Christian church. These are they who 
mourned in nominal Zion, who realized the 
decline of vital piety in her, who sadly lamented 
the great discrepancies between her 
creeds and the divine Word of promise and 



prophecy, and who hungered and thirsted 
for righteousness and searched for truth as 
men search for silver. To all such the Lord 
now appoints beauty for ashes and the oil 
of joy for the spirit of heaviness. Within 
this harvest period he has given us refreshing 
views of the completeness and beauty 
of the divine plan: he has given to us the 
beauty and symmetry of divine truth for the 
ashes of human creeds, and the oil of joy in 
consequence, for the spirit of heaviness. 
And in the end of the harvest all such who 
prove faithful to the end shall be exalted 
and glorified: they shall be made heirs of 
the Kingdom, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ. 
They shall be "trees of the Lord, the planting 
of the Lord that he might be glorified." 
This commission through the Prophet 
Isaiah is the only divinely authorized commission 
that was ever given to any man to 
preach the gospel. And it belongs only to 
those, and to all those, upon whom the 
anointing of the holy spirit of God has come 
—to the Christ, head and body. They all 
can say, "The spirit of the Lord God is 
upon me, because he hath anointed me to 
preach," etc. Our Lord Jesus received this 
anointing of the holy spirit immediately after 
his baptism in water, which symbolized his 
entire consecration to the will of God, even 
unto death, when the holy spirit visibly descended 
upon him and a voice from heaven 
was heard saying, "This is my beloved 
Son, in whom I am well pleased." And as 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES. 

R1715: page 319 

in the typical anointing of the typical high 

priest in the service of the typical tabernacle, 

the anointing oil was poured upon 

the head only, but from thence ran down 

even to the skirts of his garments, thus 

bringing the whole body under the anointing 

(Lev. 8:12; Psa. 133:2), so all who have 

come into Christ by faith and full consecration 

to the will of God have likewise come 

under the same anointing. It was at Pentecost, 

after the Lord's ascension, that this 

spirit of anointing began to descend upon the 

consecrated body of Christ (Acts 2: 1- 1 8); 

and all who have been added to the body 

since have likewise received of the anointing, 



by right of which they can also claim 
the divine commission to preach the gospel 
in the use of whatever talents they may 
possess, be they few or many, or be they 
humble or brilliant; and for the proper use 
of their commission they are accountable 
to him who gave them authority as his 
ambassadors. 

The inference is also plain that no man 
should be regarded by the saints as a minister 
of the gospel, or received or heard as 
such, who cannot claim this commission 
(which alone grants the divine authority), 
as conferred upon him by virtue of his 
anointing as a consecrated child of God and 
member of the body of Christ. All such 
are of the "royal priesthood," whose duty 
and privilege it is to serve in holy things. 

Unto those who have not fully submitted 
themselves unto the Lord, but who would 
nevertheless pose as leaders and teachers in 
the Church, the Word of the Lord is very 
explicit, saying, "What hast thou to do to 
declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest 
take my covenant in thy mouth? Seeing 
thou hatest instruction and castest my words 
behind thee?" (Psa. 50:16,17.) "Thus saith 
the Lord of hosts, Hearken not unto the 
words of the prophets [teachers] that prophecy 
unto you: they make you vain; they 
speak a vision of their own heart, and not 
out of the mouth of the Lord. ...I have not 
sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have 
not spoken to them, yet they prophesied." 
(Jer. 23:16-21.) Alas! there are many such 
false teachers who are ambitious to declare 
the visions of their own heart, and claim 
that the Lord sent them and that they are 
teaching his truth. And many, too, there are 
who, ignoring the command of God, hearken 
to the words of such false prophets and are 
thereby deceived and led astray. 

Our Lord's sermon from this gospel-laden 
text must have been one of great 
power, proclaiming the blessed tidings of 
redemption and restitution and giving some 
intimations of the special favor to be granted 
to the Gospel Church. While he thus 
spake to them as never man spake, and 
opened up the Scriptures to their understanding 
so that the blessed rays of hope 
and joy penetrated their hearts, the people 
"wondered at the gracious words which proceeded 
out of his mouth." And they said, 
"Is not this Joseph's son?" It was just 
as some remarked on other occasions— 



"Whence hath this man this wisdom?" 

Ah, it was by reason of the anointing. Being 

thus brought into close fellowship with 

the Father, the divine plan was clearly revealed 

to him through the "sure Word of 

prophecy," and his lips gave expression to 

the glorious message of love and grace. 

VERSES 23-27 are words of reproof to a 
heedless and merely curiosity-seeking people. 
While he spoke to them wonderful 
words of life, he saw that the hearts of the 
great majority at least were not prepared 
to receive them, as evidenced by the fact 
that instead of looking for the correspondency 
in the teacher to the prophetic forecast 
of him to which attention had been 
called, they were inquiring about his earthly 
pedigree, and desirous to see some manifestation 
of his power to work miracles. 

This incredulity and idle curiosity the 
Lord severely rebuked by citing them two 
historic instances where God through the 
prophets manifested his saving power, not 
to the curious and unbelieving, but passing 
all such by, he showed his great favor and 
power to the meek and humble who loved 
and believed God. This was too much for 
the hot-headed, impetuous pride of the unworthy 
hearers of that noble sermon. Who 
was this son of Joseph, one of their humblest 
citizens, that he should thus brand them 
as unworthy of the favor of God? And in 
their wrath and haste they seized him and 
with violence bore him away toward the 
brow of the hill, intending to hurl him to 
death.-Verses 28,29. 

VERSE 30 records his escape—'Tassing 
through the midst of them, he went his 
way." His hour had not yet come, and 
therefore he seems to have exerted that 
power which belonged to him as a perfect 
man over the weaker, imperfect men— the 
power of his mind alone, we believe, which 

R1715: page 320 

overwhelmed and cowed their fierce passions, 
so that none dared take the responsibility 
of casting him headlong; and he, 
therefore, passing through the midst of them, 
went his way. The same power was also exerted 
on other similar occasions. (See John 7:30,43-46.) 
But when his hour was come 
he opened not his mouth, nor resisted in any 
degree the throngs that sought his life. 
The words of the Golden Text are most 



appropriate to all that hear the word of life 

—"this gospel of the Kingdom:" "See that 

ye refuse not him that speaketh...from 

heaven." The latter part of the divine commission 

—the harvest message— now due, and 

hence now declared, by those members of the 

body of Christ now living, is just as important 

to this end of the age as was the former 

part to the beginning and all through the age: 

therefore, let him that heareth see that he 

refuse it not, however humble and unpretentious 

may seem that member of the 

body through whom it may be declared to 

him. 



R1715 : page 320 

THE DRAUGHT OF FISHES. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON II., OCT. 14, LUKE 5:1-11. 

Golden Text— "He taught them as one that had 
authority, and not as the scribes."— Mark 1:22. 

This miracle of our Lord, located thus 
early in his ministry, prior to the choosing 
of his apostles and also to the sending out 
of the seventy, was a prophecy of the future 
work of all such. They were to be 
fishers of men. And here also was a prophecy 

R1716: page 320 

of their success as fishers of men. They 
were to catch multitudes. This same lesson 
was again repeated after our Lord's resurrection 
(See John 21:1-9), and the prophecy 
has been amply verified in the long 
fishing season of the Gospel age. 

Using the same illustration, our Lord also 
spoke a parable (Matt. 13:47-50), saying, 
"The kingdom of heaven [the embryo kingdom 
of heaven, the Gospel Church] is like 
unto a net that was cast into the sea and 
gathered of every kind, which, when it was 
full, they drew to shore and sat down, and 
gathered the good into vessels, but cast the 
bad away. So shall it be at the end of the 
age: the angels shall come forth and sever 
the wicked from among the just, and shall 
cast them into the furnace of fire: there 
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth." 



The gospel net was first cast into the sea 
(the world, where no distinction was recognized 
between Jew and Gentile) at Pentecost; 
and from the day of Pentecost to the 
present harvest time it has been gathering in 
all sorts of fish; and together they constitute 
the great nominal Gospel church, or, as it is 
sometimes termed, the Christian world, and 
Christendom. But all of these fish are not 
of the kind desired of the Lord to constitute 
the true Christendom— Christ's Kingdom 
—which is to be set up in glory and power 
at the end of the Gospel age and dawn of 
the Millennium. Therefore, in the harvest 
or end of the age (a period of forty years— 
from 1874 to 1915, See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. I., page 223,224), a separating work 
is to be accomplished, and those of the kind 
desired are to be carefully gathered out and 
preserved, while the remainder are cast 
away as unworthy of the Kingdom honors 
to which they were called. 

Such a work has been in rapid progress 
since 1874. The sickle of truth has been 
the instrument in doing the separating 
work, and the angels or messengers sent 
forth to do the gathering are those of the 
Lord's people whom he has graciously 
brought to a knowledge of his glorious plan 
and its appointed times and seasons. This 
is the harvest message which was not previously 
due nor known; and it is accomplishing 
the great harvest work. Those 
who love the Lord and who partake of his 
benevolent and gracious spirit readily recognize 
the divine source from which the 
harvest message springs, and accept it. 
Such are the desired kind of fish, but they 
are few in comparison with the great number 
in the net. 

The catching of the fish in the gospel net, 
and the sorting of them at the end of the 
age, are two parts of the one great work of 
making ready a people prepared for the 
Lord. This figure corresponds to that of 
the sower and the reaper; and when the 
great work is accomplished both the sower 
and the reaper shall rejoice together. The 
seed-sowing has been going on all through 
the age, but those who observe the divinely 
appointed times and seasons will devote 
their energies now to the special work of 
harvest, and not to seed sowing— to gathering 
the good fish into safety rather than to 
catching more. 



page 322 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1719: page 322 

JEWISH NATIONALIZATION MOVEMENT. 



We have often wondered that Hebrews in 
general seem to take so little interest in the revival 
of their own nation in Palestine. But their 
"double" (M. DAWN, VOL. II., p.218) having 
ended, and the time for the re-establishment of 
Israel as a nation being near, it is appropriate 
that we see signs pointing in that direction, such 
as the following:-- 

"The Zion Association of Baltimore was organized 
on Sunday, September 9th, for the purpose 
of fostering the national idea among the 
Jews, and to co-operate with similar societies 
in Europe and the United States, with the object 
of colonizing Palestine with Hebrews, who 



are emigrating from Russia and other countries 
in Europe. 

"The society will, in the near future, publish 
a declaration of its principles, giving the reason 
that led to the formation of this Society in 
Baltimore, and calling upon all Hebrews to 
unite and assist the great work which is carried 
on in the land of our fathers." 

—Jewish Exponent. 



R1716: page 322 

LIVE PEACEABLY WITH ALL. 



Rev. E. M. Milligan, of the U. P. Church, 
Steubenville, O., has caught the anarchistic 
spirit and adapted it to his ideas of the Sunday 
question. As reported in the Press dispatches 
of Oct. 3rd, he said, "If necessary God's people 
would exchange ballots for bullets to bring 
about Sabbath reform." 

The same gentleman spoke in the evening of 
the same day upon the "Attitude of the Church 
toward Labor Problems." With such lawless 
ideas as we quote above controlling his mind 
and speech, his advice would almost surely be 
unsafe. 

All of God's people should remember the 
Apostle's advice, "Let your moderation be 
known unto all men." The influence of God's 
people— especially of those whose eyes are 
opened to see how the present unrest and discontent 
are injuring the poor world— should speak 
and act and "so far as lieth in you, live peaceably 
with all men." 



page 322 



THOSE who cannot remit by Express or P.O. 
Money Order, or Draft, may send one cent U.S. 
postage stamps;— foreign stamps are valueless 
here. 



PLEASE write quite plainly, especially your 
address. If convenient, always prefer a pen 
and black ink. Give full address in every letter. 



R1716: page 323 
