Demonstrating Faith by Being Content
1 Being content in a world that is filled with discontent requires strong faith. Most people are not satisfied with what they have. They want more, no matter what the cost may be. (Eccl. 5:10, 12b; 1 Tim. 6:9) Satan tries to cultivate materialistic inclinations in us, tempting us with things ‘desirable to the eyes.’ (1 John 2:16) This is what he did in the garden of Eden, and it worked. So he uses similar schemes to trick the unwary today.
2 To defend ourselves against Satan’s trickery, we need to demonstrate our faith by being content with what we have. Jesus taught his disciples to pray to the Father for “our bread for this day.” (Matt. 6:11) Being satisfied with his provisions leaves us free from anxiety so as to put Kingdom interests first. To strive for material things would belie our claim in this regard. (Matt. 6:33) Jesus warned that we should not store up “treasures upon the earth.” He urged us to keep our eye simple, focused on just one thing, the doing of God’s will.​—Matt. 6:19, 22.
KEEP THE KINGDOM FIRST
3 After coming to a knowledge of the truth, we had to make changes in our lives. Now we must be determined to keep putting Kingdom interests first. We would not want to be attached to material possessions as was the rich, young ruler. He asked Jesus, “What good must I do in order to get everlasting life?” Not willing to make the changes Jesus recommended, he went away grieved. (Matt. 19:16-22; Luke 18:18-23) However, we are happy to make these changes. Now that we are moving in the right direction, the challenge is to keep the Kingdom first in our lives. Working to provide suitable “sustenance and covering” is right and necessary. But Satan has a way of inducing a person to become more and more involved in his secular work, thus causing Kingdom interests to slip into the background. We can avoid Satan’s subtle snares by being content, not letting the love of money lead us astray.​—1 Tim. 6:7-10.
4 Like the apostle Paul, we gain many blessings by building our lives around the Christian ministry. He worked hard and he encouraged fellow Christians to do the same. (1 Thess. 2:9; 2 Thess. 3:7-12) His thoughts were constantly on how he could advance Kingdom preaching, and yet he showed a tender concern for the spiritual welfare of all in the congregations. (1 Thess. 2:7, 8) We should also concern ourselves with the spreading of the good news and with the needs of others. Contentment comes from knowing that we are doing what Jehovah wants us to do.
DOING WHAT WE CAN DO
5 Some of us can devote more time to the field ministry than others. But we cannot judge others by our situation. Individual circumstances vary. Age, health, and family responsibilities are all factors to be considered. So we should not be critical of others but continue to be moved by faith to work for personal improvement, serving God to the full extent that our own circumstances permit. Such an attitude will not cause discontent or be discouraging to others.
6 Jehovah has given us much to do in the Kingdom work. In September we will offer the Peace and Security book or any other 192-page book for $1.00. To be most effective in placing literature, it is good to be well acquainted with the publication we are offering. Be enthusiastic about the message it contains, knowing that it can be the means of helping honest-hearted ones develop interest in God’s Kingdom.
7 Our strong faith in Jehovah’s promises moves us to share zealously in proclaiming the good news. Let us continue to move ahead, content and confident that Jehovah will bless us with success as we loyally do his will.

