Marvelous New Helps for Our Ministry
1 The announcement that appeared in the June 1 Watchtower regarding this past summer’s “Integrity Keepers” Convention surely aroused the interest of many. It stated that the concluding presentation on Saturday “will provide you with something beautiful that not only will be a treasure to you but also should make a tremendous impact on our activity in the field ministry.” And on that afternoon we were indeed surprised and delighted at receiving the marvelous new book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? Some remarked: “It’s a masterpiece.” Others commented on the fine teaching aids in its illustrations and photographs, many in beautiful full color. Still others noted the vast amount of research that had been done, as evidenced by the documentation at the end.
2 No doubt the new Creation book will pave the way for many to come to an accurate knowledge of God and his creative works. Did you note that while the book thoroughly deals with the questions that arise about evolution, it has even more to say about the Creator, Jehovah God? It highlights his existence, his works, his purpose for humans and for this earth, as well as his prophetic Word and its fulfillment. Thus, the Creation book will likely have a profound effect on the lives of sheeplike persons who have had doubts about the existence of God. Too, how timely its publication is now, when more and more people throughout the world are turning away from belief in a purposeful Creator! During December we will be featuring the new book in the field, and Our Kingdom Ministry will have more to say about this later.
3 The June 1 Watchtower also noted that at the convention “you will receive what will prove to be long-lasting assistance to reason with others from the Scriptures.” And that is just what was provided in the new book Reasoning From the Scriptures. Every major subject that someone might bring up in the field is covered. Did you note the helpful feature toward the end of many subjects under the heading, “If Someone Says—”? This gives us the most common objections on that particular subject and how we can tactfully deal with them.
4 Did you notice, too, the very useful section near the front of the book, “Introductions for Use in the Field Ministry”? It shows how experienced Witnesses in many lands begin conversations on basic subjects of interest to people in the territory. Yes, Reasoning From the Scriptures should be a practical help to all of us, whether we have been in the ministry for many years or we are relatively new. In the months to come, more will be said in Our Kingdom Ministry about the use of this new book.
5 Truly, we are grateful to Jehovah for the instructive conventions this past summer and for the excellent publications that will enhance our ministry. Surely, Jehovah is directing his faithful organization to ‘give us our food at the proper time’!​—Matt. 24:45.

