Presenting the Good News​—By Using Published Suggestions
1 To become proficient at a trade requires much time and effort. Some trades require a person to refine his skills continually through additional education or training. Similarly, being effective servants of our God Jehovah involves progressing in the truth and keeping up to date in our ministry.
2 When Jesus sent out the 70, he taught them what they should say and how to conduct themselves. (Luke 10:1-11) He reviewed with them principles on Christian living and matters pertaining to their ministry. The apostle Paul also stressed the need to keep ministerial skills sharpened, when he admonished Timothy: “Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.” (1 Tim. 4:16) All of this shows that proper training is needed to be successful in the Christian ministry. To meet this need, “the faithful and discreet slave” provides many aids, one of which is Our Kingdom Ministry.
HELPFUL REMINDERS
3 Through the years this monthly provision has given us many helpful reminders. In it we find recommended presentations, the offer for the month, instructions on how to conduct our house-to-house ministry, and other information on how to improve our field service activity. But to benefit fully from such direction, we need to apply the things we learn. By doing so, we tap the wisdom and experience of brothers who have a rich background as active preachers of the good news. Psalm 19:7 says: “The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise.” Hence, especially those who have just begun to publish the good news can benefit from helpful counsel given in each issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Those active for many years also show wisdom by taking full advantage of the fine suggestions and direction given. So whether we are new or experienced in the ministry, appreciatively applying helpful reminders brings rich rewards.​—Ps. 119:2; compare Proverbs 1:5.
4 Consider the example of a brother who took to heart the direction in the May 1983 issue under “Presenting the Good News​—By Developing Magazine Routes.” How did he benefit? Now he calls regularly on some 60 people, supplying them with the current magazines. Certainly this brother and those he now regularly calls on have been blessed by his applying the direction found in Our Kingdom Ministry.
5 In the June 1981 issue, the article “Have You Worked Your Territory Thoroughly?” made a very helpful suggestion on working not-at-homes. It had to do with keeping a good record of not-at-homes and then calling back on them before leaving the territory. One congregation following this suggestion has found that 50 percent of those not at home earlier were contacted when the publishers returned an hour or so later. Hence, they too have experienced the happiness that comes from heeding fine suggestions.
6 When on vacation, a couple applied the suggestion found in the June 1984 issue under “Presenting the Good News​—When on Vacation.” Looking for occasions to give an informal witness, they were able to place literature and to have many fine conversations. They found that this made their vacation more enjoyable. While visiting with friends and relatives, their experiences provided a basis for upbuilding conversation.
7 Jesus exhorted his apostles: “If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.” (John 13:17) He knew that his disciples would be truly happy in their ministry if they put into practice the things he taught them. Yes, happiness in the ministry results from taking advantage of what Jehovah’s organization provides. Let us continue to use the reminders and suggestions provided in Our Kingdom Ministry so that we may be effective servants of Jehovah.

