What Will You Do in School This Year?
1 September is back-to-school time. For many young Witnesses this means new teachers, new subjects, and new challenges. As you are being taught in school, you also have the opportunity to teach others. You can share the good news of the Kingdom with your teachers and your classmates. Your skillful witnessing at school can do much to bring praise to Jehovah’s name and will bring great satisfaction and joy to you.
WHAT JEHOVAH EXPECTS
2 Jehovah God wants youths to be involved in true worship. (Ps. 148:12, 13) He purposed a place for young ones in his service. (Ps. 110:3; Matt. 19:13, 14) By involving yourself zealously in witnessing to fellow students and by maintaining upright and honest conduct while in school, you will be sharing in the sanctification of Jehovah’s name. (Prov. 27:11) Your sincere example of faith may incite others also to glorify Jehovah God.​—Matt. 21:15, 16; Phil. 2:20.
3 Keep in mind that skill comes with training and practice. Just learning to play a musical instrument does not mean that a person plays well. Similarly, youths must first share fully in basic Christian activities before they can become effective in the ministry. Go on progressing just as the youthful Jesus did. (Luke 2:52) Learn to read well. Apply yourself to your school studies. View your family and congregational studies seriously. By doing this, you can be viewed favorably, as was the young man Timothy.​—Acts 16:1, 2.
WHAT PARENTS CAN DO
4 Parents, encourage and help your children to witness informally while they are in school. Show them that standing up for the truth and bearing witness to it often safeguards and protects them from getting involved in wrong conduct while at school. It also builds respect among non-Witness students.
5 In school, situations often arise in which there is much peer pressure to participate in class projects or day trips at times other than during regular school hours. Pressure from teachers and athletic coaches to participate in extracurricular activities may be greater than your child can withstand alone. Fine information has been published on pages 22-5 of the School brochure to reinforce correct thinking on these matters. Why not make such subjects the basis for your weekly family study for a while? The section found on pages 8-11 briefly but clearly outlines moral principles a young Witness should follow in order to please Jehovah. If additional in-depth study is desired, more information can be found in the Youth book. Taking the necessary time to consider these matters with your children will produce beneficial results.​—Prov. 22:6.
USE THE SCHOOL BROCHURE
6 Why not take the brochure with you to school? If your teacher does not have a copy, make one available. Show how things are outlined forthrightly but briefly, and explain that you would appreciate having the teacher read the brochure to become familiar with what to expect of your conduct throughout the school year. This can save you many difficulties in connection with flag salute ceremonies, holidays, and other situations.
7 As you continue to apply Christian principles during the school year, you can be sure that many fine blessings from Jehovah await you, both now and in the future. As Proverbs 20:11 says, “Even by his practices a boy makes himself recognized as to whether his activity is pure and upright.”​—See also Psalm 37:37.

