Daily Walking and Talking with God
HOW can mere human creatures, who are but specks on this earth, be said to walk with God? And yet the fact is that God himself commands us to do that very thing: “He has told you, O earthling man, what is good. And what is Jehovah asking back from you but to exercise justice and to love kindness and to be modest in walking with your God?”—Mic. 6:8.a
Why does Jehovah God command us to walk with him, and how is such a thing possible? He commands it for the sake of his sovereignty, as his right; he commands it so that there may be peace, order and harmony in the universe, and he commands it for our own well-being. We might be said to walk with God when we are governed by his righteous principles, when we make his goal of the vindication of his name our goal and when we at all times conduct ourselves as seeing Him that is invisible.—Heb. 11:27.
Opposing our walking with God are three powerful foes. Who or what are they? Satan the Devil, this wicked world of mankind and sin in our own flesh. We must continually be on guard against these if we would walk with our God. Of course, in our own strength and wisdom we could not make progress against such opposition and so God has provided us with three aids, his Word, his visible organization and his holy spirit. These give us knowledge and understanding as to just how to walk with God, they point out the pitfalls facing us and they strengthen our faith and hope, giving us courage. With their help we can walk with God, even as did the faithful men of pre-Christian times and as did Jesus Christ and his early disciples.—Ps. 119:105; Zech. 4:6; Matt. 24:45-47.
Of course, before we could even begin to walk with God we would have to meet him by appointment. (Amos 3:3) That means dedicating ourselves to do his will and being baptized in symbol of that dedication. Once having made such a vow, we are under obligation to carry it out.—Eccl. 5:4-6.
As we keep on walking with God we must “exercise justice.” We must be careful to be honest, upright, impartial in all our dealings with others, whether it is a matter of time, money, energy or personal influence. We must be careful not to presume upon or take advantage of others because of our personal influence or because of their generosity or weaknesses. At the same time in regard to what others do we must “love kindness,” that is, be merciful and ready to forgive. Yes, strict with ourselves, but lenient with others.
Modesty is also required of us as we walk with God. Certainly in view of the One with whom we are walking modesty is most becoming to us. It is also the course of wisdom, for it will guard us against the snare of sinning presumptuously.—Ps. 19:13; Prov. 11:2.
We also want to talk with God as we walk with him; this we do in prayer. Not, however, that we are to think of prayer as two-way conversation. No, God speaks to us through his Word, while in prayer we speak to him, in praise, thanksgiving and petitions. And we want to talk with God not only at regular times, such as before and after each meal and upon rising and before retiring, but also incidentally as opportunity affords. We want to be alert in looking to him for wisdom and strength in every time of need and be ever ready to express our gratitude as we receive of his undeserved kindness. By talking with God we show our faith that he exists and in his goodness.—Ps. 103:2; Heb. 11:6.
According to Philippians 4:6, “in everything by prayer and supplication” we are to let our “petitions be made known to God.” Does that mean that we may make such things as unemployment, illness and family troubles subjects of prayer? Yes, we most certainly may; not that we ask God to perform miracles, but, rather, that we may ask God for wisdom and strength so that we can do what is best under the circumstances and so that we can endure. Also, in our prayers let us strive for freshness and variety so that they do not become stereotyped, with little thought and feeling, just words.
Note further that we are to be walking and talking with God daily. Every day we are recipients of God’s blessings and so every day we should be alert to buy out the opportune time for preaching God’s Word. In fact, “whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do all things for God’s glory.” The same applies to our talking with God, for we are commanded to “pray incessantly.”—1 Cor. 10:31; 1 Thess. 5:17; Eph. 5:15, 16.
Happy are those who exercise justice, who love kindness and who are modest as they keep daily walking and talking with God!
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, February 15, 1963.

