Announcements
◆ Literature offer for October: Awake! subscription and bound book for $1.50, or a double subscription with two books, for $3.00. November: Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy!, with a booklet, for 50 cents. Also, you may use Truth book on a contribution of 25 cents. December: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and Is the Bible Really the Word of God?, for $1.25.
◆ New publications available:
Organization for Kingdom-preaching and Disciple-making​—English, French, Spanish
Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy!​—English
The Bible in Living English (Byington translation)​—English
Divine Rulership​—The Only Hope of All Mankind—​English, French, Spanish
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Venda
Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook​—Efik
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained​—Lingala
“Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules!​—Danish
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Chinese, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, Japanese, Norwegian. Swedish
“The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How?​—Dutch, German
Life Everlasting​—in Freedom of the Sons of God—​Bohemian, Russian, Sesotho, Zulu
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Divine Purpose​—French
Saving the Human Race​—in the Kingdom Way—​Efik, Ibo, Yoruba
The Approaching Peace of a Thousand Years​—Ibo
◆ Again available in U.S.A.:
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Portuguese
“Let Your Name Be Sanctified”​—Spanish
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Douay Bible​—English
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained​—Italian
Man’s Rule About to Give Way to God’s Rule​—Greek
◆ The prices for the new publications are as shown below:
                                       Cong.    Pio.
Organization book                        .25     .25
Bible in Living English (Cash Item)     5.75    3.00
Paradise​—Theocracy                       .45     .10
Divine Rulership​—Mankind                 .02     .005
◆ While the Subscription Record sheet is no longer used, a Remittance and Credit Request form must accompany subscriptions.
◆ The Society now has a limited supply of the book Listening to the Great Teacher in grade-two English braille available on a loan basis. You may receive this 215-page, three-volume set free of charge by writing the Braille Desk. The set must be returned to the Braille Desk after completion of reading or study. These sets are not to be stocked by the congregation.

