Branch Letter
Dear Fellow Publishers:
Here at Bethel we seem to be busier than ever. The backlog of books on order is about 16 million! To help us meet the demand, we have been temporarily running three bindery lines at night. Really, an average month’s work here is tremendous: We make about 2 million books, and print about 20 million magazines. Each month The Watchtower and Awake! are presently produced here in 61 separate magazines, in a total of 30 languages. So there is much to do at Bethel, and it is all a very necessary part of the work in preaching “this good news of the kingdom.” Of course, to get all this great amount of work done, people are needed. Are you in position to help?
Because of the kind of work that is done here, there are certain requirements that must be met by applicants. Those invited are healthy young men and women between the ages of 19 and 40. Also healthy married couples over 25 years of age, married more than three years, may apply. They should be without any obligations or responsibilities at present toward family members. All applicants for Bethel service must agree to stay at Bethel for at least four years. But, better still, why not make Bethel service your career, your life’s work?
All who apply should like to do hard work, because that is what we do at Bethel. We have a vast amount of work to be done at the Bethel home, factory, office and Watchtower Farm. Young men and women willing to work hard and devote themselves full time to serving Jehovah at Bethel should write to the Office of the President and ask for an application for Bethel service. But before you write, please read pages 145-147 of the book Organization for Kingdom-preaching and Disciple-making, under the subheading “Bethel Service.” Make this a matter of prayer. If you filed an application before the “Divine Rulership” Assembly and still want to come, please request a new application. It may be that you will be invited to come soon to work at Bethel, “the house of God.”
As befits a family loyally adhering to the theocratic rule, the members of the Bethel family do their work because they love Jehovah God. It is a family that has one interest in mind, and that is making known the name of Jehovah and announcing his kingdom. What joy they have in performing this labor of love in behalf of their fellow workers and all mankind! We hope that more of you can share our joy, especially by making Bethel your life career.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

