Presenting the Good News​—Helping One Another
1 As an “association of brothers” we all want to help one another. (1 Pet. 2:17) This is especially true in connection with the grand work we have been assigned as Kingdom-preachers and disciple-makers. It is very impressive to see the wonderful work that this “association of brothers” has accomplished in bringing the good news to others, spending in the United States over 71 million hours in the field service just last year.
2 “When we consider that many who share in this work are quite young and others are newly associated, with 47,953 being baptized last year in this country, we can see the need to help one another to be effective in our service. But even those who have been a long time in Kingdom service very much appreciate the help and suggestions received from the Kingdom Ministry and the assistance given by the older brothers in showing effective ways to present the good news.
3 Often it is noted that fine presentations are reviewed for us during the service meeting. But by the time we are ready to share in the field service, those thoughts may have already slipped our mind. What can be done where additional meetings for field service are arranged? In addition to considering the text briefly, it is usually beneficial to discuss suggestions on a presentation we can use in the field. If the group will be offering magazines, would it not be good to discuss a few interesting points from the current magazines that might be mentioned to householders?
4 Or, if you will be presenting the regular offer, the discussion might be handled in a variety of ways as it appears best to the brother caring for the group. For example, if a new sermon has been suggested in Kingdom Ministry, it is helpful to review this with the group. Some might feel it of benefit from time to time to ask different publishers to give presentations to the group. On other occasions perhaps just the Scripture texts might be reviewed or talking points from the literature be presented. Perhaps some have had good results using a certain presentation, and their comments would be helpful.
5 For variety, a brief consideration of some of the factors that make our ministry a success could be highlighted. For instance, can we make our introduction more interesting or appealing, catching the interest of householders? Do we make it a point to try to draw them into the conversation, helping them to understand? Do we make the main point we want to convey stand out? Do we try to illustrate the point in a practical way? Do we show enthusiasm and friendliness in our approach? Is our conclusion effective? Do we give them reason to desire what we are offering?
6 By our following these suggestions, when the brothers leave the meeting for field service they will feel prepared to say something specific and thought-provoking. On the other hand, if the person in charge of the group just remarks, ‘I’m sure we all know the offer and a presentation,’ some may feel they are not helped by gathering together as they might have been.
7 Finally, who does not appreciate a warm invitation to work along with another publisher, especially if he is young or rather new in the service? So let us at all times consider helping one another.

