Speak Boldly!
1 She was just a little girl, but she spoke so boldly! Were not our hearts moved by the young Israelite girl in the drama this summer whose faith in Jehovah caused her to speak courageously to her imposing master Naaman? Tactfully, kindly but with conviction she told him of Jehovah’s powers and his ability to save those who put their trust in him. To her, Jehovah was the only God, and she knew that everyone should come to him.​—2 Ki. 5:1-4.
2 As Jehovah’s dedicated people, do we feel the same way she did? Will we speak boldly about Him too? Will we make His name known to our friends, relatives and those who live in the community around us? This is indeed a time to speak boldly, a time to let the people know they are living in the concluding days of this system of things.
3 We have a tremendous help in the Awake! magazine. As an instrument of truth it speaks boldly on the issues of the day. When you read this no doubt you will already have made use of the October 8 issue, which shows straightforwardly that lasting peace will come only from Jehovah through his kingdom arrangement. You will find that the October 22 issue in its opening article asks, “Does modern man need God?,” and then presents material that answers with a most positive YES! As its companion we will be offering the October 15 issue of The Watchtower, which features the stirring talk delivered at the assembly, “Divine Rulership​—The Only Hope of All Mankind.”
4 We believe you will agree that it is not difficult to place Awake! Of course, the more we know about a subject the easier it is to speak about it with confidence; so it is good to get to know what is in Awake! and then, with specific talking points in mind, go in the field service and present the subscription offer. A year’s subscription is inexpensive, only $1.50 for 24 issues, and we are giving free with each new one-year subscription a fifty-cent book (copyrighted before 1961). Just think, $1.50 is less than what many persons pay for one meal, and yet subscribers get a year’s supply of spiritual information.
5 When is the time to speak to others about these things? Just about any time. If it is a matter of organized field service activity, then the weekends seem to be the best time for those who do secular work during the week. Would it be possible to spend more time in the field service on Saturday or Sunday? Why not examine your schedule and see if you can spend more time in the house-to-house work, or in some other feature of preaching?
6 Is it necessary for you as a housewife to be home much of the time because of children or other responsibilities? If so, you may still find occasions during the week to be in the field service, there to offer subscriptions. Even if you are at home you may still be able to preach the good news and take subscriptions. True, it takes courage to speak up when tradesmen come to the door, but the conversation may include world conditions and here is your opportunity to offer a subscription for Awake! Or, you may find, as some publishers do, that you can telephone those you have not been able to find at home at other times. Be determined to speak; let others know God’s truth.
7 Have you tried the store-to-store or street work recently? Boldness is needed here. As people walk along the street or stand waiting for a bus, you can strike up a brief conversation, offering them the magazines. It has been observed in a number of cities that publishers working together miss many opportunities to present the magazines because of conversing with each other or merely standing with the magazines without speaking. On the other hand, we know of an elderly sister who placed many magazines and subscriptions on the street. When asked how she did it, she said that when people asked the cost she would say, “It’s just $1.50 for a year.” Then if they did not take the subscription she offered the single issues. Perhaps you could try this yourself.
8 While being straightforward and determined in our efforts to preach the good news to others, we can still be kind, tactful and pleasant. We want to reach the hearts of those to whom we speak. We have the most wonderful message to deliver and we should always speak with conviction, recognizing that our source of strength is Jehovah. Let us, like the apostles, pray that Jehovah may grant that we “keep speaking . . . with all boldness.”​—Acts 4:29.
[Blurb on page 1]
Loyally adhere to the Theocratic Rule.
[Blurb on page 4]
Can you spend more time in field service?

