Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 8
12 min: Song 90. Introduction. Two elders discuss text and “Question Box” with each other.
15 min: “Speak Boldly!” Cover by question-and-answer method. Give brothers opportunity to relate local experiences of speaking boldly in the field service from door to door or informally at home, school or work.
 5 min: Accounts report. Also, cover appropriate points on turning in subscriptions so all understand how they may cooperate, making sure that each slip is made out neatly, accurately and in triplicate (two copies turned in, one of which is to be marked “copy”).
15 min: “Serving Jehovah Whole-Souled.” Discuss by questions and answers the material in the “Organization” book, Chapter 7, page 132 to page 134, paragraph 3. Have the scriptures looked up to the extent possible and read each paragraph. Emphasize that motivation to serve Jehovah comes from the heart and that each one should endeavor to express appreciation to Jehovah to the fullest extent possible.
13 min: Concluding comments. Also have brothers prepared with talking points from October 15 “Watchtower” and October 22 “Awake!” Encourage weekend activity with special magazines, with emphasis on subscription offer. If talks on “Paradise​—Theocracy” book have started, encourage all to attend. Song 101. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 15
20 min: Song 24. Introduction. Elder discusses text, then Branch Letter, with a group that could be eligible for Bethel service. Discuss importance of work done at Bethel in relation to the entire organization. Talk about routine of life at Bethel, type of work done. Consider motive in applying for Bethel service: not just to get away from home, or to see New York, or to be looked up to by others, but out of love for Jehovah and his people and with willingness to serve in any assignment to advance the Kingdom interests. Read excerpts about how those at Bethel feel about serving there. (w70 59, 60; w66 639; g69 11/22 19)
10 min: Talk by brother on “‘I’m Not Interested’​—Why?” based on article in August 8 “Awake!” Show why knowing how people think and reason helps us to overcome this objection. May also wish to include thoughts on overcoming objections to, ‘I already subscribe to a number of magazines.’
15 min: Jehovah​—A Name to Respect. Talk and audience discussion. Base this on material in “Aid to Bible Understanding” under subject, “Jehovah,” page 885, paragraph 3, “Importance of the Name,” to page 889, paragraph 3. One handling this part should not deal with just technicalities and figures. Make this part one providing faith-building information and practical material for the field ministry. For example, one could show how to answer questions that might come up, such as ‘Why worship Jehovah when many say he is the tribal God of the Jews?’ or, ‘Why do you use the name Jehovah?’ or, ‘How does one get to know Jehovah?’ If the material lends itself to answering a question often encountered locally, then such a question and answer should be considered.
15 min: Concluding comments. Include experiences by publishers in placing the special issues of magazines and in obtaining subscriptions, also build up enthusiasm for the public talks on the book “Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy!” Song 44. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 22
(Plan this meeting yourself. Might wish to prepare for this by asking brothers to submit beforehand questions or situations that they would like to have dealt with to improve their understanding of the Scriptures or to carry on their field ministry more effectively. The presiding overseer or, at his request, another elder can decide what questions to use and the manner in which the information will be presented. If sufficient questions are not brought up by the publishers, undoubtedly the elders will have thoughts as to what material could best be considered for the spiritual welfare of the congregation.)
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 29
10 min: Song 19. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: Suggested sermon for November​—“Paradise Restored by Theocracy.”
(3 min) Chairman talks with audience: First time to use new book “Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy!” in door-to-door work. We are getting to know book through public talks and reading it, so now can offer in field ministry with enthusiasm. May wish to use following Scriptural presentation or another one that is best for you.
(10 min) Chairman discusses with audience development of presentation. After appropriate introduction to householder one might say: “People everywhere are interested in good government. Would you be interested in knowing what the Bible says the future holds as regards rulership here and all over the earth?” (Allow for comment.) Answering according to householder’s reply, you may wish to say, “if you are familiar with the Bible account, you know that God put man in a paradise but that man was later expelled from that paradise because of disobedience. However, did you know that God promises to restore paradise by a government of his own? [Here again, allow for reply.] In the last book, Revelation, He says He will bring to ruin those ruining the earth. (Rev. 11:18) And we read at Revelation 21:3 and 4 that . . . [Read.] So it is by God’s rule, a theocracy, not man’s rule, that paradise will be restored. This publication ‘Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy!’ describes how this will come about. It discusses in detail the Bible books of Haggai and Zechariah. It is yours for a contribution of 50 cents.”
(2 min) Encourage brothers to practice presentation at home so as to present new book effectively.
12 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Helping One Another.” Handle with questions and answers, but include demonstration of what can be done at meetings for field service to help prepare publishers for day’s service. May want to use Scriptural presentation discussed in previous part or presentation of magazines. Make clear that if publishers want to go directly into field service after meetings on Sunday without having a separate meeting for field service later, such can be done. See June 1967 “Kingdom Ministry.” page 4, and July 1968 “Kingdom Ministry,” page 4.
13 min: Jehovah​—Our Unchanging God. Upbuilding talk based on material in “Aid to Bible Understanding,” page 892, paragraph 5, to page 894, paragraph 3. Emphasize God’s unchangeable interest in his people despite their imperfection and why we should serve him zealously out of love and not out of compulsion.
10 min: Concluding comments. Urge all to support public talks on new book. Encourage turning in all subscriptions promptly. Song 50. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 5
10 min: Song 73. Text comments and pertinent Announcements.
13 min: “Let the Young Children Come.” This could be handled by questions and answers, also allowing time for discussing with younger brothers and sisters in congregation what they are doing to spread the good news among their schoolmates and upbuilding one another at school and at other opportunities.
 7 min: Discussion of Theocratic News items. Use this part to build up interest in whole association of brothers world wide. Let the congregation know what was accomplished in the field ministry in October. Mention also talk on new book, encouraging all to attend and to bring interested persons with them.
30 min: Your Relationship with God. Cover material in “Organization” book, page 13 to middle of page 18. Read each paragraph. Emphasize in this the disowning of ourselves by the giving of ourselves to Jehovah to do his will as an individual. Show the importance of the field ministry as a means of expressing our appreciation for approved relationship with God. Song 72. Prayer.

