Announcements
● Literature offer for August: Survival book for a contribution of $1.00. Any brochure, but especially Life on Earth or Divine Name for 30¢ each, may be used as an alternate offer. September: Peace and Security; if none in stock, any other 192-page book for $1.00 contribution. October: Subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for a contribution of $4.00 for each one-year subscription. November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures with any older 192-page book of which the congregation has a good supply, for a contribution of $4.50.
● Congregations will begin consideration of the United in Worship book in Congregation Book Studies during the week of October 13, 1985.
● Starting in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk “Bringing the Many to Righteousness in the Time of the End.” This will be a picture slide presentation. The public talk to be given by district overseers in connection with the new series of circuit assemblies beginning in September will be “Global Peace​—From What Source?”
● During the week of September 2-7, 1985, the Society will be taking an inventory of all literature on hand in Brooklyn. Because of this inventory, no congregation literature orders will be processed for shipment or for pickup during that week.
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature. Please fill out the forms completely and send the original to us no later than September 6. Keep a carbon copy for your files. We are sending a third copy for use as a work sheet.
● 1986 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses: Publishers and pioneers, please order your calendars through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these calendars now. Then on September 1, 1985, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society, using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Calendars in other languages should be listed under “Other Language Publications,” showing the quantity for each language separately as well as the year 1986. The calendars will be available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish.
Calendars are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers, pioneers, and the public. Do not send the remittance with the order. (See the Cost List, pars. 22-4.) Until the calendars are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices.
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding
(Volume 25, In-Is)   ​—Italian
(Volume 26, Is-Le)   ​—Italian
(Volume 27, Le-Loc)  ​—Italian
(Volume 28, Log-Man) ​—Italian
(Volume 29, Man-Mel) ​—Italian
(Volume 30, Mel-Moa) ​—Italian
(Volume 31, Mod-Naz) ​—Italian
(Volume 32, Naz-Of)  ​—Italian
(Volume 33, Of-Pal)  ​—Italian
(Volume 34, Pal-Pec) ​—Italian
(Volume 35, Pec-Pie) ​—Italian
(Volume 36, Pie-Pre) ​—Italian
(Volume 37, Pre-Put) ​—Italian
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1980​—Italian
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1981​—Italian
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1982​—Italian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The First of Chronicles (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—English

