Joyfully Increasing Our Praise to Jehovah
1 Summer has been a busy season for all of us, theocratically and otherwise. For families with children home from school, there were perhaps additional responsibilities in caring for their needs. Some may have been able to auxiliary pioneer for a month or two. Vacation time provided a change of pace for many, and there was the activity in planning for and attending the “Integrity Keepers” Convention.
2 Now as we again settle into our regular routine, it is time to plan our activities for the months ahead. The district convention program encouraged us to increase our Kingdom service. How can we do that during the new service year, and especially during the autumn months that are now upon us?
3 As summer ends, it may be easier to find more people at home when we call. Pleasant fall weather conditions may allow for longer days in field service. This can be advantageous if the congregation has either outlying territory or other areas yet to be worked this year. How will you be able to widen your service opportunities in the days ahead?
IN SCHOOL
4 What about you young ones who are still in school? No doubt you had opportunities to witness to schoolmates and teachers during the past school year. Now, however, you may have different teachers and classmates. Do they know that you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? If not, you will want to make it known to them during the first few weeks in school this year.
5 As worldly holidays come up, some will want to know why you do not join in the celebrations. Take advantage of their curiosity and receptiveness by witnessing to them. Perhaps you will be asked to make a report on what you did during the summer. Tell them about the unique experience that you enjoyed attending the district convention. Have your teachers received the School brochure? Use the Evolution and Youth books to give a witness, or share with others selected articles from The Watchtower and Awake! Many of our brothers and sisters were first introduced to the truth by classmates who were Witnesses. School is indeed a fertile field to increase your Kingdom service during the coming autumn months.
BE AN AUXILIARY PIONEER
6 Just before the summer started, many of us were privileged to share in the auxiliary pioneer work during the months of March and April. Have you considered doing it again this autumn? September has five Sundays, November has five Saturdays, and December has five Sundays plus time off from school for the holidays. Why not make plans right now to auxiliary pioneer this fall? The elders will be more than glad to give you an application.
7 There may be other personal circumstances that will change with the coming of autumn. As Christians, we want to take advantage of favorable opportunities for increasing our Kingdom service. Our united efforts in declaring the good news will bring us personal satisfaction and will increase praise to Jehovah’s name.

