Manifesting the “Spirit of Faith”
1 It takes genuine faith to speak the message of God’s Kingdom boldly. The apostle Paul wrote: “Now because we have the same spirit of faith as that of which it is written . . . we too exercise faith and therefore we speak.” (2 Cor. 4:13) Jehovah’s people today have that faith. And speak we did​—in excess of 505 million hours during the 1984 service year! Among those who took the lead in this display of genuine Christian faith were the pioneers. Congregation publishers, too, made a commendable display of genuine faith.
2 As a Kingdom publisher you hold the key position in the modern theocratic society. Faith that these are the last days, along with a sense of urgency, may move you to examine your circumstances prayerfully to see if you can do more as a Kingdom publisher, perhaps even pioneer. Do you have family obligations? Responsibilities in the congregation? Perhaps your health is not the best. Some have financial commitments. Still others may feel they are too old. For some, these may be legitimate reasons for not entering the pioneer work now. But tens of thousands of our brothers and sisters have kept the goal of pioneer service before them and, when circumstances allowed, have joyfully entered the pioneer ranks.
3 “The assured expectation” we have as Christians should influence our decisions and deeply affect our lives. If you are about to finish high school, ask yourself: ‘How can I best show my love for God and for Christ with the freedom I have as a young unencumbered person?’ Are material pursuits robbing some in your family of the joy of increased service? Some who have retired from their secular work have found their new situation opens the door to pioneer service. Whatever your situation, your faith can be given fuller expression by honestly appraising your circumstances with a view to serving as a regular pioneer.​—Heb. 11:1.
4 The pioneer ranks increased from 29,764 to 34,232 last September when the 1985 service year began. During the one month of August 1984, more than 4,300 applications for regular pioneer service were received. Can we do something similar this September? Pioneer applications should be submitted a month in advance. However, if you wish to take up the pioneer work the first of September this year, you may submit your application to your Congregation Service Committee even now. It is not too late!
5 Can you make definite plans to pioneer for at least a year? Your sense of firm commitment will give you added incentive. If you cannot adjust your circumstances just now to serve as a regular pioneer, can your service as a congregation publisher be improved or can you possibly serve as an auxiliary pioneer periodically or even continuously? Faith grows when exercised. Your faith and confidence can be nourished by auxiliary pioneering, and you may even realize that, with Jehovah’s help and blessing, you can serve as a regular pioneer.​—Mal. 3:10; Luke 14:28-30.
6 The “spirit of faith” is truly manifested among Jehovah’s people today. Why not seriously consider enriching yourself spiritually by becoming a regular or an auxiliary pioneer starting the first of September?

