Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 4
Song 128
10 min: Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Suggest talking points to be used in presenting current magazines on second Saturday, August 10. Continue offering August 8 Awake! to persons involved in law enforcement.
20 min: “Manifesting the ‘Spirit of Faith.’” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Encourage those whose circumstances will permit them to auxiliary pioneer or enter the regular pioneer service in September to fill out the appropriate pioneer application form now. Read paragraphs and key scriptures as time allows.
15 min: Continue Offering Survival Book During August. Discussion, demonstrations, and experiences encouraging zealous field service using the Survival book offer. Commend brothers for good work already done offering this publication during July and outline opportunities open to us during August. Present one or two brief demonstrations of how local publishers have effectively offered the book. Interview one or two publishers who have placed the book and who may have been able to start a home Bible study with the interested person. Outline arrangements for weekend field service and encourage all to have a share.
Song 43 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 11
Song 192
10 min: Local announcements. Include accounts report. Briefly discuss daily text and encourage all to benefit from regular consideration of the daily text individually, with family, or in service groups. Commend publishers for what was accomplished in the field service in July. Outline congregation’s field service arrangements and encourage all to spend some time preaching the good news this weekend.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Personal Conviction.” Question-and-answer discussion of article.
10 min: “New Circuit Assembly Program to Help Us Glorify God.” Talk building anticipation for new circuit assembly program.
10 min: “Finding Joy in a Trouble-Filled World.” Talk based on article in June 15, 1985, Watchtower.
Song 19 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 18
Song 16
10 min: “Another Encouraging Memorial Report,” Theocratic News, and local announcements. Suggest brief magazine presentations that the brothers may be able to use next Saturday. Be sure to select points that would likely appeal to people in local territory.
20 min: “Joyfully Increasing Our Praise to Jehovah.” Encouraging talk, with some audience participation. Does the congregation have territory that should be worked before winter months set in? Are arrangements being made for groups to work in outlying areas of the territory? Some publishers who are making special arrangements to increase Kingdom service during autumn months may be called on for prepared comments on what they will be doing. What field service arrangements are being made to help those who will be auxiliary pioneering during these months? Encourage those who wish to pioneer to turn in applications now.
15 min: Are You Benefiting From “Young People Ask . . . ” Articles? Talk by brother who can appeal to young ones in the congregation and their parents. May focus on article in July 8, 1985, Awake! on “Is Marijuana Really Harmful?” but make reference to various articles that have appeared in Awake! pointing out how these have been appreciated by young people around the world. Encourage youth and parents to cooperate in considering these timely articles. They can open the way for beneficial discussions between parents and their children.
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 25
Song 213
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Our Part in Showing Theocratic Submission.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Read paragraphs and discuss application of cited and quoted scriptures as time permits.
15 min: Local needs.
10 min: Suggest talking points and presentations for Peace and Security or other book to be offered in September. Outline arrangements for weekend field service and encourage all to be prepared for preaching work on first Sunday of September.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.

