Our Part in Showing Theocratic Submission
1 Theocratic submission is a key factor in the progress and spiritual advancement of a congregation. Paul emphasized this at Hebrews 13:17: “Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over your souls as those who will render an account.” This indicates that the spiritual well-being of the congregation as a whole, as well as of each one individually, depends upon our willingness to cooperate and work closely with the elders as they fulfill their responsibilities as shepherds of the flock.
2 Further emphasizing this, Paul made this appeal: “Now we request you, brothers, to have regard for those who are working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord and admonishing you; and to give them more than extraordinary consideration in love because of their work.” (1 Thess. 5:12, 13) We can show this consideration not only by being respectful toward the elders but more importantly by doing all we can to assist them in getting the work done.
WORK OF ELDERS
3 Consider some of the responsibilities assigned to the elders. Besides teaching at meetings, they also take the lead in the field ministry. (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) Correspondence with the Society and other necessary business must be handled. (Compare Acts 6:1-6.) They look after the spiritual welfare of those experiencing problems, helping them avoid anything that would endanger their relationship with Jehovah. (John 10:11, 15) So, they are required to spend much time dealing with matters connected with the Kingdom work.
CARRY OUR OWN LOAD
4 Since all of us are imperfect, we may offend each other at times, resulting in strained relations. But, personal difficulties of a minor nature should be resolved quickly and privately. (Col. 3:12-14; om pp. 139-40) If you are convinced that someone in the congregation has committed a serious sin against you personally, do not be hasty to turn to the overseers or someone else, requesting them to intervene in your behalf. As Jesus counseled, speak privately with the one against whom you have a complaint. (Matt. 18:15, 16; om p. 142, pars. 2, 3) If you are unable to resolve the matter and it is turned over to the elders for investigation and judgment, leave the problem in their hands, trusting in Jehovah that it will be resolved.
5 We can be a great help to the elders by following Scriptural principles that direct us to be modest, chaste in our conduct, and diligent in caring for our family responsibilities. (om pp. 63-4; Titus 2:2-5) Our dress, grooming, and decorum should bespeak the dignity associated with worshiping Jehovah at his house. (Eccl. 5:1; 1 Tim. 2:9, 10; Gal. 6:4, 5) Our conscientious effort in these areas will help maintain a wholesome spirit in the congregation.
6 The elders are concerned about the prompt, orderly handling of congregational affairs. They greatly appreciate it when we share in service regularly, turn in reports promptly, and fulfill our assignments in the Theocratic Ministry School. Working our assigned territory thoroughly, and promptly reporting its coverage, is also helpful. Doing our share to keep the Kingdom Hall clean and in good repair is a fine way to assist the elders.​—Neh. 10:39.
HELP OTHERS
7 Keeping the congregation spiritually strong and active is a major concern of the elders. (1 Thess. 2:7, 8) We can assist personally in helping others by ‘speaking consolingly to the depressed souls and supporting the weak.’ (1 Thess. 5:14) Our zeal for the preaching work serves to motivate others to do more. A keen personal interest in our brothers helps keep the congregation strong.​—Phil. 2:4.
8 So while the elders are assigned to shepherd the flock, it takes everyone, each one doing his share, to ensure the proper ‘growth of the body and the building up of itself in love.’ (Eph. 4:16; Prov. 11:14) If we appreciate the vital role played by theocratic submission in the spiritual growth of the congregation, we will ‘reckon the elders worthy of double honor’ and give them wholehearted cooperation as they shepherd the flock of God.​—1 Tim. 5:17.

