Presenting the Good News​—With Personal Conviction
1 The apostle Paul, in recalling the hard work of the Thessalonica congregation, said to them, “The good news we preach did not turn up among you with speech alone but also with power and with holy spirit and strong conviction . . . and you became imitators of us and of the Lord.” (1 Thess. 1:5, 6) Yes, Paul and his associates, along with the congregation in Thessalonica, knew for a certainty that they were worshiping God properly. This conviction was reflected in their speech. Our ministry, too, should reflect strong personal conviction.
SPEAK FROM THE HEART
2 How can we reflect personal conviction in our ministry? Basically it involves expressing what is in our heart. Our manner of presenting the good news should show that we truly believe what we are saying. If we speak from our heart, our sincerity and personal conviction will shine through, for ‘out of the heart’s abundance the mouth speaks.’​—Luke 6:45.
3 If we are to reflect personal conviction, we must have a deep appreciation for the truth and for Jehovah’s organization. Having the truth, it is your responsibility to help others learn it. Thinking positively about these things will help motivate you to present the truth with conviction. Jesus set a fine example for us in speaking with the Samaritan woman.​—John 4:21-24.
4 The way we offer literature reflects whether we are speaking from the heart. When presenting the good news, we should be familiar with the literature offer and select specific points that can be used to whet the householder’s appetite. This will also build up our confidence as we present the literature.
AVOID MANNERISMS
5 Sometimes certain mannerisms can affect the householder’s view of our sincerity and conviction. Needlessly looking at our literature or allowing our gaze to wander while speaking to a householder could give the impression that we are not sincere. We should look at our householder while speaking, indicating that we believe what we are saying.
6 Some who are shy may find it difficult to maintain visual contact with the householder. Is this your problem? If so, what can be done about it? Sometimes this problem is a result of thinking too much about your own weaknesses and inabilities while speaking, perhaps feeling that someone else is better qualified to help the person. However, this is Jehovah’s work. Think of Jehovah and his unlimited power and might instead of your own weaknesses. When the apostle Paul was in a position where he had to stand alone, he said, “the Lord stood near me and infused power into me, that through me the preaching might be fully accomplished.” (2 Tim. 4:17) You, too, can receive power from Jehovah through prayer.
7 Other mannerisms, such as shifting from one foot to another or excessively thumbing through your Bible or literature, may reveal nervousness. These mannerisms can be controlled if you become aware of them and rely on Jehovah to help you to develop greater courage.
8 Facial expressions, too, are important since they generally reveal what is in your heart. Strong conviction and a sincere interest in the householder should be reflected in your countenance.
9 Our choice of words also has a large bearing on the impression we leave. If we repeatedly use expressions such as “I think” and “maybe” the householder could get the idea that we are not sure of what we are saying. Our choice of words should reflect conviction on our part.​—Compare Matthew 7:28, 29.
10 As you work hard to present the good news with personal conviction, you can have the assurance that ‘your labors are not in vain in connection with the Lord.’​—1 Cor. 15:58.

