A Message of Hope!
1 Inflation! Sickness! Crime! War! What can mankind do about these things? How much longer will we have to suffer? Is there any reason to hope for better times? Questions like these are being asked by people all over the world. Because of having no hope, many despair. “Expectation postponed is making the heart sick,” is the way the wise man expressed it at Proverbs 13:12.
2 The Bible tells us that these things are to take place in the last days. (Rev. 6:1-8) And it foretells from what source relief will come. People are looking to man’s government for help. Or they look to astrologers or fortune-tellers. Some look to the scientists. But none can be sure of lasting relief from these sources. Thankfully, we know that the only place to look for sure help is the kingdom of God.
A NEW TRACT
3 The tract for September has as its title “HOPE FOR ENDING INFLATION, SICKNESS, CRIME, WAR?” It will surely bring a message of hope to sincere people.
4 The tract points to the Bible as the only book in which man can securely put his hope. It shows that the very existence of man’s problems is a basis for hope. (See Luke 21:28.) The third page illustrates that inflation will not only be controlled, but will be completely done away with. (Ps. 72:16) Sickness will cease. (Rev. 21:4) Crime will end. (Ps. 37:10) War will be no more. (Ps. 46:9) All the grand things that the Bible tells us about will be realized in this generation and be enjoyed by people right here on the earth.
5 How can we help people to know of this sure hope? One way is by presenting the new tract with enthusiasm and conviction. During the month of September we all will have an opportunity to do this.
HOW TO PRESENT THE TRACT
6 Many brothers have expressed appreciation for opportunities to talk to people at length concerning the contents of previous tracts. We encourage you to do this whenever possible. Since the tract offer is one of the easiest to present, many who have never shared in witnessing before may want to start. Encourage them to do so if they qualify. What about Memorial attenders we have been assisting? Would some of them qualify to share in this activity during the month? Could some be reactivated? During September it will be a good time to assist these.
7 Because of the appealing title, many individuals will be happy to obtain a copy. You may simply hand them a tract and encourage them to read it. Or you could say: “Good morning. My name is . . . . Because of the skyrocketing inflation, dreaded diseases, increasing crime right in our own neighborhood and even the threat of World War III, many people are understandably disturbed. Do you think there is hope for better times? [Allow householder to answer.] We are pleased to give you this tract entitled ‘HOPE FOR ENDING INFLATION, SICKNESS, CRIME, WAR?’ Page two shows that many people are turning to astrologers and fortune-tellers to learn what the future holds. Do you believe they could have the answers needed? [Allow householder to answer.] The Bible gives us a hope for better times. [Then discuss one of the points on page three.] This is your free copy of the tract. To help you further learn about the Bible’s hope we are offering this publication [any 192-page book] on a contribution of 60c. We would like you to have it also.”
8 Jehovah has provided the only sure message of hope. Let us share it with as many as we can!

