Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 31
10 min: Song 5. Local announcements.
20 min: Congregation secretary discusses letter of July 20, 1980, regarding new MEDICAL ALERT card. Distribute a copy of card to each in audience who wants one; then discuss what is to go in each blank. Stress need for neatness and having two witnesses sign. Letter can be placed on information board for a month and then retained in congregation file for future use.
15 min: “A Message of Hope!” Question-and-answer discussion with demonstration of paragraph 7. Pass out tract beforehand. As you consider the paragraphs, read corresponding page in tract.
15 min: Service overseer considers article on “New Literature Prices.” Song 119 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 7
10 min: Song 85, local announcements, accounts report.
20 min: “A Loving Provision from Jehovah.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Also allow time to ask congregation: (1) What obstacles do some face in getting to meetings on time? (2) How do they endeavor to effectively deal with such obstacles? (Eccl. 3:1) Also, consider problems our brothers have in other lands in order to attend meetings and how they overcome them. (See w79 8/15 pp. 10, 11; yb78 pp. 204, 205; w74 pp. 518, 519.)
15 min: Talk by service overseer on group field service. Commend brothers for fine support of weekend activity, especially first Sunday of each month. Discuss what field arrangements are in operation in the congregation. Point out benefits of working with the book study group: (1) closer bond of love, and (2) sharing ideas and learning from one another. Give suggestions on how to share regularly in group field service activity. (Also see June 1980, Our Kingdom Service.)
15 min: Relate encouraging experiences with HOPE tract. Remind brothers to bring June 15, 1980, Watchtower next week. Song 66 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 14
10 min: Song 55, Announcements and local announcements.
15 min: Discuss main points of June 15, 1980, Watchtower pp. 5-7, “Why Must Christians Keep Separate from the World?”
15 min: Talk on June 15, 1980, Watchtower pp. 8-10, “What It Takes to Keep Separate from the World.”
15 min: Review highlights of latest circuit overseer’s visit; point out the progress being made in the congregation. Commend brothers and offer appropriate suggestions for further progress.
 5 min: Song 88 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 21
10 min: Song 60 and local announcements. Include experience having to do with tract work.
10 min: Consider article “Do Not Become Their Prey!” and Theocratic News.
12 min: Joshua, a Man of Strong Faith and Courage. If possible, have a father handle this part with a number of young children. Draw out the children and help them to see that Joshua was strong in faith and courageous. Use My Book of Bible Stories, stories 38, 43 and 45.
20 min: “Be Courageous and Strong.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Also, arrange in advance to interview one or two of the younger members of the congregation concerning occasions when they have had to be courageous and strong in harmony with any of the points in the article.
 8 min: Song 73 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 28
10 min: Song 37. Local announcements. Make field service announcements, encouraging all who can to support field service arrangements for first Sunday of the month.
15 min: Arrange locally according to needs of congregation. Or a talk can be given, based on the July 1, 1980, Watchtower article “Have You Tried to Make Amends?”
15 min: The offer for October: Awake! subscription for a contribution of $2.50. The theme of the October 8 issue of Awake! is “How Can You Cope with Stress?” Have experienced publisher or pioneer demonstrate following presentation. After asking the householder what some of the things are that cause stress, direct the conversation to the current Topic for Conversation, “Reason and Remedy for World Woes.” Draw the attention of the householder to Revelation 12:12 and Romans 16:20, getting his comments on what these scriptures say.
A second brief demonstration can feature an article from magazine that appeals to the publisher, who expresses conviction that householder will be equally impressed with the practical information presented. Ask audience for their observations on effective points of the presentation or different articles they plan to feature.
Encourage all to keep presentations simple and uncomplicated, showing householders practical value of information in the magazines. Several issues of the magazine can be displayed to help householder see value of the subscription. Encourage the offering of subscriptions in house-to-house work, informal witnessing, when making return visits, and the offering of single issues if the subscription offer is not accepted.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—On the First Sunday of the Month.” Questions and answers. Also include any encouraging experiences or expressions from local publishers concerning their work on the first Sunday of the month.
 5 min: Song 89 and prayer.

