Presenting the Good News—On the First Sunday of the Month
1 Do you have a regular share in the work of Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making? (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) Many have been aided to share with others in this work on the first Sunday of the month as well as at other times.
2 When the announcement is made in the congregation that “This coming Sunday will be the first Sunday of the month . . . ” and field service arrangements are outlined, reports indicate that the response and support have been very encouraging. Many put forth a special effort to share in the house-to-house work on that day. Brothers have often made adjustments so that other matters do not interfere with arrangements to share with the rest of the congregation in this special activity.
3 One elder said concerning himself and his wife: “We make it our business to share in the house-to-house work with other publishers on that Sunday for sure, and on other weekends as we are able.” Many publishers who were not participating in house-to-house work on Sunday are now doing so consistently.—Acts 20:20.
4 It affords a wonderful opportunity for parents to work with their children. One father said: “This arrangement helps us to keep a good schedule for field service.” Another said: “If our family finds it necessary to be away from the congregation on a weekend, we try to arrange things so that it is not the first weekend of the month. Jesus said ‘Seek first the kingdom,’ so we try to put field service in the first place each month.”—Matt. 6:33.
5 One sister, with an unbelieving husband, who was not permitted to share in the service on weekends got a pleasant surprise. She told her husband of the Society’s suggestion that Jehovah’s people share in the witness work on at least the first Sunday of the month. He said: “That’s fine. You can go out the first Sunday of the month and I’ll sleep late that morning.”
OTHER BENEFITS
6 Elders and other publishers have been delighted that they have had opportunity to work with some they were not able to work with on other occasions. Many are encouraged by seeing others in the work. One brother said: “There is a special joy in knowing so many are working together in a united way.” A sister who had not normally been sharing in the work on Sunday came back rejoicing that she had started the Bible study that she had been praying for.
7 Many congregations have reported very good support of the special field service arrangements for the first Sunday of each month. Some have had close to 100 percent support. Regular reminders from the platform and personal invitations during the week before encourage many to share. Good support by the elders and ministerial servants is vital.
8 Are you out in field service with the group on the first Sunday of the month? Could you arrange your affairs so that this might be possible? If you can, we encourage you to do so.

