[6024] 


of his sermons, 
time. 


Further announcement will be made in due 



Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JANUARY 1, 1917 


No. 1 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


God's children appreciate the fact that his Word is a "light 
unto their feet, and a lantern unto their pathway." To the 
divine Word and providence they look for guidance, instruction 
and comfort. They believe the Word of God^and rely upon it, 
and thus walk by faith. They view current events in the 
light of divine prophecy. For several years Bible students have 
been expecting a great international war, followed by revolution
 and anarchy. (1 Kings 19:11-13) They expect the great 
ecclesiastical systems, conceived in sin, barn in iniquity and 
operated in fraud and deceit, to be swept away with a great 
besom of destruction. (Revelation 18:5-21) They have looked 
for the governments of earth, built upon false and unrighteous 
foundations, to crumble away amidst a great storm of human 
passion. (Psalm 18:7-19; Jeremiah 25:8-38) They have expected
 a dark night just preceding the ushering in of the 
glorious kingdom of Messiah. (Isaiah 21 : 11, 12) They expect 
these things because the Bible says so. God's Word is true. 

For the encouragement of hia followers, the great Master 
said, "When these things begin to come to pass, then look 
up and lift up your heads, for your deliverance draweth nigh." 
(Luke 21:28) "Be patient, therefore, brethren"; the kingdom 
of Messiah is at the door. 4 

EXPECTATIONS BEHTO REALIZED 

Current events confirm our expectations. The new year 
dawns amidst great strife, turmoil and bloodshed. For nearly 
two and one-half years a mighty conflict has raged amongst 
the European nations, and the storm of destruction continues 
unabated. In that time more than a dozen kingdoms and nations
 have been involved; and upwards of thirty millions of 
men, armed with the most deadly weapons known to modern 
science, have engaged in wholesale destruction of human life 
and property. Approximately seven millions of men have been 
killed, and many more millions are insane or nervous wrecks 
by reason of the indescribable experiences through which they 
have passed. 

Jehovah, through his Prophet, foretold the coming of this 
great storm, describing it as a "great and strong wind which 
rent the mountains and brake in pieces the rocks before the 
Lord." The Bible deals largely in symbols. "Wind" is a 
symbol of war; "mountains," a symbol of kingdoms or governments
, and "rocks" a symbol of the solid or more stable 
parts of the governments. In this picture, therefore, the rocks 
would very fitly represent the financial strongholds of the governments
. When the financial strength of a government is 
gone, the government itself is practically gone. 

It is apparent to all observing ones that the warring nations
 are on the verge of bankruptcy. For the purpose of procuring
 money with which to conduct the war, the belligerents 
have borrowed fabulous amounts, for which they have issued 
bonds, treasury notes and other promises to pay. The amount 
of bonded indebtedness of the warring nations is now so 
enormous that there is not enough money in all the earth to 
pay the interest on that indebtedness. How then, will it ever 
be possible to pay the principal? 

Great Britain and her Allies have borrowed heavily from 
Americans through the instrumentality of certain American 
financiers. These nations are desperately attempting to negotiate
 other loans through the same channels. As an evidence 
of the desperation to which these nations are driven, we cite 
the recent attempt of Great Britain to borrow from American 


investors one billion dollars upon unsecured treasury notes, 
which have no basis for issue and are strictly fiat money. Some 
time prior to this attempt, the British government obtained 
credits in the United States to the amount of $1,100,000,000. 
About one-half of this amount was obtained upon unsecured 
paper, and was taken largely 1 by munition manufacturers and 
other large creditors who expected to make enough profit out 
of the sale of munitions to cover any loss that might occur. 

About the first of December last, the President of the 
United States became aware of the attempt of the British government
, through its American agents, to sell to American investors
 a billion dollars of flat credits, designated as "short 
time treasury notes." Foreseeing the uncertainty of the payment
 of such notes, President Wilson and the Federal Reserve 
board exposed this dangerous scheme by warning American investors
 against the purchase of these. Discussing this question 
editorially, one of the leading American dailies recently said: 
"When the British government came back for more 
credit and wanted a real loan in Wall Street, then Wall 
Street was not so certain of the value of the treasury 
notes. It wanted security in the shape of American stocks 
and bonds, and insisted upon having it. 

"The British government has no American stocks and 
bonds and not a great deal of gold to spare. After having 
taken care of Wall Street's preferred loans, still it wants 
more American money on credit. So certain English 
agents among American bankers attempted to persuade 
American Investors, through American banks, to buy 
one billion dollars of unsecured treasury notes, when Wall 
Street was unwilling to lend half that amount against a 
year ago without additional collateral American security. 
"It is probable that these Anglo-American bankers, 
whose prestige is very great, would have carried this disastrous
 -scheme through without a hitch had not the President
 and the Federal Reserve Board interferred with their 
warning. 

"Thes'e notes are unsecured, and are subject to the 
hazard of defeat in war, of national bankruptcy through 
prolongation of war, and of repudiation in case of social 
revolution after war. 

"They have no gold basis; for the British government 
has already outstanding more of their promises to pay — 
more of this fiat money, in fact, than all the gold that has 
been produced since the Christian era began could redeem. 
"There is not gold enough in all the countries of Europe 
combined to pay ten cents on the dollar of the paper fiat 
treasury notes that have already been issued by Great 
Britain." 
Financiers everywhere are trembling, and "men's hearts 
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which 
are coming on the earth." (Luke 21:26) All these things 
that we see are but the beginning of greater sorrows. The end 
shall be "a time of trouble such as was not since the beginning
 of the world." 

Each warring nation has hoped for victory, but it has not 
come. Discouraged and dismayed at the utter failure to deal 
a crushing blow, the rulers of some of the nations have impressed
 their strongest men, that mightier efforts might be put 
fortlv In desperation, government officials have resigned their 
positions; and others have been asked to take their places. 


[6025] 


(3-4) 


(4-5) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


TLft British ministry recently fell; and a new ministry, organized
 with l>avid Lloyd George as Premier, is now threatened 
by those who favor peace. In November last a new ruler 
ascended the throne in Austria; a new cabinet was organized, 
and within one month that cabinet has fallen. 

CRT TOE PEACE— GREATER SORROWS TO FOLLOW 

Germany desires peace and proposes terms. It is believed
 that all the ruling nations desire peace; but some of 
these nations, particularly the British, are too proud to make 
peace yet. But may we not expect peace among the nations at 
an early date? We are not inclined to that opinion. The nations
 must be further weakened. It may be expected , however, 
t£at the warring nations will agree upon some sort of peace 
terms in the not far distant future. But such a peace will not 
be a lasting one; it will be merely temporary. 

It may be expected that politicians will from henceforth 
have much to say about peace; that the ministers of the 
nominal church systems, who have been advising their respective
 nations to war against other nations, contrary to the 
Word of God, will also say "Peace"; that people in general, 
unaware of God's purposes, will say "Peace" and will believe 
that safety has come to them. There will be, doubtless, a 
short period of peace; but it will be merely a lull before a 
greater convulsion. We base our conclusion upon the Scriptures
. These clearly indicate that there will be a great earthquake
 (symbolic of revolution) — "an earthquake such as was 
not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake 
and so great." — Revelation 16:18. 

St. Paul, writing of the "day of the Lord,"whioh he declared
 would come upon the earth as a thief in the night, 
said: "For when they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden
 destruction cometh upon them as travail upon a woman 
with child; and they shall not escape." — \ Thessalonians 5:3. 

REVOLUTION CERTAEK 

Corroborative of this, the Lord in 1 Kings 19:11 describes 
the second stage of the trouble on the earth in these words: 
"And after the wind an earthquake." This picture is symbolic 
of revolution. Having faith in God's Word, let us look about 
U£ and see whether there is any evidence that this mighty 
earthquake is near at hand. The Apostle assured the watchers 
that they would not need to be in ignorance respecting that 
day, saying: V( Ye brethren, are not in darkness, that that day 
should overtake you as a thief." 

Revolution is the result of discontent on the part of the 
governed, and a determination on their part to be no longer 
subject to the rule of constituted authority. Before the war 
the people of Europe were greatly burdened with taxation. The 
increase of national indebtedness, resulting from the war, is 
now so great that the burden of annual taxation must be increased
 more than 400% in order to raise the interest on the 
debt. Seven millions of Europe's able-bodied, wealta^producing 
men have perished on the battle-field. The earning capacity of 
those surviving is less than prior to the war, because of their 
weakened physical condition, even if after the war there be 
sufficient employment for them to earn money. The war has 
so impoverished the nations engaged in the conflict that they 
cannot further issue bonds to rebuild the destroyed property* 
Hence the opportunity for earning money by daily labor is 
greatly reduced. 

In addition to this, while the men have been at the front, 
women have been installed in the positions held by men prior 
to the war. To put the women out in order to give the men 
the positions would be an injustice to the women, and would 
cause trouble from that source. If the women are permitted 
to hold the positions and perform the work, there will be a 
large army of unemployed men. These unavoidable conditions
 will produce increased discontent. Add to this the 
scarcity of food supply, the increased cost of living and the 
lack of opportunity to procure food in a legitimate way, and 
the ultimate result will be a great army of starving men, 
women and children. 

Naturally, such an army of unemployed discontents will 
ask, "Wny do we find ourselves in this miserable condition? 
Have not our comrades given up their lives for our country? 
Have we not suffered great loss for the same cause, and are we 
not now entitled to food and shelter ? If war is responsible for 
this miserable condition, why should we have gone to war at 
all? Who sent us to war?" Of necessity the answer must be 
that they went to war at the behest of the kings, and rulers; 
that the clergy of the various nations have long advised these 
kings and rulers that they were ruling by Divine right, and 
that therefore they were justified in whatsoever course they 
might take; and that the same clergy class have urged the people
 to go to war. Hence the political and ecclesiastical element
 will be held responsible by the common people for their 
miserable condition. 

Bloodshed becomes commonplace in time, The shedding 
of blood upon the battle-field month after month develops the 
disposition in men to shed more blood under different circumstances
. The conditions that led up to the French Revolution
 exist among many nations today. A small act at that 
time stared the "earthquake"; so now but little will be required
 to provoke a world-wide revolution. Once started, it 
cannot be stopped until the fire of anarchy, begun by the revolution
, has burned itself out. 

STATESMEN EXPECT REVOLUTION 
Statesmen and worldly-wise men see that revolution is unavoidable
. Max Nordau, one of the greatpst of modern 
scientists, in recent months published an article calling attention
 to the conditions in European countries and stating 
that revolution is certain to follow in every country now engaged
 in the war. 

About September 1, 1916, the London Times published an 
article from the pen of Lord Beresford in which he stated the 
following: 

"We began the war with two great assets — the fleet 
and our wealth. The second asset is being squandered by 
millions without business supervision or adequate return. 
We shall soon be bankrupt if this goes on." 
A few weeks after Earl Loreburn, in the House of Lords, 
warned Parliament and the nation of the tremendous revolution
 which will j*esult if the European conflict is prolonged. 
He said, "Unless the collective common sense of mankind prevails
 before the worst comes, Europe will be little better than 
a wilderness peopled by old men, women and children. It is 
no exaggeration to say that if the war continues indefinitely 
revolution or anarchy may well follow." 

In the House of Commons Andrew Bonar Law, Secretary 
for the Colonies, recently said that England had to risk 
bankruptcy to bring the war to a successful conclusion, and 
that the situation was extremely dangerous. He further said, 
"The moment the country cannot raise indefinite loans — and 
if the war lasts long enough that moment will come — the 
country will have to find other means for carrying on the 
war* 

Sir George Paish, the ablest financial authority in England
, in a recent public address, said: 

"England is carrying the financial burden of the war. 
The adverse trade balance, if we include what we have 
done for our Allies, is already between three billion and 
three billion, five hundred million, to balance which we 
have succeeded in borrowing about two hundred and fifty 
million, our moiety of the American loan. 

"If we go on spending money as we are now, we shall 
see another break in American exchange, accompanied by 
a break in Canadian, Argentine, Australian and Indian exchanges
. This probably will mean the suspension of specie 
payments, and we shall have to tell the world that we are 
unable to pay our debts." 

AMEBICAN UNREST 

Suspension of specie payment by European governments 
would produce the greatest financial panic the world has ever 
known, and would especially affect the United States, thereby 
increasing the discontent here. 

The Lord Jesus, describing the condition through wfiich 
the world is now passing, said that the wars would be followed
 by "great earthquakes (revolution) in divers places, 
and famines and pestilences." (Luke 21:11.) A glance at 
the present situation is convincing that the world is rapidly 
advancing toward famine and pestilence. 

Broken, bleeding, starving Europe is frantically grasping 
for food in American markets. Exportation of food stuffs has 
been so great, and the supply in America reduced to such an 
alarming degree, that Congress is considering the placing of 
an embargo upon all food supplies. Congressman Fitzgerald 
is quoted as recently saying: 

"I favor an embargo on food stuffs. The embargo 
should be imposed for purely domestic reasons: the prices 
of food stuffs have reached levels that are bringing widespread
 distress to the country. Many thousands of our 
people are suffering from the lack of the necessities of life. 
Wholesale prices in many commodities are less abroad 
today than they were a year ago; and here the retail prices 
have advanced alarmingly." 
The Lob Angeles Tribune editorially says: 

<c We venture the prediction that unless radical action 
is taken to prevent the exportation of food stuffs, now 
proceeding at a rate that presently will strip the country 


[6026] 


January 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


<5-6) 


of its supplies, the early months of the coming year will 
behold bread riots in American cities." 
From the St Louie Star we quote: 

'The food production in America in the year past has 
been greatly reduced from that of former years, as will be 
observed by noting the following figures: There is a falling 
off in the corn production of 374,000,000 bushels. Wheat 
is less by 504,000,000 bushels. Oat3 show a loss of 300,- 
000,000 bushels. The potato crop is short 70,000,000 
bushels. Apples are short 9,000,000 bushels. Sweet potatoes
, beans, tomatoes, cabbage and everything in the vegetable
 line are also short crops, so that both in fresh and 
canned vegetables there is comparative shortage of supply." 
In parts of the United States there is now an unhealthy 
prosperity prevailing. Many factories engaged in the production
 of war munitions are paying increased wages, which enable
 the workingmen in a measure to meet the increased cost 
of living. Even a temporary peace will stop the manufacture 
of war munitions, resulting in a great number of unemployed 
in America and greatly reduced wages for those who are employed
. But the cost of living will not he reduced. If the 
cost of living is governed in a measure by the law of supply 
and demand, it could not be expected that prices will be lower; 
for the supply is decreasing. 

January 1, 1917, marks the day for the opening of the 
great legal battle in the United State's Supreme Court between
 the Railway companies and the Railway employes over 
the eight-hour law. Should the court sustain the law, which 
is hardly probable, government ownership of railways would 
quite likely result. Such a victory for a portion of the labor 
element would encourage other labor organizations to demand 
national legislation in their behalf; and the failure to get it 
would add more fuel for the flame. If the railway employes 
are defeated in their legal battle, a nation-wide strike is almost 
certain. 

The evidence points strongly to the fact that the world 
is now nearing the great earthquake, the great revolution, 
to be followed shortly by the fire of anarchy. In symbolic 
language the Prophet of the Lord described it as follows: 
*For he (Jehovah) commandeth and raiseth the stormy wind 
(great trouble), which lifteth up the waves thereof. They 
mount up to the heaven (higher ruling powers), they go down 
to the depths (the lowest stratum of society) ; their soul (the 
very being of the government) is melted because of trouble; 
they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and 
are at their wits' end. Then they cry unto the Lord in their 
trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distresses. He 
maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still." 
—Psalm 107:25-29. 

Thus the Lord describes the passing away of the present 
order, preparatory to the establishment of the kingdom of 
righteousness under the Prince of Peace. 

WABNIXCt TO THE CHURCH 

The great "hour of temptation" (Revelation 3:10) is upon 
the world. Selfishness, discontent, insubordination, refusing 
to be subject to the constituted authority or order of things, 
is the great temptation or trial upon the world that is leading 
straight to revolution and anarchy. "There hath no temptation
 taken you but such as is common to man." { 1 Corinthians 
10:13) In other phrase the Apostle says, "The temptation 
that has come to the world comes to all, including the church. 
The same great trial that is upon the world, the church must 
come in contact with." 

Is it possible that the spirit of revolution will try the 
church? We repeat our definition of revolution — "discontent, 
insubordination, a determination not to be subject to the constituted
 order of tnings." The Lord Jeeus is the Master of 
the harvest, and is present directing the work thereof. For 
many years during the harvest he nas had one special servant 
in the world to give out "meat in due season to the household
 of faith." The Great Master, through his chosen servant, 
instituted the order of things amongst the harvest workers; 
and a disposition persistently to refuse to conform to that 
consituted arrangement would ultimately lead to disaster. 

While it is indeed gratifying to note the spirit of loyalty 
manifested by the friends from every part of the land, yet as 
we enter upon the year 1917, which will of necessity be fraught 
with great trials, we deem it proper to call the attention of 
each other to the dangers that may be lurking in the way. 
Shall we continue faithfully to recognize and to partake of that 
"meat in due season" provided for us by the Lord through his 
"wise and faithful servant," and strictly conform ourselves 
to the order which the Lord has instituted for the proclaiming 
of the kingdom message? Or shall we take a contrary course? 
Shall we keep in mind that "in unity there is strength," and 


be governed thereby? Or shall we pursue an opposite course, 
and disregard the Lord's appointed way? Shall we walk in 
humility before the Lord and continue earnestly to seek divine 
wisdom and more of his Spirit? Or shall we be self-willed? 

These are some of the questions that must come to the 
church; for they involve the principles in the temptation that 
is now upon the world. These words are not written to discourage
, but for the purpose of helping each one of us to 
keep before his mind the true situation which we are facing. 
"He who is for us is greater than all that can be against us." 

We deem it appropriate, therefore, to call attention here 
to the final warning and admonition given to the church 
by that "faithful and wise servant," published in the November
 1, 1916, Watch Tower. This warning from Brother Russell
 seems to indicate that after his decease special trials would 
come to the church. Since his death his words appear even 
more striking and appropriate than while he was among us. 
We quote them as follows: 

"So far as we are able to judge, the same conditions 
prevail today among Bible Students, which the Apostle 
pointed out to the elders of the church at Ephesus when 
he charged them, saying, 'Take, therefore, heed unto yourselves
 and to all the flock over which the holy Spirit hath 
made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he 
hath purchased with the blood of his own' (Son). — Acts 
20:28. Diaglott. 

"St. Paul's prophecy came true: 'After my departure 
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, notsparing the 
flock; also of your own selves shall men arise speaking 
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore
, watch, and remember that bv the space of three years 
I ceased not to warn everyone night and day with tears; 
and now, brethren, I commend you to God and to the word 
of his grace." 

We commend a careful rereading of that entire article, 
entitled "The Hour of Temptation."— Z. '16, P. 327. 

In this connection we suggest to the various Ecclesias that 
a wise and prudent course to pursue is to refrain from giving 
information to anyone requesting it as to the names and addresses
 of the members of your class and similar information 
as to the character of meetings, etc., unless such information 
be requested by our Society for reasons assigned. 

Notwithstanding the fact that we may expect such trials, 
thanks be to God that his grace is sufficient for every time 
of need, and will be abundantly supplied to all who faithfully 
follow in the Master's footsteps and loyally obey his Word. 
Courage, then, brethren! Hear the Lord again speaking to 
his own, through St. Peter, "Wherefore, gird up the loins of 
your mind, be sober and hope to the end for the grace that 
is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ." — 
1 Peter 1:13. 

We believe that there is yet much work to do before all 
comprising the kingdom clas3 are gathered into the garner 
of the Lord and the kingdom is set up. This seems to be 
particularly true with reference to the United States, which 
has been especially favored of the Lord in his harvest work. 

PASTORAL WORK 

The pastoral work is opening wider fields of service for 
the sisters and for many of the brethren. This work was begun
 and conducted more particularly under the supervision of 
Brother Russell as Pastor. Since he was Pastor over many 
of the congregations, it was quite appropriate to -designate it 
"Pastoral Work." While the name may not seem so appropriate
 since his passing away, yet for want of a better name 
the Society will continue the work under that title. Our dear 
Brother Sturgeon will have the oversight of that department 
at the Brooklyn office. All communications concerning the 
same should be addressed: 

Watch Tower Bible and Tbaot Society, 
Pastoral Department, 

13 Hicks St, Brooklyn, X. Y, 

It is the desire of the Society to co-operate with the classes 
everywhere in furthering this work. We recommend that it be 
organized in all the cities and towns, and that each one who 
has some ability and opportunity have some part in the work. 
The Society will appreciate reports from time to tiine from 
the lieutenant in charge of the work at each place. 

SMITING JORDAN 
Time and again our attention has been called to the fact 
that the Jordan must be smitten. We understand the "Jordan" 
to represent people, and the "smiting" to symbolize that which 
will divide or separate the people, and the message of the 
kingdom to be the instrument with which the smiting will be 


[6027] 


(7-8) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


done. We cannot, of course, be sure how this smiting or division
 will take place; but we venture here a, suggestion which 
it may be well to consider. At least, the suggestion may stimulate
 us to greater sobriety of mind, watchfulness and zeal 
for the Lord's cause. 

We may not hope to improve our method of advertising 
and thereby draw out greater crowds to hear the message. The 
message itseh cannot be improved upon. We cannot hope to 
have greater ability with which to present the truth. We may 
not be supplied with any unusual amount of money with which 
to spread the kingdom message. Then how may the smiting 
be done? 

We answer, A great change may take place in the mind3 
of the people. "Man's extremity is God's opportunity." "A 
broken and contrite heart, God, thou wilt not despise." 
(Psalm 51:17) "I will look even to him that is poor and of 
a contrite spirit and trembleth at my Word." (Isaiah 66:2) 
Nominal Christendom — Catholic and Protestants— numbers her 
members by the millions. She is proud and says, "I am rich 
and have need of nothing." Evidently there are quite a number
 in these nominal systems who love the Lord, but who because
 of weakness of faith and pride of heart are held in 
bondage to the systems. But when the great "earthquake" becomes
 evident to all, when the people become thoroughly convinced
 from evidence aside from the Bible that all earthly 
institutions are doomed to complete and utter destruction , 
when their pride is humbled, and when they become of a 
broken and contrite spirit, may we not expect this to work such 
a change of mind that many will seek to know the real reason 
for prevailing conditions 1 

It so, then such will learn that the nominal preachers 
throughout the land have been deceiving the people; that 
Pastor. Russell for more than forty years has been telling 
the people the truth when he called attention to the approaching
 storm, earthquake and fire. They will then recognize that 
the real servant of the Lord was among them, and that they 
heard him not. They will realize that the vicious assaults 
made upon him by nominal preachers were without any justification
, and were made really to cast sand into the eyes of 
the people and blind them to the truth. Then may we not 
expect many of these to hear the message of the kingdom 
gladly? If so, then will be the time for every consecrated 
child of God to grasp the sword of the Spirit and go forth to 
"smite." 

Clearly, Brother Russell had a purpose in sending out the 
V, D. M. questions to all the church. Those who are able to 
give clear and proper answers to those questions manifest 
that they have a sufficient knowledge of the truth to give 
to any one who may ask an outline of God's plan. All who 
have this knowledge, who have the Spirit of the Lord, and 
who possesB a zeal for his cause, will gladly avail themselves 
of the opportunity. 


HOW TO PAETICIPATE IK THE SMXTIHO 

Are you prepared, dear brethren? Have you put on the 
whole Armor of God? Then in due time may all who thus 
have on this Armor go forth like the faithful little band of 
Gideon and participate in the "smiting" by giving the light 
from the divine Word! 

It is not to be expected 'that all in the nominal systems 
who claim to love the Lord, will hear the message. Those 
who do hear and believe the truth will say, "Thank God, there 
is hope for the salvation of mankind!" And they will rejoice. 
Others will take an opposite view; and hence there will be 
a division. 

The smiting of the Jordan — 'the dividing of the people — and 
the separation of the antitypioal Elijah and Elisha classes 
are two different things. The Watch Toweb has repeatedly 
pointed out this fact. It was the chariot of fire that separated
 Elijah from Elisha. The chariot of fire seems to represent
 severe trials and persecutions. Zeal for the Lord and 
for the message of his kingdom will bring upon the faithful 
ones such persecution and fiery trials as would separate them 
from those having less zeal. Then the picture seems to indicate 
that the Elijah class will be taken up — changed in the great 
whirlwind of anarchy, indicating that some of the Lord's true 
saints may suffer some special persecution. 

4 'GO YE- AFTEE HIM AND SMITE" 

What Bible Student is he who thoroughly appreciates the 
divine plan and yet doubts that Brother Russell was the "man 
clothed with linen with the writer's inkhorn by his side/' described
 in Ezekiel 9:2? He has finished his course, completed 
the work given him to do; and truly could he say, as stated 
in the 11th verse, "I have done as thou hast commanded me." 
In the 5th verse of this chapter we read, "And to the others 
he said in mine hearing, go ye after him through the city and 
smite," etc. It has been suggested that the five mentioned in 
Luke 16:28 refer to a class. Is it not also reasonable to suggest
 that the five others, mentioned in Ezekiel 9, refer to all of 
the true followers of the Master who will gladly take up the 
message of the kingdom, and with it "smite" the people, thus 
accomplishing the work that is left for the remaining members
 of tlie church to perform? 

We merely offer this suggestion, dear friends, that it may 
stimulate our faith and zeal. W'ho knows but that 1917 may 
be the greatest year yet for activity in the service of our King? 
Truly we are living in a fearful and wonderful time! "What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and 
godliness!" Let us not become disturbed or excited; but, striving
 to appreciate the importance of the time in which we are 
living and the wonderful opportunities that are set before us, 
let us be of sober mind, and watch and pray, that we may be 
enabled to take advantage of every opportunity that comes 
to glorify the great King of kings 1 


CHRIST COMING— AND COMING TO CHRIST 

[Except the paragraphs printed below, this article was a reprint of that entitled ' ' The Heavenly Jerusalem, ' * published in issue 

of June 1, 1905, which please see.] 

December 31. — Revelation 22:6-14. 

"The spirit and the bride Bay, Come. And he that heareth, let him say, Come. And he that is athirst, let him come; he that 

will, let him take of the water of life freely/' — Verse 17. E. V. 
••THE SPTBIT AND THE BRIBE SAT — COME" turn to life everlasting. It will require the entire Millennial 

Our Golden Text is the inspired statement respecting that age for the delivery of the message to every creature and for 


glorious time and its blessed message. There will be a bride 
then; but there is no bride now. The church is an espoused 
virgin; but the marriage of the Laroib is still deferred. (2 
Oor. 11 :2) The last members of his church must complete 
their course, must pass their final examination and enter into 
glory with him, before the marriage can be consummated. 

After the marriage of the Lamb, not only will there be the 
holy city, representing the church in her official or governing 
capacity under Christ her Head, but there will also be the 
Messed work of the church — the oalling of the world's attention
 to the river of the water of life, to the leaves of healing, 
to the fruits of the Spirit. Then the Spirit, the power of God, 
will co-operate with the message then promulgated; and the 
result undoubtedly will be that all the world shall hear, and 
that all who love righteousness and hate iniquity will remankind
 to avail themselves of the privileges then afforded 
to whosoever will, 

Nowhere do the Scriptures speak of the river of the water 
of life as existing now — during this Gospel age. There is none, 
and there can be none until the heavenly city descends from 
above, for the river must flow from the midst of it, from the 
throne. Describing the condition of the Lord*B saints at the 
present time very differently, the Master declares that those 
who are his have in them a well of water springing up into life 
eternal. (John 4:14) We know what thjs means. We know 
in what sense each individual of the church has received of 
the holy Spirit, and has in himself a fountain of grace and 
truth for has refreshment. But there is no river of the water 
of life to which he could go or to which he could invite others 
to go. 


'BATTLE IN ECCLESIASTICAL HEAVENS" 


We now have a good stock of "A Great Battle in the Ecclesiastical
 Heavens," by Brother Rutherford. In view of the 
fact that Brother Russell's death has stimulated some of his 
enemies to renewed attacks, in hope of injuring the work of 
the Society and weakening the cause of the truth, this seems 
a propitious time to offset the influence Buch attacks create. 

While much injury often recoils upon thote resorting to 


such methods — in one instance recently, three men went forward
 to their minister and informed him of their displeasure 
over his remarks and of their intention never to return to 
the church — it is our privilege to help those not so able to 
see the real object of these attacks. 

Orders for the above booklet will be filled at $2.00 per 100 
for a limited time. When ordering, please mention "Battle." 


[6028] 


JESUS THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "The Life and Light of Men," published in issue of December 15, 1904, which please 

see.] 


"THE SPIRITS OF JUST MEN MADE PERFECT" 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of August 15, 1913, which please see.] 


"FROM GLORY UNTO GLORY" 

2 Corinthians 3:18. 
[This poem was a reprint of that which appeared in issue of January, 1891, which please see.] 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


A VOIOE FROM LONDON 
Deab Brethren: — 

Loving greetings in our Heavenly Father's name! At a 
meeting of the London Tabernacle Congregation, it was unanimously
 agreed to send you a cable message and also a letter 
of loving sympathy. 

The news of our beloved Pastor's death came as a great 
shook to us. We realize more clearly than hitherto how much 
we owe to him, and how much occasion we have to praise the 
Lord on his behalf. 

In a special sense he was Pastor both to the New York 
Temple and the London Tabernacle congregation. Both were 
so very near his heart that we feel specially drawn to one 
another. 

Our hearts go out to you especially, dear Brethren, because 
the closeness of your association with our dear Brother will 
cause you to feel the break more keenly than others who have 
not been so privileged. 

We thank our dear Father for sparing Brother Russell to us 
so long. For forty years his faithful ministry has testified 
his courage, zeal and We. He has been a constant stimulus to 
us— ^a wonderful copy of God's dear Son ! 

Whether there be much work to be done by the Church in 
flesh, or little, we prize highly the privilege of bearing the 
precious vessels left in our charge, and of feeding the Lord's 
dear sheep. Our chief concern must be to watch and prav that 
we may be ready and, whilst pressing on with all diligence, 
our eyes will be fixed on heaven yet more earnestly, looking 
for a happy reunion. Pray for us, as we will continue to do 
for you. 

With sincere sympathy and fond love in the Lord to you, 

Your brethren and fellow-servants, 

London Tabbbnacld Congregation. 

well com tlh uk in that which he begtan 
Deab Bbkthben : — 

Greetings in the name of the Lord! Mercy unto you ; grace, 
peace and love be multiplied unto you. 

We take this opportunity of expressing our appreciation of 
our dear Pastor's labor of love, our implicit confidence in his 
purity and integrity, his sterling qualities, and our determination
 to continue in that which he began. 

While recognizing our exceeding great loss, we rejoice that 
our dear brother has passed beyond into his reward, to the inheritance
 of the saints in light. We feel sure that he is now 
with our dear Lord, crowned; having ceased from his labors, 
but his. works continuing. 

Words would fail us to express the spiritual help, comfort 
and encouragement we have received from the Lord's hand 
through this faithful servant. 

Having before us his noble example of self-sacrifice — laying 
down his strength and life In our interest aad service- of 
faith, love, loyalty and cheerful and unmurmuring endurance of 
■persecution and misrepresentation — we are resolved that, by 
the Lord's assisting grace, we shall endeavor more faithfully 
to walk humbly in our dear Redeemer's footsteps, daily striving
 to grow up into him, and to develop the fruit of the Spirit 
— 3ove. 

We desire to continue our co-operation with the Bethel 
family in the harvest work, in harmony with our dear Pastor's 
labors, and pray the Lord's richest blessing upon all participating
, to the honor and praise of our glorious Head and our 
heavenly Father. 

HAMILTON CHTJBOH— Oft*. 


"HE WHO HATH LED WILL LEAD" 
Dear Friends at Bethel: — 

Together with representatives of the Thayer, Mo., Class, we 
held a memorial service in memory of our dear Brother Russell
 and his faithful services toward us all. 

At this meeting I was requested to extend the love and sympathy
 of both classes in this hour of trial, which we realize 
comes especially hard upon those of his immediate family, although
 we are glad to feel that we are all of one family,, because
 we share one another's joys and sorrows. "Blest be the 
tie that binda" 

The friends here wish to assure you that their love, cooperation
 and support in every way possible will continue just 
the same as heretofore. While we feel keenly our great loss 
in the death of one to whom we were bo deeply indebted everyway
, yet we rejoice with him! Our hearts are made glad by 
the thought that his days of pain and weariness are over; 
that he has entered into the joys of the Lord. We are praying
 that divine guidance, wisdom and courage may be given 
you for the great responsibilities resting upon you, trusting 
that "he who hath led will lead us still." 

Mammoth Springs Church. — ArU. 

MOBE AND MOBS DETERMINED TO FBESS ON 

Deab Brethren in Christ:— 

Love and greetings in the name of our dear Redeemer ! We 
desire to thank you for the visit of our dear Pilgrim Brother 
Thorn. How the Lord blessed our fellowship together, and 
how our pure minds were stirred up by way of remembrance! 

Instead of our Pastor's death Blackening our zeal, it has 
wonderfully increased it, and we are more determined to press 
on, cheerfully and patiently doing with our might what out 
hands find to do. We want to work while it is called day, for 
a dark night is coming. 

We can't properly express our appreciation of the dear 
messengers of the truth whom you send to us — those who are 
developed in the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. They are 
doing a wonderful work, ministering to the saints. Please 
send us one as often as possible. 

We are still praying the Lord's rich blessing upon you, that 
he may continue to bless your efforts and labors of love. 

Yours in His glad service, Ft. Smith Eoclesia.— Ark. 

MOBS DETERMINED THAN EVER 
Dear Bbethben: — 

Enclosed you will find for my Good-Hopes for the 

last half of 1916. And, dearly Beloved, I wish to say that I 
have received a great blessing from the Lord for my Good 
Hopes offerings of the past year. I know the amount ia sma\l, 
but I feel sure it ia precious in His sight. I hope to do even 
better, if I can. Truly our heart* are willing; and God 
looketh upon the heart. One of out Good-Hopes for next year 
is that we continue to serve the Lord faithfully, either <m this 
side the veil or on the other side. We hope soon to see him 
face to face. 

I wish to assure you of my love and interest in you. Since 
our Pastor's change, I am more determined to continue to follow
 him as he ioHowed the Lord, As I delighted to follow 
him while he was here; I now expect to follow him on until 
I shall see him in the kingdom glory. 

I sometimes think how you brethren must miss the presence
 of out dear Brother; but then I know that the kingdom 
is becoming more and more real to you. My prayers ascend 
for you. With much love, I am 

Your fellow-servant, Alexander Lowe. — Pa. 


VU-14 


[6029] 


(9-14) 


(14-15) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


FINISHED HIS COURSE TRIUMPHANTLY 
DEAB BRETHREN IN THE LORD: — 

We were deeply affected by the sudden, unexpected death 
of God's faithful servant Particularly do we mourn his loss 
because of the love, sympathy and help he 'has at all times so 
freely given us. We realize now more than ever how completely 
he laid down his life for the brethren. But while we mourn 
our loss we rejoice in the thought that he has finished Ms 
course triumphantly and gone to his eternal reward. 

We wish to assure you of the love and loyalty of all the 
brethren here, of their earnest desire and intention of cooperating
 with the Society in carrying on the kingdom work 
so lovingly begun by our Pastor and so untiringly continued by 
him until his death, thus setting such an inspiring example. 
Our consecration, too, is unto death ; we would not have it 
otherwise. So, dear Brethren, you have our prayers, supplemented
 by our best efforts in holding high the banner of 
Truth until the work is finished ; whether the time for its accomplishment
 lies in the early future, as we hope, or is deferred
 for "yet a little while longer," 

St. Louis Ecclesia. — Mo, 
A VOICE FROM ABROAD 
Dear Brethren: — 

We cannot say much; our hearts are full; but we sympathize
 with you in the loss (pro tern.) of our Beloved Brother 
Russell. We, too, feel keenly that the Lord has seen fit to remove
 from us our brother-friend. 

How glad we are that he has ever urged us to rest in the 
Lord and in him only ! And how glad we are of his repeated 
warnings against pride, selfishness and wolves! Through his 
unique faithfulness, thank God, we have been aided in putting 
on and utilizing the whole armor of God. 

We trust that we, with you, may remain faithful and 
courageous to the end, and that you may individually and 
collectively be enabled to enter into sfuoh parts of the readjusted
 work as will bring honor to our God, to his truth 
and permanent blessings to yourselves. 

Yours in his love. F. Guard and Family. — Eng. 

CONTINUED DEEP INTEREST AND COOPERATION 
Beloved Brethren: — 

Deepest sympathy in the mutual loss of our dearly beloved 
Pastor ! We realize with sorrow our great loss in the passing 
over of "that wise and faithful servant"; but we sorrow- not 
as others, realizing that while he has ceased from his earthly 
labors, his work follows with him. 

"Therefore, beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, 
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye 
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." We desire 
to assure you of our continued deep interest and co-operation 
with you in the furtherance of the Lord's work during the remaining
 time that the Lord may permit us to continue to serve 
him in the flesh. Your servants in the Lord, 

Springfield Ecclesia. — Mass. 
FAITHFULNESS IN LITTLE THINGS 
Dear Sirs: — 

I do not know the persons doing your work here— distributing
 literature; but whoever they are, the papers are not 
placed as they should be to get results. I find them on doorsteps
, in yards and on the sidewalks; not one- fourth appear to 
get into the homes. I should like to have a, trial, and would 
guarantee to do the work thoroughly and satisfactorily. 

["He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also 
in much. We believe that the greatly increased cost of paper 
will be one of the aids to greater care in the distribution of 
the Bible Students Monthly — that every paper may reach 
the hands of a reader. No doubt our Lord would be very 
careful in putting out literature, that there be no waste; and 
we believe he would be pleased to have his brethren endeavor 
to exercise equal care.] 

STAND TOGETHER AS GOOD SOLDXEBS 
Bear Brethren in Christ:— 

Christian greetings to you in the name of our dear Redeemer
 and Advocate! Keenly do we feel the loss of him who 
so faithfully laid down his life for the brethren, and who with 
untiring devotion to the service of the Lord, provided that 
which is "meat in due season for th« household of faith" ; and 
though he has "gome before," he ever liveth in the memory of 
those to whom he has been a lasting benefactor. 

We sorrow not as those who have no hope, but rejoice inasmuch
 as he has ceased from his labors and has entered into 
the joys oi our Lord. We assure you of our faithful support 
in the work. 

Yours in the servicfe of our Redeemer, 

Wheeling Ohubch. — W. Va. 


confidence in the society 

Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

We have confidence in your abilities. As you have been 
so long in close contact with our Pastor you will have understanding
 necessary to finish the proposed services, according 
as the I»rd has directed him, and we shall do all in our power 
to uphold your hands. 

We express our hearts when we tell you that we shall 
the more fervently love you in your desire to continue in the 
service of the "Glad Tidings," even unto death. You have our 
daily prayers and sympathetic interest in this dark "Hour of 
Temptation." "Our fears, our hopes, our aims are one — our 
comforts and our cares." Abilene Ecclesia — Kan. 

WILL HELP "HOLD UP THE HANDS*' 

L>ear Saints in the Bethel Home:— h 

As a Class, and also as individuals, we realize that in the 
death of our Beloved Pastor we have lost that "faithful and 
wise steward," who laid down his life so faithfully in the 
Lord's cause, even unto death. His faithfulness has been the 
means of giving us more determination than ever to continue 
in the work which he loved so very much, and we assure you 
that the Allentown Ecclesia is anxious to "hold up the hands" 
of those upon whom the work of the Society falls, and to assist 
in every way possible to carry on the work, until "the night 
cometh wherein no man can work." 

Allentown Ecclesia. — Pa. 
Deab Fbiends: — 

Five hundred Memorial Numbers of The Watch Towkb 
are desired, for which please find remittance covering amount, 

A. M. ZlMMBRMAN.^Pa; 
TRITTH-HTTNGBT ONES AMONG THE SOLDIEBS 
Dear Bbethben: — 

We are sure you are remembering us in your pravers as 
we are continually bearing your names in our petitions to 
the heavenly Father. The work of showing the Dbama to the 
soldiers on the Mexican Border is a wonderful privilege, and 
is surely having the Lord's blessing! Dear brother (Gen.) 
Hall is being used of the Lord very wonderfully, and we are 
glad to co-operate. Many of the officers take very kindly to 
the Dbama, and evince considerable interest, and the soldiers 
are very eager for it. 

At the close of one finale talk twenty-eight written questions
 were handed in, and several told the speaker it was the 
first real appeal that came home to their hearts to induce 
them to surrender all to the Lord. 

Our living in the tents and "roughing it" with the soldiers 
brings us into close contact with them and gives us nwuay 
privileges of service. There are indeed truth-hungry ones 
among them! 

In personal conversation with two military prisoners, one 
told how he had heard several of our "pilgrims." Often some 
one mentions a mother, sister, father or brother in the truth. 
We desire a further interest in your prayers. I am so glad 
our dear Pastor offered me this precious privilege of service 
before he was called home! 

Your brother by his grace. Walter H. Bundy. 

MOTJBN NOT AS THOSE WHO HAVE NO HOPS 
Dear Brethren: — 

We of Vernon, B. G, Ecclesia wish to express our deepest 
love and heartfelt sympathy for all at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
who mourn the passing of our beloved Pastor Russell. But 
although our hearts are sore, we do no^ mourn as do otheTs; 
for we know our brother has entered a glorious reward, having
 "borne the cross, despising the shame, and we rejoice that 
his course of "suffering" is finished, his crown won. 

We pray that the father's richest blessing may rest upon 
aU who are taking up the work in Pastor Russell's stead, and 
that our great High Priest, our Lord Jesus Christ, will soon 
come forth in his garments of beauty to bless hi* people. 

Yours in His love, Vernon Ecclksia*— B. 0. 

WOKLD HAS LOST A BEAL FRIEND 


My L>bab Mr.: : — 

This is to thank' you for the two copies of The Watch 
Tower containing an account of the career, so illustrous, the 
life, bo full, sweet, wholesome and truly good, of that much 
beloved Pastor Russell, whom I learned to admire and lore 
in the brief time I was his guest on two occasions only a few 
days before his death. The whole world has lost a real friend. 
iHow I wish he could have been spared another span of life 
that be might continue to teach us meekness and love! 

I hav^ many friends who will be much interested in Pastor 
Russell and his teachings, and if you can favor me with a 
half dozen or more copies of the above issue, I will take 


[6030] 


January 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(15-20) 


pleasure in seeing that they get them. With all best wishes 
I beg to remain 

Yours very sincerely, Clabence E. Spayd. — Brooklyn, 

DEEM JT A PRIVILEGE TO COOPERATE 

Deab Brethren in Christ: — 

On this, the occasion of the passing beyond -the veil of our 
beloved Pastor, we desire to assure you of our resolution to 
continue, by the grace of the Lord, faithful even unto death. 
We deem it the highest possible privilege at the present time 
to be allowed to co-operate with you in the further spreading 
of the glad tidings of the kingdom. 

We are rejoiced to know that the work of The Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society will continue. Our prayers 


shall ascend daily to the Throne of Heavenly Grace on your 
behalf. Kamsack Ecclesia. — Bash., Can* 

EAGEB TO COOPERATE FULLY 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

We are real anxious to let you at Headquarters know of 
our earnest desire to co-operate fully with you in the harvest 
work yet remaining. The class voted unanimously on this 
question. 

We seem to be so much nearer now to one another — more 
oneness in mind and spirit. We are so glad for this! We 
thank our heavenly Father. Express to us at any time even 
your smallest desires. Columbus Ecclesia. — Ohio. 

