Announcements
SUPPORTING THE SERVICE OF JEHOVAH’S HOUSE FULLY—Mal. 3:10, AS.
Jehovah’s witnesses give their support to God’s house or organization by their individual dedication vows and by their faithfulness in service. Maintaining the purpose of the organization, they advance the interests of God’s kingdom and make faithful proclamation of the good news of that kingdom in all the earth. They keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus that “he that is not on my side is against me, and he that does not gather with me scatters.” (Matt. 12:30, NW) Their primary support of the work is, therefore, by means of their preaching the truth, which is spiritual giving, charitable work. They aid the people of good will to come to lifesaving knowledge and understanding of the great God Jehovah and his Son, Christ Jesus. Throughout November they will support the service of Jehovah’s house by visiting people at their homes and presenting the book You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World and a booklet, on a contribution of 50c. You may support it with them.
LEARN HOW TO LENGTHEN YOUR LIFE
Billions are spent every year by men the world over to improve their health or to find ways of lengthening their lives. Billions more are spent to strengthen their spiritual hopes and to seek a firmer hold on the “hereafter.” Yet death continues to take its toll and materialism is rapidly clouding religion’s view. How does your future look to you? Are you satisfied with your physical and spiritual prospects? You may be, yet the severest strain on man’s fortitude ever faced lies immediately ahead. You will need to know why these events must come and how you can recognize them. You will need to know where you can find the only way to prolong your existence during this crisis. It is no stop-gap measure, a temporary relief from this world’s troubles. It is a permanent cure that will provide endless health and joy under perfect conditions. Money cannot buy its benefits, yet they are available to any who seek them. Send only 50c and receive the book You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World with a free booklet and learn how to lengthen your life into eternity.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
December 2: Christian Worship and Preservation of Virtue. Page 657.
December 9: Turn to the New World Society. Page 663.

