Supporting the Service at Jehovah’s House Fully
SOME 2,300 years ago God said to an Israelite remnant restored to their native land: “Bring the whole tithe into the treasure-house, that there may be food in my house, and prove me now herewith, saith Jehovah of hosts, if I open not to you the windows of the heavens, and pour you out a blessing, till there be no place for it.”—Mal. 3:10, Da.
Since all the things written aforetime were written for our instruction, how do the foregoing words apply to Jehovah’s servants today? What is pictured by the tithe? In what ways can we bring tithes into Jehovah’s house? Have Jehovah’s people in this day made a test of Jehovah, not by their doing evil or foolishly, but by bringing in the whole tithe, and has Jehovah proved true to his promise?a
The tithe or tenth could not picture our all, since it was made regularly year by year, whereas we bring our all once, when we dedicate ourselves to Jehovah. Rather, bringing the tithe pictures our regularly supporting the service at Jehovah’s house in token of or as a symbol or a proof of the fact that we have dedicated our all. This we can do in various ways.
For one thing, we can give material support by contributing toward the upkeep of the local Kingdom Hall, toward the sending of missionaries to foreign lands, toward assembly expenses and toward helping pioneers to stay in the full-time service.
And we can also bring spiritual tithes to Jehovah’s house. How? By attending all the congregational meetings arranged for Jehovah’s worship and our benefit, and not only by attending these but by preparing ourselves in advance. Then we shall be able to make a spiritual contribution toward Jehovah’s worship to the extent that we are allowed to do so. Additionally we can welcome the stranger that shows up at the public lecture as well as assist others to attend if we are in position to do so by providing transportation.
But doubtless the most effective way in which we can fully support the service at Jehovah’s house is by personally sharing in preaching the good news of the Kingdom in the homes, on the streets and from the public platform, and also by making good use of every opportunity for incidental preaching to those with whom we have business dealings, to those alongside whom we happen to work or who chance to be our traveling companions. This obligation to preach falls upon all. Even shut-ins can have a share by writing letters and making use of the telephone. So let none think that they can slight supporting the service at Jehovah’s house in this way simply because they support it in other ways.
Particularly since 1919 have Jehovah’s people been making a test of Jehovah by thus bringing their whole tithe to his house of worship. With what result? They have received many evidences of his favor, blessing and protection. They have triumphed over their enemies. They are bringing forth the fruitage of the spirit. They have a clean organization. They have Jehovah’s name upon them. Their spiritual condition is that of Beulah, a land that is married, and upward of 600,000 of them are preaching this good news of the Kingdom every month.
Even the world notices the prosperity and happiness of the servants of Jehovah and especially do men of good will call them happy. Are you sharing in the spiritual prosperity and happiness? You will be if you are supporting the service of Jehovah’s house fully.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 15, 1955.

