Insight on the News
The Right to Decide
Do family rights override religious beliefs? No, says the Ōita, Japan, district court. An adult is not “doing anything illegal by refusing blood transfusions in adhering to his faith,” the court ruled.
The man involved in this court case developed a sarcoma​—a malignant tumor—​in the bone of his left thigh, and the entire leg needed to be amputated. He agreed to the operation, provided that no blood transfusion would be administered. The hospital refused to perform the operation with such a condition. Fearing the loss of their son’s support in their old age, the parents of this 34-year-old Jehovah’s Witness filed an injunction, claiming their rights as parents. While the court recognized their right “to live happily with the family and to expect support from their son in the future,” it ruled that “‘family rights’ do not override the religious beliefs of” an individual.
It is important that a Christian look after his parents and ‘practice godly devotion in his own household,’ yet this must be done in harmony with other Scriptural commands. (1 Timothy 5:4, 8) Just as it is not moral to steal in order to provide for one’s family, neither would it be valid in God’s eyes to look after one’s family at the cost of ignoring His laws regarding the sanctity of blood. The Scriptures admonish us to “abstain . . . from blood.” (Acts 15:20, 28, 29; compare Leviticus 17:10-12.) In such matters God-fearing persons will “obey God as ruler rather than men.”​—Acts 5:29.
Poor Alternatives
The staggering rise of illegitimate teenage pregnancies has prompted United States authorities to take a closer look at the problem. For example, one state government passed a law requiring parents to “foot the bill” if their unwed son or daughter under the age of 18 becomes a parent. Such a measure, they hope, will encourage parents of teenagers to become more involved in preventing pregnancy in the first place. Other authorities, however, believe that such a law only encourages teenagers to have abortions. They offer as alternatives state-funded sex education as well as contraceptives for sexually active teenagers.
Such measures are certainly poor alternatives. Why? Because they do not eliminate the cause, namely, premarital sexual intercourse. One expert on teenage pregnancy stated: “In the eyes of their peers, it is important for kids to be sexually active. No one wants to be a virgin.” (Time magazine) A declining use of the Bible is the main reason for this “free-for-all attitude,” notes Emory Davis in a lecture at Rutgers University.
What, then, is the solution? The Scriptures are clear: Sexual intercourse among unmarried persons is forbidden by God’s Word. Fornicators “will not inherit God’s kingdom,” says 1 Corinthians 6:9. Parents must inculcate God’s law on such matters into the hearts of their children. (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7) Why? As wise King Solomon stated: “Train up a boy according to the way for him; even when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.”​—Proverbs 22:6.
Anglican Membership
“Devastating!” says Robert Runcie, primate of the Church of England, about the findings on church membership in the recently published report Rural Anglicanism. Why? Because a typical rural diocese membership roll shows a drop from 17.5 percent of the population in 1950 to 7.4 percent in 1980. The analysis presents “a picture of almost unmitigated hopelessness,” says The Times of London, and merely reflects what has long been existing in inner-city dioceses.
One main reason given for the slump in Anglican support is the alienation of young people from the church. Church social programs geared to the young, the report implies, may reverse the trend. Yet, the apostle Paul placed the emphasis on the spiritual part of a person’s life. He admonished the young man Timothy to “pursue righteousness, faith,” and “godly devotion” as his aims.​—2 Timothy 2:22; 1 Timothy 4:7, 8.

