[6024] 


of his sermons, 
time. 


Further announcement will be made in due 



Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JANUARY 1, 1917 


No. 1 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


God's children appreciate the fact that his Word is a "light 
unto their feet, and a lantern unto their pathway." To the 
divine Word and providence they look for guidance, instruction 
and comfort. They believe the Word of God^and rely upon it, 
and thus walk by faith. They view current events in the 
light of divine prophecy. For several years Bible students have 
been expecting a great international war, followed by revolution
 and anarchy. (1 Kings 19:11-13) They expect the great 
ecclesiastical systems, conceived in sin, barn in iniquity and 
operated in fraud and deceit, to be swept away with a great 
besom of destruction. (Revelation 18:5-21) They have looked 
for the governments of earth, built upon false and unrighteous 
foundations, to crumble away amidst a great storm of human 
passion. (Psalm 18:7-19; Jeremiah 25:8-38) They have expected
 a dark night just preceding the ushering in of the 
glorious kingdom of Messiah. (Isaiah 21 : 11, 12) They expect 
these things because the Bible says so. God's Word is true. 

For the encouragement of hia followers, the great Master 
said, "When these things begin to come to pass, then look 
up and lift up your heads, for your deliverance draweth nigh." 
(Luke 21:28) "Be patient, therefore, brethren"; the kingdom 
of Messiah is at the door. 4 

EXPECTATIONS BEHTO REALIZED 

Current events confirm our expectations. The new year 
dawns amidst great strife, turmoil and bloodshed. For nearly 
two and one-half years a mighty conflict has raged amongst 
the European nations, and the storm of destruction continues 
unabated. In that time more than a dozen kingdoms and nations
 have been involved; and upwards of thirty millions of 
men, armed with the most deadly weapons known to modern 
science, have engaged in wholesale destruction of human life 
and property. Approximately seven millions of men have been 
killed, and many more millions are insane or nervous wrecks 
by reason of the indescribable experiences through which they 
have passed. 

Jehovah, through his Prophet, foretold the coming of this 
great storm, describing it as a "great and strong wind which 
rent the mountains and brake in pieces the rocks before the 
Lord." The Bible deals largely in symbols. "Wind" is a 
symbol of war; "mountains," a symbol of kingdoms or governments
, and "rocks" a symbol of the solid or more stable 
parts of the governments. In this picture, therefore, the rocks 
would very fitly represent the financial strongholds of the governments
. When the financial strength of a government is 
gone, the government itself is practically gone. 

It is apparent to all observing ones that the warring nations
 are on the verge of bankruptcy. For the purpose of procuring
 money with which to conduct the war, the belligerents 
have borrowed fabulous amounts, for which they have issued 
bonds, treasury notes and other promises to pay. The amount 
of bonded indebtedness of the warring nations is now so 
enormous that there is not enough money in all the earth to 
pay the interest on that indebtedness. How then, will it ever 
be possible to pay the principal? 

Great Britain and her Allies have borrowed heavily from 
Americans through the instrumentality of certain American 
financiers. These nations are desperately attempting to negotiate
 other loans through the same channels. As an evidence 
of the desperation to which these nations are driven, we cite 
the recent attempt of Great Britain to borrow from American 


investors one billion dollars upon unsecured treasury notes, 
which have no basis for issue and are strictly fiat money. Some 
time prior to this attempt, the British government obtained 
credits in the United States to the amount of $1,100,000,000. 
About one-half of this amount was obtained upon unsecured 
paper, and was taken largely 1 by munition manufacturers and 
other large creditors who expected to make enough profit out 
of the sale of munitions to cover any loss that might occur. 

About the first of December last, the President of the 
United States became aware of the attempt of the British government
, through its American agents, to sell to American investors
 a billion dollars of flat credits, designated as "short 
time treasury notes." Foreseeing the uncertainty of the payment
 of such notes, President Wilson and the Federal Reserve 
board exposed this dangerous scheme by warning American investors
 against the purchase of these. Discussing this question 
editorially, one of the leading American dailies recently said: 
"When the British government came back for more 
credit and wanted a real loan in Wall Street, then Wall 
Street was not so certain of the value of the treasury 
notes. It wanted security in the shape of American stocks 
and bonds, and insisted upon having it. 

"The British government has no American stocks and 
bonds and not a great deal of gold to spare. After having 
taken care of Wall Street's preferred loans, still it wants 
more American money on credit. So certain English 
agents among American bankers attempted to persuade 
American Investors, through American banks, to buy 
one billion dollars of unsecured treasury notes, when Wall 
Street was unwilling to lend half that amount against a 
year ago without additional collateral American security. 
"It is probable that these Anglo-American bankers, 
whose prestige is very great, would have carried this disastrous
 -scheme through without a hitch had not the President
 and the Federal Reserve Board interferred with their 
warning. 

"Thes'e notes are unsecured, and are subject to the 
hazard of defeat in war, of national bankruptcy through 
prolongation of war, and of repudiation in case of social 
revolution after war. 

"They have no gold basis; for the British government 
has already outstanding more of their promises to pay — 
more of this fiat money, in fact, than all the gold that has 
been produced since the Christian era began could redeem. 
"There is not gold enough in all the countries of Europe 
combined to pay ten cents on the dollar of the paper fiat 
treasury notes that have already been issued by Great 
Britain." 
Financiers everywhere are trembling, and "men's hearts 
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which 
are coming on the earth." (Luke 21:26) All these things 
that we see are but the beginning of greater sorrows. The end 
shall be "a time of trouble such as was not since the beginning
 of the world." 

Each warring nation has hoped for victory, but it has not 
come. Discouraged and dismayed at the utter failure to deal 
a crushing blow, the rulers of some of the nations have impressed
 their strongest men, that mightier efforts might be put 
fortlv In desperation, government officials have resigned their 
positions; and others have been asked to take their places. 


[6025] 


(3-4) 


(4-5) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


TLft British ministry recently fell; and a new ministry, organized
 with l>avid Lloyd George as Premier, is now threatened 
by those who favor peace. In November last a new ruler 
ascended the throne in Austria; a new cabinet was organized, 
and within one month that cabinet has fallen. 

CRT TOE PEACE— GREATER SORROWS TO FOLLOW 

Germany desires peace and proposes terms. It is believed
 that all the ruling nations desire peace; but some of 
these nations, particularly the British, are too proud to make 
peace yet. But may we not expect peace among the nations at 
an early date? We are not inclined to that opinion. The nations
 must be further weakened. It may be expected , however, 
t£at the warring nations will agree upon some sort of peace 
terms in the not far distant future. But such a peace will not 
be a lasting one; it will be merely temporary. 

It may be expected that politicians will from henceforth 
have much to say about peace; that the ministers of the 
nominal church systems, who have been advising their respective
 nations to war against other nations, contrary to the 
Word of God, will also say "Peace"; that people in general, 
unaware of God's purposes, will say "Peace" and will believe 
that safety has come to them. There will be, doubtless, a 
short period of peace; but it will be merely a lull before a 
greater convulsion. We base our conclusion upon the Scriptures
. These clearly indicate that there will be a great earthquake
 (symbolic of revolution) — "an earthquake such as was 
not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake 
and so great." — Revelation 16:18. 

St. Paul, writing of the "day of the Lord,"whioh he declared
 would come upon the earth as a thief in the night, 
said: "For when they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden
 destruction cometh upon them as travail upon a woman 
with child; and they shall not escape." — \ Thessalonians 5:3. 

REVOLUTION CERTAEK 

Corroborative of this, the Lord in 1 Kings 19:11 describes 
the second stage of the trouble on the earth in these words: 
"And after the wind an earthquake." This picture is symbolic 
of revolution. Having faith in God's Word, let us look about 
U£ and see whether there is any evidence that this mighty 
earthquake is near at hand. The Apostle assured the watchers 
that they would not need to be in ignorance respecting that 
day, saying: V( Ye brethren, are not in darkness, that that day 
should overtake you as a thief." 

Revolution is the result of discontent on the part of the 
governed, and a determination on their part to be no longer 
subject to the rule of constituted authority. Before the war 
the people of Europe were greatly burdened with taxation. The 
increase of national indebtedness, resulting from the war, is 
now so great that the burden of annual taxation must be increased
 more than 400% in order to raise the interest on the 
debt. Seven millions of Europe's able-bodied, wealta^producing 
men have perished on the battle-field. The earning capacity of 
those surviving is less than prior to the war, because of their 
weakened physical condition, even if after the war there be 
sufficient employment for them to earn money. The war has 
so impoverished the nations engaged in the conflict that they 
cannot further issue bonds to rebuild the destroyed property* 
Hence the opportunity for earning money by daily labor is 
greatly reduced. 

In addition to this, while the men have been at the front, 
women have been installed in the positions held by men prior 
to the war. To put the women out in order to give the men 
the positions would be an injustice to the women, and would 
cause trouble from that source. If the women are permitted 
to hold the positions and perform the work, there will be a 
large army of unemployed men. These unavoidable conditions
 will produce increased discontent. Add to this the 
scarcity of food supply, the increased cost of living and the 
lack of opportunity to procure food in a legitimate way, and 
the ultimate result will be a great army of starving men, 
women and children. 

Naturally, such an army of unemployed discontents will 
ask, "Wny do we find ourselves in this miserable condition? 
Have not our comrades given up their lives for our country? 
Have we not suffered great loss for the same cause, and are we 
not now entitled to food and shelter ? If war is responsible for 
this miserable condition, why should we have gone to war at 
all? Who sent us to war?" Of necessity the answer must be 
that they went to war at the behest of the kings, and rulers; 
that the clergy of the various nations have long advised these 
kings and rulers that they were ruling by Divine right, and 
that therefore they were justified in whatsoever course they 
might take; and that the same clergy class have urged the people
 to go to war. Hence the political and ecclesiastical element
 will be held responsible by the common people for their 
miserable condition. 

Bloodshed becomes commonplace in time, The shedding 
of blood upon the battle-field month after month develops the 
disposition in men to shed more blood under different circumstances
. The conditions that led up to the French Revolution
 exist among many nations today. A small act at that 
time stared the "earthquake"; so now but little will be required
 to provoke a world-wide revolution. Once started, it 
cannot be stopped until the fire of anarchy, begun by the revolution
, has burned itself out. 

STATESMEN EXPECT REVOLUTION 
Statesmen and worldly-wise men see that revolution is unavoidable
. Max Nordau, one of the greatpst of modern 
scientists, in recent months published an article calling attention
 to the conditions in European countries and stating 
that revolution is certain to follow in every country now engaged
 in the war. 

About September 1, 1916, the London Times published an 
article from the pen of Lord Beresford in which he stated the 
following: 

"We began the war with two great assets — the fleet 
and our wealth. The second asset is being squandered by 
millions without business supervision or adequate return. 
We shall soon be bankrupt if this goes on." 
A few weeks after Earl Loreburn, in the House of Lords, 
warned Parliament and the nation of the tremendous revolution
 which will j*esult if the European conflict is prolonged. 
He said, "Unless the collective common sense of mankind prevails
 before the worst comes, Europe will be little better than 
a wilderness peopled by old men, women and children. It is 
no exaggeration to say that if the war continues indefinitely 
revolution or anarchy may well follow." 

In the House of Commons Andrew Bonar Law, Secretary 
for the Colonies, recently said that England had to risk 
bankruptcy to bring the war to a successful conclusion, and 
that the situation was extremely dangerous. He further said, 
"The moment the country cannot raise indefinite loans — and 
if the war lasts long enough that moment will come — the 
country will have to find other means for carrying on the 
war* 

Sir George Paish, the ablest financial authority in England
, in a recent public address, said: 

"England is carrying the financial burden of the war. 
The adverse trade balance, if we include what we have 
done for our Allies, is already between three billion and 
three billion, five hundred million, to balance which we 
have succeeded in borrowing about two hundred and fifty 
million, our moiety of the American loan. 

"If we go on spending money as we are now, we shall 
see another break in American exchange, accompanied by 
a break in Canadian, Argentine, Australian and Indian exchanges
. This probably will mean the suspension of specie 
payments, and we shall have to tell the world that we are 
unable to pay our debts." 

AMEBICAN UNREST 

Suspension of specie payment by European governments 
would produce the greatest financial panic the world has ever 
known, and would especially affect the United States, thereby 
increasing the discontent here. 

The Lord Jesus, describing the condition through wfiich 
the world is now passing, said that the wars would be followed
 by "great earthquakes (revolution) in divers places, 
and famines and pestilences." (Luke 21:11.) A glance at 
the present situation is convincing that the world is rapidly 
advancing toward famine and pestilence. 

Broken, bleeding, starving Europe is frantically grasping 
for food in American markets. Exportation of food stuffs has 
been so great, and the supply in America reduced to such an 
alarming degree, that Congress is considering the placing of 
an embargo upon all food supplies. Congressman Fitzgerald 
is quoted as recently saying: 

"I favor an embargo on food stuffs. The embargo 
should be imposed for purely domestic reasons: the prices 
of food stuffs have reached levels that are bringing widespread
 distress to the country. Many thousands of our 
people are suffering from the lack of the necessities of life. 
Wholesale prices in many commodities are less abroad 
today than they were a year ago; and here the retail prices 
have advanced alarmingly." 
The Lob Angeles Tribune editorially says: 

<c We venture the prediction that unless radical action 
is taken to prevent the exportation of food stuffs, now 
proceeding at a rate that presently will strip the country 


[6026] 


January 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


<5-6) 


of its supplies, the early months of the coming year will 
behold bread riots in American cities." 
From the St Louie Star we quote: 

'The food production in America in the year past has 
been greatly reduced from that of former years, as will be 
observed by noting the following figures: There is a falling 
off in the corn production of 374,000,000 bushels. Wheat 
is less by 504,000,000 bushels. Oat3 show a loss of 300,- 
000,000 bushels. The potato crop is short 70,000,000 
bushels. Apples are short 9,000,000 bushels. Sweet potatoes
, beans, tomatoes, cabbage and everything in the vegetable
 line are also short crops, so that both in fresh and 
canned vegetables there is comparative shortage of supply." 
In parts of the United States there is now an unhealthy 
prosperity prevailing. Many factories engaged in the production
 of war munitions are paying increased wages, which enable
 the workingmen in a measure to meet the increased cost 
of living. Even a temporary peace will stop the manufacture 
of war munitions, resulting in a great number of unemployed 
in America and greatly reduced wages for those who are employed
. But the cost of living will not he reduced. If the 
cost of living is governed in a measure by the law of supply 
and demand, it could not be expected that prices will be lower; 
for the supply is decreasing. 

January 1, 1917, marks the day for the opening of the 
great legal battle in the United State's Supreme Court between
 the Railway companies and the Railway employes over 
the eight-hour law. Should the court sustain the law, which 
is hardly probable, government ownership of railways would 
quite likely result. Such a victory for a portion of the labor 
element would encourage other labor organizations to demand 
national legislation in their behalf; and the failure to get it 
would add more fuel for the flame. If the railway employes 
are defeated in their legal battle, a nation-wide strike is almost 
certain. 

The evidence points strongly to the fact that the world 
is now nearing the great earthquake, the great revolution, 
to be followed shortly by the fire of anarchy. In symbolic 
language the Prophet of the Lord described it as follows: 
*For he (Jehovah) commandeth and raiseth the stormy wind 
(great trouble), which lifteth up the waves thereof. They 
mount up to the heaven (higher ruling powers), they go down 
to the depths (the lowest stratum of society) ; their soul (the 
very being of the government) is melted because of trouble; 
they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and 
are at their wits' end. Then they cry unto the Lord in their 
trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distresses. He 
maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still." 
—Psalm 107:25-29. 

Thus the Lord describes the passing away of the present 
order, preparatory to the establishment of the kingdom of 
righteousness under the Prince of Peace. 

WABNIXCt TO THE CHURCH 

The great "hour of temptation" (Revelation 3:10) is upon 
the world. Selfishness, discontent, insubordination, refusing 
to be subject to the constituted authority or order of things, 
is the great temptation or trial upon the world that is leading 
straight to revolution and anarchy. "There hath no temptation
 taken you but such as is common to man." { 1 Corinthians 
10:13) In other phrase the Apostle says, "The temptation 
that has come to the world comes to all, including the church. 
The same great trial that is upon the world, the church must 
come in contact with." 

Is it possible that the spirit of revolution will try the 
church? We repeat our definition of revolution — "discontent, 
insubordination, a determination not to be subject to the constituted
 order of tnings." The Lord Jeeus is the Master of 
the harvest, and is present directing the work thereof. For 
many years during the harvest he nas had one special servant 
in the world to give out "meat in due season to the household
 of faith." The Great Master, through his chosen servant, 
instituted the order of things amongst the harvest workers; 
and a disposition persistently to refuse to conform to that 
consituted arrangement would ultimately lead to disaster. 

While it is indeed gratifying to note the spirit of loyalty 
manifested by the friends from every part of the land, yet as 
we enter upon the year 1917, which will of necessity be fraught 
with great trials, we deem it proper to call the attention of 
each other to the dangers that may be lurking in the way. 
Shall we continue faithfully to recognize and to partake of that 
"meat in due season" provided for us by the Lord through his 
"wise and faithful servant," and strictly conform ourselves 
to the order which the Lord has instituted for the proclaiming 
of the kingdom message? Or shall we take a contrary course? 
Shall we keep in mind that "in unity there is strength," and 


be governed thereby? Or shall we pursue an opposite course, 
and disregard the Lord's appointed way? Shall we walk in 
humility before the Lord and continue earnestly to seek divine 
wisdom and more of his Spirit? Or shall we be self-willed? 

These are some of the questions that must come to the 
church; for they involve the principles in the temptation that 
is now upon the world. These words are not written to discourage
, but for the purpose of helping each one of us to 
keep before his mind the true situation which we are facing. 
"He who is for us is greater than all that can be against us." 

We deem it appropriate, therefore, to call attention here 
to the final warning and admonition given to the church 
by that "faithful and wise servant," published in the November
 1, 1916, Watch Tower. This warning from Brother Russell
 seems to indicate that after his decease special trials would 
come to the church. Since his death his words appear even 
more striking and appropriate than while he was among us. 
We quote them as follows: 

"So far as we are able to judge, the same conditions 
prevail today among Bible Students, which the Apostle 
pointed out to the elders of the church at Ephesus when 
he charged them, saying, 'Take, therefore, heed unto yourselves
 and to all the flock over which the holy Spirit hath 
made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he 
hath purchased with the blood of his own' (Son). — Acts 
20:28. Diaglott. 

"St. Paul's prophecy came true: 'After my departure 
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, notsparing the 
flock; also of your own selves shall men arise speaking 
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore
, watch, and remember that bv the space of three years 
I ceased not to warn everyone night and day with tears; 
and now, brethren, I commend you to God and to the word 
of his grace." 

We commend a careful rereading of that entire article, 
entitled "The Hour of Temptation."— Z. '16, P. 327. 

In this connection we suggest to the various Ecclesias that 
a wise and prudent course to pursue is to refrain from giving 
information to anyone requesting it as to the names and addresses
 of the members of your class and similar information 
as to the character of meetings, etc., unless such information 
be requested by our Society for reasons assigned. 

Notwithstanding the fact that we may expect such trials, 
thanks be to God that his grace is sufficient for every time 
of need, and will be abundantly supplied to all who faithfully 
follow in the Master's footsteps and loyally obey his Word. 
Courage, then, brethren! Hear the Lord again speaking to 
his own, through St. Peter, "Wherefore, gird up the loins of 
your mind, be sober and hope to the end for the grace that 
is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ." — 
1 Peter 1:13. 

We believe that there is yet much work to do before all 
comprising the kingdom clas3 are gathered into the garner 
of the Lord and the kingdom is set up. This seems to be 
particularly true with reference to the United States, which 
has been especially favored of the Lord in his harvest work. 

PASTORAL WORK 

The pastoral work is opening wider fields of service for 
the sisters and for many of the brethren. This work was begun
 and conducted more particularly under the supervision of 
Brother Russell as Pastor. Since he was Pastor over many 
of the congregations, it was quite appropriate to -designate it 
"Pastoral Work." While the name may not seem so appropriate
 since his passing away, yet for want of a better name 
the Society will continue the work under that title. Our dear 
Brother Sturgeon will have the oversight of that department 
at the Brooklyn office. All communications concerning the 
same should be addressed: 

Watch Tower Bible and Tbaot Society, 
Pastoral Department, 

13 Hicks St, Brooklyn, X. Y, 

It is the desire of the Society to co-operate with the classes 
everywhere in furthering this work. We recommend that it be 
organized in all the cities and towns, and that each one who 
has some ability and opportunity have some part in the work. 
The Society will appreciate reports from time to tiine from 
the lieutenant in charge of the work at each place. 

SMITING JORDAN 
Time and again our attention has been called to the fact 
that the Jordan must be smitten. We understand the "Jordan" 
to represent people, and the "smiting" to symbolize that which 
will divide or separate the people, and the message of the 
kingdom to be the instrument with which the smiting will be 


[6027] 


(7-8) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


done. We cannot, of course, be sure how this smiting or division
 will take place; but we venture here a, suggestion which 
it may be well to consider. At least, the suggestion may stimulate
 us to greater sobriety of mind, watchfulness and zeal 
for the Lord's cause. 

We may not hope to improve our method of advertising 
and thereby draw out greater crowds to hear the message. The 
message itseh cannot be improved upon. We cannot hope to 
have greater ability with which to present the truth. We may 
not be supplied with any unusual amount of money with which 
to spread the kingdom message. Then how may the smiting 
be done? 

We answer, A great change may take place in the mind3 
of the people. "Man's extremity is God's opportunity." "A 
broken and contrite heart, God, thou wilt not despise." 
(Psalm 51:17) "I will look even to him that is poor and of 
a contrite spirit and trembleth at my Word." (Isaiah 66:2) 
Nominal Christendom — Catholic and Protestants— numbers her 
members by the millions. She is proud and says, "I am rich 
and have need of nothing." Evidently there are quite a number
 in these nominal systems who love the Lord, but who because
 of weakness of faith and pride of heart are held in 
bondage to the systems. But when the great "earthquake" becomes
 evident to all, when the people become thoroughly convinced
 from evidence aside from the Bible that all earthly 
institutions are doomed to complete and utter destruction , 
when their pride is humbled, and when they become of a 
broken and contrite spirit, may we not expect this to work such 
a change of mind that many will seek to know the real reason 
for prevailing conditions 1 

It so, then such will learn that the nominal preachers 
throughout the land have been deceiving the people; that 
Pastor. Russell for more than forty years has been telling 
the people the truth when he called attention to the approaching
 storm, earthquake and fire. They will then recognize that 
the real servant of the Lord was among them, and that they 
heard him not. They will realize that the vicious assaults 
made upon him by nominal preachers were without any justification
, and were made really to cast sand into the eyes of 
the people and blind them to the truth. Then may we not 
expect many of these to hear the message of the kingdom 
gladly? If so, then will be the time for every consecrated 
child of God to grasp the sword of the Spirit and go forth to 
"smite." 

Clearly, Brother Russell had a purpose in sending out the 
V, D. M. questions to all the church. Those who are able to 
give clear and proper answers to those questions manifest 
that they have a sufficient knowledge of the truth to give 
to any one who may ask an outline of God's plan. All who 
have this knowledge, who have the Spirit of the Lord, and 
who possesB a zeal for his cause, will gladly avail themselves 
of the opportunity. 


HOW TO PAETICIPATE IK THE SMXTIHO 

Are you prepared, dear brethren? Have you put on the 
whole Armor of God? Then in due time may all who thus 
have on this Armor go forth like the faithful little band of 
Gideon and participate in the "smiting" by giving the light 
from the divine Word! 

It is not to be expected 'that all in the nominal systems 
who claim to love the Lord, will hear the message. Those 
who do hear and believe the truth will say, "Thank God, there 
is hope for the salvation of mankind!" And they will rejoice. 
Others will take an opposite view; and hence there will be 
a division. 

The smiting of the Jordan — 'the dividing of the people — and 
the separation of the antitypioal Elijah and Elisha classes 
are two different things. The Watch Toweb has repeatedly 
pointed out this fact. It was the chariot of fire that separated
 Elijah from Elisha. The chariot of fire seems to represent
 severe trials and persecutions. Zeal for the Lord and 
for the message of his kingdom will bring upon the faithful 
ones such persecution and fiery trials as would separate them 
from those having less zeal. Then the picture seems to indicate 
that the Elijah class will be taken up — changed in the great 
whirlwind of anarchy, indicating that some of the Lord's true 
saints may suffer some special persecution. 

4 'GO YE- AFTEE HIM AND SMITE" 

What Bible Student is he who thoroughly appreciates the 
divine plan and yet doubts that Brother Russell was the "man 
clothed with linen with the writer's inkhorn by his side/' described
 in Ezekiel 9:2? He has finished his course, completed 
the work given him to do; and truly could he say, as stated 
in the 11th verse, "I have done as thou hast commanded me." 
In the 5th verse of this chapter we read, "And to the others 
he said in mine hearing, go ye after him through the city and 
smite," etc. It has been suggested that the five mentioned in 
Luke 16:28 refer to a class. Is it not also reasonable to suggest
 that the five others, mentioned in Ezekiel 9, refer to all of 
the true followers of the Master who will gladly take up the 
message of the kingdom, and with it "smite" the people, thus 
accomplishing the work that is left for the remaining members
 of tlie church to perform? 

We merely offer this suggestion, dear friends, that it may 
stimulate our faith and zeal. W'ho knows but that 1917 may 
be the greatest year yet for activity in the service of our King? 
Truly we are living in a fearful and wonderful time! "What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and 
godliness!" Let us not become disturbed or excited; but, striving
 to appreciate the importance of the time in which we are 
living and the wonderful opportunities that are set before us, 
let us be of sober mind, and watch and pray, that we may be 
enabled to take advantage of every opportunity that comes 
to glorify the great King of kings 1 


CHRIST COMING— AND COMING TO CHRIST 

[Except the paragraphs printed below, this article was a reprint of that entitled ' ' The Heavenly Jerusalem, ' * published in issue 

of June 1, 1905, which please see.] 

December 31. — Revelation 22:6-14. 

"The spirit and the bride Bay, Come. And he that heareth, let him say, Come. And he that is athirst, let him come; he that 

will, let him take of the water of life freely/' — Verse 17. E. V. 
••THE SPTBIT AND THE BRIBE SAT — COME" turn to life everlasting. It will require the entire Millennial 

Our Golden Text is the inspired statement respecting that age for the delivery of the message to every creature and for 


glorious time and its blessed message. There will be a bride 
then; but there is no bride now. The church is an espoused 
virgin; but the marriage of the Laroib is still deferred. (2 
Oor. 11 :2) The last members of his church must complete 
their course, must pass their final examination and enter into 
glory with him, before the marriage can be consummated. 

After the marriage of the Lamb, not only will there be the 
holy city, representing the church in her official or governing 
capacity under Christ her Head, but there will also be the 
Messed work of the church — the oalling of the world's attention
 to the river of the water of life, to the leaves of healing, 
to the fruits of the Spirit. Then the Spirit, the power of God, 
will co-operate with the message then promulgated; and the 
result undoubtedly will be that all the world shall hear, and 
that all who love righteousness and hate iniquity will remankind
 to avail themselves of the privileges then afforded 
to whosoever will, 

Nowhere do the Scriptures speak of the river of the water 
of life as existing now — during this Gospel age. There is none, 
and there can be none until the heavenly city descends from 
above, for the river must flow from the midst of it, from the 
throne. Describing the condition of the Lord*B saints at the 
present time very differently, the Master declares that those 
who are his have in them a well of water springing up into life 
eternal. (John 4:14) We know what thjs means. We know 
in what sense each individual of the church has received of 
the holy Spirit, and has in himself a fountain of grace and 
truth for has refreshment. But there is no river of the water 
of life to which he could go or to which he could invite others 
to go. 


'BATTLE IN ECCLESIASTICAL HEAVENS" 


We now have a good stock of "A Great Battle in the Ecclesiastical
 Heavens," by Brother Rutherford. In view of the 
fact that Brother Russell's death has stimulated some of his 
enemies to renewed attacks, in hope of injuring the work of 
the Society and weakening the cause of the truth, this seems 
a propitious time to offset the influence Buch attacks create. 

While much injury often recoils upon thote resorting to 


such methods — in one instance recently, three men went forward
 to their minister and informed him of their displeasure 
over his remarks and of their intention never to return to 
the church — it is our privilege to help those not so able to 
see the real object of these attacks. 

Orders for the above booklet will be filled at $2.00 per 100 
for a limited time. When ordering, please mention "Battle." 


[6028] 


JESUS THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "The Life and Light of Men," published in issue of December 15, 1904, which please 

see.] 


"THE SPIRITS OF JUST MEN MADE PERFECT" 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of August 15, 1913, which please see.] 


"FROM GLORY UNTO GLORY" 

2 Corinthians 3:18. 
[This poem was a reprint of that which appeared in issue of January, 1891, which please see.] 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


A VOIOE FROM LONDON 
Deab Brethren: — 

Loving greetings in our Heavenly Father's name! At a 
meeting of the London Tabernacle Congregation, it was unanimously
 agreed to send you a cable message and also a letter 
of loving sympathy. 

The news of our beloved Pastor's death came as a great 
shook to us. We realize more clearly than hitherto how much 
we owe to him, and how much occasion we have to praise the 
Lord on his behalf. 

In a special sense he was Pastor both to the New York 
Temple and the London Tabernacle congregation. Both were 
so very near his heart that we feel specially drawn to one 
another. 

Our hearts go out to you especially, dear Brethren, because 
the closeness of your association with our dear Brother will 
cause you to feel the break more keenly than others who have 
not been so privileged. 

We thank our dear Father for sparing Brother Russell to us 
so long. For forty years his faithful ministry has testified 
his courage, zeal and We. He has been a constant stimulus to 
us— ^a wonderful copy of God's dear Son ! 

Whether there be much work to be done by the Church in 
flesh, or little, we prize highly the privilege of bearing the 
precious vessels left in our charge, and of feeding the Lord's 
dear sheep. Our chief concern must be to watch and prav that 
we may be ready and, whilst pressing on with all diligence, 
our eyes will be fixed on heaven yet more earnestly, looking 
for a happy reunion. Pray for us, as we will continue to do 
for you. 

With sincere sympathy and fond love in the Lord to you, 

Your brethren and fellow-servants, 

London Tabbbnacld Congregation. 

well com tlh uk in that which he begtan 
Deab Bbkthben : — 

Greetings in the name of the Lord! Mercy unto you ; grace, 
peace and love be multiplied unto you. 

We take this opportunity of expressing our appreciation of 
our dear Pastor's labor of love, our implicit confidence in his 
purity and integrity, his sterling qualities, and our determination
 to continue in that which he began. 

While recognizing our exceeding great loss, we rejoice that 
our dear brother has passed beyond into his reward, to the inheritance
 of the saints in light. We feel sure that he is now 
with our dear Lord, crowned; having ceased from his labors, 
but his. works continuing. 

Words would fail us to express the spiritual help, comfort 
and encouragement we have received from the Lord's hand 
through this faithful servant. 

Having before us his noble example of self-sacrifice — laying 
down his strength and life In our interest aad service- of 
faith, love, loyalty and cheerful and unmurmuring endurance of 
■persecution and misrepresentation — we are resolved that, by 
the Lord's assisting grace, we shall endeavor more faithfully 
to walk humbly in our dear Redeemer's footsteps, daily striving
 to grow up into him, and to develop the fruit of the Spirit 
— 3ove. 

We desire to continue our co-operation with the Bethel 
family in the harvest work, in harmony with our dear Pastor's 
labors, and pray the Lord's richest blessing upon all participating
, to the honor and praise of our glorious Head and our 
heavenly Father. 

HAMILTON CHTJBOH— Oft*. 


"HE WHO HATH LED WILL LEAD" 
Dear Friends at Bethel: — 

Together with representatives of the Thayer, Mo., Class, we 
held a memorial service in memory of our dear Brother Russell
 and his faithful services toward us all. 

At this meeting I was requested to extend the love and sympathy
 of both classes in this hour of trial, which we realize 
comes especially hard upon those of his immediate family, although
 we are glad to feel that we are all of one family,, because
 we share one another's joys and sorrows. "Blest be the 
tie that binda" 

The friends here wish to assure you that their love, cooperation
 and support in every way possible will continue just 
the same as heretofore. While we feel keenly our great loss 
in the death of one to whom we were bo deeply indebted everyway
, yet we rejoice with him! Our hearts are made glad by 
the thought that his days of pain and weariness are over; 
that he has entered into the joys of the Lord. We are praying
 that divine guidance, wisdom and courage may be given 
you for the great responsibilities resting upon you, trusting 
that "he who hath led will lead us still." 

Mammoth Springs Church. — ArU. 

MOBE AND MOBS DETERMINED TO FBESS ON 

Deab Brethren in Christ:— 

Love and greetings in the name of our dear Redeemer ! We 
desire to thank you for the visit of our dear Pilgrim Brother 
Thorn. How the Lord blessed our fellowship together, and 
how our pure minds were stirred up by way of remembrance! 

Instead of our Pastor's death Blackening our zeal, it has 
wonderfully increased it, and we are more determined to press 
on, cheerfully and patiently doing with our might what out 
hands find to do. We want to work while it is called day, for 
a dark night is coming. 

We can't properly express our appreciation of the dear 
messengers of the truth whom you send to us — those who are 
developed in the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. They are 
doing a wonderful work, ministering to the saints. Please 
send us one as often as possible. 

We are still praying the Lord's rich blessing upon you, that 
he may continue to bless your efforts and labors of love. 

Yours in His glad service, Ft. Smith Eoclesia.— Ark. 

MOBS DETERMINED THAN EVER 
Dear Bbethben: — 

Enclosed you will find for my Good-Hopes for the 

last half of 1916. And, dearly Beloved, I wish to say that I 
have received a great blessing from the Lord for my Good 
Hopes offerings of the past year. I know the amount ia sma\l, 
but I feel sure it ia precious in His sight. I hope to do even 
better, if I can. Truly our heart* are willing; and God 
looketh upon the heart. One of out Good-Hopes for next year 
is that we continue to serve the Lord faithfully, either <m this 
side the veil or on the other side. We hope soon to see him 
face to face. 

I wish to assure you of my love and interest in you. Since 
our Pastor's change, I am more determined to continue to follow
 him as he ioHowed the Lord, As I delighted to follow 
him while he was here; I now expect to follow him on until 
I shall see him in the kingdom glory. 

I sometimes think how you brethren must miss the presence
 of out dear Brother; but then I know that the kingdom 
is becoming more and more real to you. My prayers ascend 
for you. With much love, I am 

Your fellow-servant, Alexander Lowe. — Pa. 


VU-14 


[6029] 


(9-14) 


(14-15) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


FINISHED HIS COURSE TRIUMPHANTLY 
DEAB BRETHREN IN THE LORD: — 

We were deeply affected by the sudden, unexpected death 
of God's faithful servant Particularly do we mourn his loss 
because of the love, sympathy and help he 'has at all times so 
freely given us. We realize now more than ever how completely 
he laid down his life for the brethren. But while we mourn 
our loss we rejoice in the thought that he has finished Ms 
course triumphantly and gone to his eternal reward. 

We wish to assure you of the love and loyalty of all the 
brethren here, of their earnest desire and intention of cooperating
 with the Society in carrying on the kingdom work 
so lovingly begun by our Pastor and so untiringly continued by 
him until his death, thus setting such an inspiring example. 
Our consecration, too, is unto death ; we would not have it 
otherwise. So, dear Brethren, you have our prayers, supplemented
 by our best efforts in holding high the banner of 
Truth until the work is finished ; whether the time for its accomplishment
 lies in the early future, as we hope, or is deferred
 for "yet a little while longer," 

St. Louis Ecclesia. — Mo, 
A VOICE FROM ABROAD 
Dear Brethren: — 

We cannot say much; our hearts are full; but we sympathize
 with you in the loss (pro tern.) of our Beloved Brother 
Russell. We, too, feel keenly that the Lord has seen fit to remove
 from us our brother-friend. 

How glad we are that he has ever urged us to rest in the 
Lord and in him only ! And how glad we are of his repeated 
warnings against pride, selfishness and wolves! Through his 
unique faithfulness, thank God, we have been aided in putting 
on and utilizing the whole armor of God. 

We trust that we, with you, may remain faithful and 
courageous to the end, and that you may individually and 
collectively be enabled to enter into sfuoh parts of the readjusted
 work as will bring honor to our God, to his truth 
and permanent blessings to yourselves. 

Yours in his love. F. Guard and Family. — Eng. 

CONTINUED DEEP INTEREST AND COOPERATION 
Beloved Brethren: — 

Deepest sympathy in the mutual loss of our dearly beloved 
Pastor ! We realize with sorrow our great loss in the passing 
over of "that wise and faithful servant"; but we sorrow- not 
as others, realizing that while he has ceased from his earthly 
labors, his work follows with him. 

"Therefore, beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, 
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye 
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." We desire 
to assure you of our continued deep interest and co-operation 
with you in the furtherance of the Lord's work during the remaining
 time that the Lord may permit us to continue to serve 
him in the flesh. Your servants in the Lord, 

Springfield Ecclesia. — Mass. 
FAITHFULNESS IN LITTLE THINGS 
Dear Sirs: — 

I do not know the persons doing your work here— distributing
 literature; but whoever they are, the papers are not 
placed as they should be to get results. I find them on doorsteps
, in yards and on the sidewalks; not one- fourth appear to 
get into the homes. I should like to have a, trial, and would 
guarantee to do the work thoroughly and satisfactorily. 

["He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also 
in much. We believe that the greatly increased cost of paper 
will be one of the aids to greater care in the distribution of 
the Bible Students Monthly — that every paper may reach 
the hands of a reader. No doubt our Lord would be very 
careful in putting out literature, that there be no waste; and 
we believe he would be pleased to have his brethren endeavor 
to exercise equal care.] 

STAND TOGETHER AS GOOD SOLDXEBS 
Bear Brethren in Christ:— 

Christian greetings to you in the name of our dear Redeemer
 and Advocate! Keenly do we feel the loss of him who 
so faithfully laid down his life for the brethren, and who with 
untiring devotion to the service of the Lord, provided that 
which is "meat in due season for th« household of faith" ; and 
though he has "gome before," he ever liveth in the memory of 
those to whom he has been a lasting benefactor. 

We sorrow not as those who have no hope, but rejoice inasmuch
 as he has ceased from his labors and has entered into 
the joys oi our Lord. We assure you of our faithful support 
in the work. 

Yours in the servicfe of our Redeemer, 

Wheeling Ohubch. — W. Va. 


confidence in the society 

Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

We have confidence in your abilities. As you have been 
so long in close contact with our Pastor you will have understanding
 necessary to finish the proposed services, according 
as the I»rd has directed him, and we shall do all in our power 
to uphold your hands. 

We express our hearts when we tell you that we shall 
the more fervently love you in your desire to continue in the 
service of the "Glad Tidings," even unto death. You have our 
daily prayers and sympathetic interest in this dark "Hour of 
Temptation." "Our fears, our hopes, our aims are one — our 
comforts and our cares." Abilene Ecclesia — Kan. 

WILL HELP "HOLD UP THE HANDS*' 

L>ear Saints in the Bethel Home:— h 

As a Class, and also as individuals, we realize that in the 
death of our Beloved Pastor we have lost that "faithful and 
wise steward," who laid down his life so faithfully in the 
Lord's cause, even unto death. His faithfulness has been the 
means of giving us more determination than ever to continue 
in the work which he loved so very much, and we assure you 
that the Allentown Ecclesia is anxious to "hold up the hands" 
of those upon whom the work of the Society falls, and to assist 
in every way possible to carry on the work, until "the night 
cometh wherein no man can work." 

Allentown Ecclesia. — Pa. 
Deab Fbiends: — 

Five hundred Memorial Numbers of The Watch Towkb 
are desired, for which please find remittance covering amount, 

A. M. ZlMMBRMAN.^Pa; 
TRITTH-HTTNGBT ONES AMONG THE SOLDIEBS 
Dear Bbethben: — 

We are sure you are remembering us in your pravers as 
we are continually bearing your names in our petitions to 
the heavenly Father. The work of showing the Dbama to the 
soldiers on the Mexican Border is a wonderful privilege, and 
is surely having the Lord's blessing! Dear brother (Gen.) 
Hall is being used of the Lord very wonderfully, and we are 
glad to co-operate. Many of the officers take very kindly to 
the Dbama, and evince considerable interest, and the soldiers 
are very eager for it. 

At the close of one finale talk twenty-eight written questions
 were handed in, and several told the speaker it was the 
first real appeal that came home to their hearts to induce 
them to surrender all to the Lord. 

Our living in the tents and "roughing it" with the soldiers 
brings us into close contact with them and gives us nwuay 
privileges of service. There are indeed truth-hungry ones 
among them! 

In personal conversation with two military prisoners, one 
told how he had heard several of our "pilgrims." Often some 
one mentions a mother, sister, father or brother in the truth. 
We desire a further interest in your prayers. I am so glad 
our dear Pastor offered me this precious privilege of service 
before he was called home! 

Your brother by his grace. Walter H. Bundy. 

MOTJBN NOT AS THOSE WHO HAVE NO HOPS 
Dear Brethren: — 

We of Vernon, B. G, Ecclesia wish to express our deepest 
love and heartfelt sympathy for all at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
who mourn the passing of our beloved Pastor Russell. But 
although our hearts are sore, we do no^ mourn as do otheTs; 
for we know our brother has entered a glorious reward, having
 "borne the cross, despising the shame, and we rejoice that 
his course of "suffering" is finished, his crown won. 

We pray that the father's richest blessing may rest upon 
aU who are taking up the work in Pastor Russell's stead, and 
that our great High Priest, our Lord Jesus Christ, will soon 
come forth in his garments of beauty to bless hi* people. 

Yours in His love, Vernon Ecclksia*— B. 0. 

WOKLD HAS LOST A BEAL FRIEND 


My L>bab Mr.: : — 

This is to thank' you for the two copies of The Watch 
Tower containing an account of the career, so illustrous, the 
life, bo full, sweet, wholesome and truly good, of that much 
beloved Pastor Russell, whom I learned to admire and lore 
in the brief time I was his guest on two occasions only a few 
days before his death. The whole world has lost a real friend. 
iHow I wish he could have been spared another span of life 
that be might continue to teach us meekness and love! 

I hav^ many friends who will be much interested in Pastor 
Russell and his teachings, and if you can favor me with a 
half dozen or more copies of the above issue, I will take 


[6030] 


January 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(15-20) 


pleasure in seeing that they get them. With all best wishes 
I beg to remain 

Yours very sincerely, Clabence E. Spayd. — Brooklyn, 

DEEM JT A PRIVILEGE TO COOPERATE 

Deab Brethren in Christ: — 

On this, the occasion of the passing beyond -the veil of our 
beloved Pastor, we desire to assure you of our resolution to 
continue, by the grace of the Lord, faithful even unto death. 
We deem it the highest possible privilege at the present time 
to be allowed to co-operate with you in the further spreading 
of the glad tidings of the kingdom. 

We are rejoiced to know that the work of The Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society will continue. Our prayers 


shall ascend daily to the Throne of Heavenly Grace on your 
behalf. Kamsack Ecclesia. — Bash., Can* 

EAGEB TO COOPERATE FULLY 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

We are real anxious to let you at Headquarters know of 
our earnest desire to co-operate fully with you in the harvest 
work yet remaining. The class voted unanimously on this 
question. 

We seem to be so much nearer now to one another — more 
oneness in mind and spirit. We are so glad for this! We 
thank our heavenly Father. Express to us at any time even 
your smallest desires. Columbus Ecclesia. — Ohio. 


BATTERING DOWN THE WALLS OF HELL 

"What Say the Scriptures About Hell" (Hz)„ Watch which many entertain respecting the erroneous doctrine of 

Tower form* is 5c per copy, or 2c each in lots of 50 or more. eternal torment, while pointing out the punishment set forth 

This Watch Tower continues to be in great demand. It treats in the Scriptures for the incorrigible, namely, "The wages of 

every text in which is found the word hell and dispels the fear sin is death ; but the gift of God is eternal life through Christ." 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JANUARY 15, 1917 


No. 2 


GOD'S SPECIAL GIFT TO HIS CHILDREN 


"If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the 

holy Spirit to them that ask him?" — Luke 11:13. 
Comparatively few have realized the value of this heavenly 
gift of the holy Spirit, and few have possessed it. 


The begetting
 of the "holy Spirit, which first came on Pentecost to 
those who were to constitute the church, is necessary in order 
that we may become children of God. One cannot become 
a Christian by the mere study of the Bible. Indeed, we must 
be begotten of the holy Spirit before we shall be able to understand
 the Bible, to apprehend the deep things of God. The 
begetting of the holy Spirit is something that we cannot 
explain, something that nobody can explain. If God had 
wished us to understand this miracle of grace, doubtless he 
would have made it sufficiently plain in the Bible. 

But we know from the testimony of the Word, corroborated 
by our own experience, that there is a begetting of the Spirit, 
a supernatural start of a new life in those who consecrate 
themselves to God. In referring to this beginning of the new 
nature, the Lord uses a figure of speech, illustrating the matter
 by something that is well known to the human family. 
We know that it is not a mental power in man that begets 
a human life, but that it requires a direct importation of the 
spirit of life originally received from the Creator, before an 
individual life can begin. And so it is with the spiritual 
child of God. There must be a direct importation of the 
holy Spirit to start the new heavenly life. 

We are not to think of this start as being something great 
or large in amount; for as a matter of fact, the beginning 
of the new life is small. But it must be there. The Christian 
mar not be able to point back to anything like an electric 
charge as the beginning of his Christian life. A few people 
have tnade such claims, but we think this is a mere hallucination
 of the mind. God used a special outward manifestation 
at the begetting of the Lord Jesus with the holy Spirit, in 
order that Jolin the Baptist might make* a declaration of what 
he saw in the case of the first member of the church, and 
that we might know. There was also an outward demonstration
 at Pentecost, and in the case of Cornelius and his 
family, the first Gentiles to be received into the church. But 
these were for a very special purpose, as heretofore shown. 
As" TespectB all the ot&ers . of God's f amjjy; we are inducted 
into the body of Christ, which is the church, without any 
outward manifestation. But when we have met the conditions, 
we do not doubt our acceptance. We receive it all by faith 
in the Lord's Word. 

NECESSITY OF FEEDING UPON THE WORD 

This begetting of the holy Spirit, then, which iias a small 
beginning, shortly after manifests itself as the new creature 
feeds * r jfist as the germ of life in the human being must be 
fed, must gradually grow, develop and become stronger, and 
thus manifest its individual life. It the new creature does 
not feed upon the Word of the Lord, it will grow weak and 
sickly, and eventually will die. We have known some who 
have been for twenty years consecrated to the Lord, and who 
are still babes in Christ* because they have been stunted in 
their development through insufficient or improper feeding and 
exercise. 

God did not wait for us to come voluntarily into his 


family. Indeed, no man can come unless he Jias been invited 
by the Lord. Whoever has received the Word of truth intelligently
, and is 1 drawn by it, has an invitation. If he responds 
during his "acceptable time," if he accepts Jesus as his ransom 
and presents himself fully to God, he is begotten of the 
holy Spirit. Then he is to grow through "eating" the truth, 
through studying the truth, through applying it to his own 
life. We should store our minds with the Scriptures, so that 
in each of our experiences these Words of Life will be there 
to give U3 in increased measure the Spirit of the truth, that 
we may grow strong in the Lord as the various trials of life 
come to us, and thus we may be sustained by the Spirit of 
the truth. 

WHO MAT PRAY FOE THE HOLY fiPXBXT 

W T ith the thought of the primary work of the holy Spirit 
in mind — namely, the work of spirit-begetting — let us now 
consider our text. Our Lord had been suggesting to his disciples
 the thought that a good parent, if asked for a fish, would 
not give his child a serpent, or if asked for bread, would not 
give a stone. Jesus would have his disciples consider how 
they would act as parents, so that they might the better 
realize what God's attitude would be toward any whom he received
 into his family as his children. Then the words of 
our text followed: 'If ye, then, being evil, know how to give 
good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him!" 
That is to say, if you who are imperfect, who have largely 
lost the likeness of God as a race, still so realize the responsibility
 of parents to their children that you would not 
do your children harm when they come to you for something 
good, much more would the heavenly Father not do harm to 
his children, but good, when they come to him for a blessing. 

Then our Lord Jesus specifies the particular blessing for 
which we should ask — God's holy Spirit—not using vain repetition
, as do the Gentiles, those who are not the Lord's true 
children, and who are not instructed to pray to Jehovah. With 
many, ihe prayers go up in a merely mechanical way, as by 
machinery — in some nations by literal machinery. The Chinese 
have a praying-wheel which they turn around and around, 
and thus repeat the prayers. They are shrewd enough to 
know that thus they can say the prayer more often than with 
the lips. Such is not the kind of prayer that the Lord will 
receive. 

God's children have instructions from his Word on this 
subject of prayer. They are to come'to the Father according to 
these instructions, not doubting his love, his wisdom, and his 
power. They are to come with full confidence in him as their 
Father, asking for the things for which he has bidden them to 
pray. Their <trust in him should be so absolute that they would 
know that he is ever seeking their very highest blessing, that 
all his instructions and leadings are "to this end, and that 
he withholds nothing that would be for their good. 

But before any one can come to God in the sense here referred
 to, he must take the definite step of becoming a child 
of God. The world are not children of God; for that relationship
 was lost when Adam became disobedient. By dis- 


[6031] 


l2if-21) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


obedience he was cut off from sonship, from fellowship with 
the heavenly Father. He lost the spirit of God — the mind, 
or disposition, of the Lord — which all beings created in the 
image of the heavenly Father possess by nature, so long as 
they retain that image unblemished. After his fall Adam 
became imperfect in all his powers; and this imperfection 
increased until death fully claimed him. 

Thus all of Adam's posterity, through hereditary imperfection
, have gone further and further from God, being alienated 
"by wicked works." But God has made provision by which 
eventually all who desire may come back into relationship 
bo him as children. His provision is our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
the work he will do for mankind. During the Gospel age 
our Lord has been doing one part of the work, that some may 
come immediately into relationship with God and enjoy all the 
favors of being his sons. Another part of his work our Lord 
will do during the age to follow this — the Millennial age — 
when all the world, every son and daughter of Adam, will be 
permitted and assisted to regain this lost sonship, if they will. 
It is for the benefit of mankind that the church class is 
being called out now, in advance of the world's blessing. God 
is fully content with the arrangement which he has made. He 
has no desire to urge anybody to come into the enjoyment of 
his present and special blessing. He desires, on the contrary, 
that none shall come except those who really have the heart 
desire for his favor and fellowship. 

OOD NOT PHONO OVER THE WOBU) 

So far as the Gospel age is concerned, God has purposely 
made the way an especially narrow one, in order that he might 
during this age make a selection of very earnest followers of 
Jesus, who would have his mind, his spirit, his disposition. 
During the next age he will do away with the narrowness of 
the way, and there will he a great highway cast up. However
, there will still be tests upon the people, conditions of 
attaining relationship to God. God does not purpose at any 
time to be in relationship with those who do not wish to be 
in relationship with him. 

We should by no means have the thought that God is 
grieving because all mankind are not praying and going to 
church. Nothing of the kind! God's happiness is not dependent
 upon man or man's doings. The Almighty has not a 
particle of anxious concern ahout those who are not now in 
relationship with him. He is not calling all the world at 
this time. He merely concerns himself for those who desire 
to avail themselves of his present arrangement, that they may 
be his children, with all their interests provided for. 

The child of the Lord is instructed to ask for the blessings 
which the Lord has for him. The Lord wishes His children to 
make a formal request for the blessings they need, in order 
that they may realize their need of the gift Whoever does not 
realize his need would be little blessed by receiving from the 
Lord. Our heavenly Father desires that we should fully feel, 
desire, crave, what he has to give, before it comes to us, that 
his gift may prove of real and lasting benefit. 

The Scriptures have limited us in regard to the things for 
which we may ask. We may ask for nothing contrary to 
God's will. To do so would show that we are not in accord 
with the heavenly Father. The very terms and conditions of 
our being received as his children were that our wills^should 
be fully submitted to his will. If, then, we ask for things 
for which he has not told us to ask, and which he does not 
wish to give us, our course proves that we have a will in 
opposition to his or that we have not studied to know what is 
his will. And if we have not studied to know his will, it 
shows carelessness and a lack of loyalty to the Lord. To ask 
favor at his hands when we are not seeking to know what he 
would have us do, and hence are not doing it, would be pre* 
sumption. So we should be very careful to note what our 
Father is pleased to give us, that we may ask the things pleasing
 in his sight. 

GOD'S PATTBKCE WITH "BABES" 

But the Lord is very merciful with "babes in Christ" — 
those who have partaken only of "the milk of the Word," and 
not of the "strong meat," and hence would not know the things 
to ask for. He is patient with them, sympathetic, and m 
such cases takes the will, the heart intention, instead of the 
words. "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities; for 
we know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the 
spirit maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot 
be uttered. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what 
is the mind of the spirit, for he maketh intercession for the 
saints according to the will of God." (Romans 8:26, 27) 
That is, God accepts our minds, if we are wishing for right 
things in our hearts. If the holy Spirit, the holy mind to 
which we are begotten, longs for the Lord's spiritual blessings, 


God will give us those things, and not the things we may be 
asking for with our lips. 

We have known of some good Christian people, sincere in 
heart though poorly instructed, who would pray fervently that 
God would baptize them "with the Holy Ghost and with fire" 
— not appreciating the meaning of their words, not seeing that 
a baptism of fire would have a destructive influence and would 
be injurious to them. Those who thus pray do not understand 
John the Baptist's words, do not realize that it was the disobedient
 and unfaithful Israelites who were to receive the 
baptism of fire, while the faithful would receive the baptism 
of the holy Spirit, at Pentecost. But the Lord mercifully accepts
 the minds, the hearts, of these his children, and not what 
they say. 

The Lord indicates that his true children may always feel 
confident of receiving what is for their highest good. We are 
to realize that the Lord knows far better than we do what we 
need. The Master taught us to pray, "Give us this day our 
daily bread!" There is no intimation of what kind it would 
be, whether the food was to be little or much, very plain or 
not so plain, whether it would be what was pleasing to the 
palate or otherwise. We are merely to ask him to give us 
what is best in order to our greatest benefit as new creatures. 
If this means suffering in the flesh or the impoverishment of 
the human body, well and good, for this body is consecrated 
to death, and we are glad 'to lay it down according to the 
Lord's choice for us. 

But there is one thing for which we may pray and be sure 
that in so doing we are asking in harmony with God's will; 
and that is, the holy Spirit, But even here many do not really 
know what they ask; for there has been a great misconception 
as to what the holy Spirit is. Many of God's people are 
sadly confused. They think that the holy Spirit is a person, 
who will personally come into them, and into perhaps million* 
of others. This subject has been greatly beclouded. We are 
only beginning to get out of the fog. We need to study God's 
Word more and not be too confident as to our own conceptions. 

"HOLY SPIRIT" A BROAD TEEM 

In asking for more of the holy Spirit as Christians, we 
are asking for more of the mind of the Lord, the disposition 
of the Lord. The term "holy Spirit" has a broad significance. 
It means the power or influence or energy of God; it also 
means the mind or disposition of God. We know that God 
has an invisible power that he exercises. Holy men of old 
spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy Spirit, the 
holy power of the Lord, God's energy or influence. God has 
given his sons an enlightenment of mind, a supernatural illumination
, which throws a light upon the Scriptures of the Old 
Testament and the New Testament. Thus we gain a good 
conception of the purposes and the mind of the Lord, that 
which the holy Spirit of God has placed in his Word. 

Now since the holy Spirit placed the light in the Word of 
God, it is there for a purpose. That purpose is that earnest 
hearts might know how to find the Lord and might feed upon 
the Word, and by feeding upon it might become partakers of 
the holy mind, disposition of God. Those Christians who 
neglect the Word of God do not receive from it this holy Spirit, 
this holy mind, and the heavenly light becomes dim. But 
those who feed upon the promises of God, the instructions of 
God, appropriating these to themselves, become strong in the 
Lord and in the power of his might. They receive more and 
more of this holy Spirit which God has put in his Word. 
It ia his Spirit, his truth, the divine power exercised thus by 
him. So the Christian receives God's Spirit in the sense of 
receiving the divine .begetting and illumination, in the sense 
of receiving holy power, energy, and in the sense of receiving 
the holy disposition of the Lord. 

MEASURE OF THE HOLT SPIRIT VARIOUSLY INCREASED 
This Spirit of God may be increased in us by other ways 
than by the direct reading of the Scriptures. For instance, 
some children of God, guided by his holy Spirit, the Spirit of 
the truth, may write some beautiful hymn, and into this hymn 
may incorporate so much of the truth of the Scriptures, so 
much of its spirit, that the mere singing of that hymn, or the 
reading of it, may give us an additional measure of the Spirit 
of God. It is none the less the Lord's Spirit, thouzh it is 
transferred from the printed page into the individual life. It 
is the coming of the truth and its spirit and power into the 
heart and life that constitutes the light. 

As the child of the Lord receives individually the Spirit of 
the truth, in that same proportion he becomes a burning and 
shining light. As the holy Spirit is from the Father and 
through the Son, so this holy Spirit is in the church, and shines 
from them upon the world. But the world comprehends not 
the light. Sometimes they think it is hypocrisy — sometimes 


[6032] 


January 15 t 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(21-22) 


one thing, sometimes another. But no matter. It is ours to 
show forth the praises of God, And some few will hear, and 
will take knowledge that we have been with Jesus and learned 
of him, Thus they may be led to God. 

While this holv Spirit proceeds from the Word of God and 
from the lives of God's children, it does not come to them 
without divine assistance in the matter. For instance, while 
studying the Word of God, we may be in touch with the 
spiritual channel of heavenly communion — namely, prayer; by 
which the child of God may tell the Father of his feelings, 
sentiments, etc., even as God through the Bible tells hia children
 hia sentiments. Thus we receive an increase of the holy 
Spirit through the act of prayer. In our appeals for forgiveness
, etc., we are reviving in our minds the Spirit of God; 
and this holy Spirit comes tq us more richly as a further 
comfort and assistance in the good way. We call to mind the 
divine assurance, "Like as a father pitieth hia children, so 
the Lord pitieth them that reverence him" ; and so we come to 
the throne of heavenly grace to obtain mercy and find grace 
to help in every time of need. As therefore the needy one 
comes, he receives more of the holy Spirit. 

There is still another means by which the heavenly Father 
gives his children of his holy Spirit, and that is through his 
providences. While we know not, of ourselves, the things we 
should ask for as we ought, we know from his Word that 
we may always ask for more of his holy Spirit and the fruits 
and graces thereof. But we may not at first realize how 
these can best be cultivated in our hearts. We have the instruction
 in the Bible that we are to put on meekness, selfcontrol
, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness. 
Yet while we know this, there is something more that we need 


— ^experiences in life which will bring these things before our 
minds so that they may be better appreciated by us and we 
may get more of the holy Spirit out of these injunctions of 
Holy Writ. For instance, we shall have special trials, and 
thus learn what real patience ia, and why we should exercise 
patience. And so with meekness. The Lord may permit us to 
stumble into some trial by which we may be led to see our 
lack in this respect ; and we may come to study more carefully 
the quality of meekness, to see the holy Spirit of meekness 
as presented in the Bible. And thus with self-control, gentleness
 and love. 

So God is giving us more of his holy Spirit by bringing 
the instructions of the Bible forcefully to our attention 
through painful experiences. These experiences are supervised 
by the Lord, by his holy Spirit, or power, as a part of the 
means by which we are to attain the necessary heart and 
character development — that thus we may be rounded out and 
become rich in all the -heavenly fruits and graces. 
"0 holy Spirit, Messenger of God, 

Gome, fill our hearts and minds with rich intent! 
Illuminate, instruct, and guide our wills, 

That they may with thy mind be fully blent. 
"By words divine that point the heavenly way, 

By discipline's hard hammer, or by strain 
Of heavenly music winged with pleading prayer, 

By sunshine bright or dreary days of pain, 
"Lead thou us on! This narrow, rugged path 

We cannot keep alone ; but led by thee, 
The way grows luminous and sweet and fair, 
Each earthly bond is loosed, and we are free!" 


CONVENTION AT PITTSBURGH 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS 

The Convention of Bible Students at Pittsburgh, January 
6 and 7, was a season of blessed fellowship. When the Society 
began to make arrangements for the annual election of its 
officers, required by the charter to be held at Pittsburgh, on 
January 6, it was thought well to have a convention in connection
 therewith, and a two-days' convention was then arranged
. 

This was the first convention held by the Society since 
the death of Brother Russell. As was expected, the spirit 
manifested by tlie friends in attendance was excellent, giving 
evidence that all had been living very near to the Lord. The 
attendance on Saturday, the 6th, averaged about 600, and 
sessions were held in Carnegie Hall, North Side, Pittsburgh. 
The addresses by Brother Ritchie and Brother Hirsh were 
much enjoyed by the friends. 

The Sunday meetings were held at the Lyceum Theater, 
opening at 9:45 a. m,, with the Bethel service and followed 
by a praise and testimony meeting. At 11 o'clock there was 
an address by Brother Macmillan, Chairman of the convention ; 
about a thousand of the friends were in attendance at this 
time. In the afternoon Brother Rutherford delivered an address
 to about 1,500, about 500 of the public being present. 
Excellent attention was given, and a good proportion of cards 
received from those who had heard the truth for the first 
time. 

The evening address by Brother Van Amburgh was greatly 
appreciated and was followed by a love feast, participated in by 
about 500. 

THE SOCIETY'S OFFICERS 

Saturday was the day specially set apart for the election of 
officers to serve the Watch Toweb Bible akd Tbact Society 
for the ensuing year. Much interest was centered in this 
election by friends throughout the world* Brother Russell had 
held the office of President from the organization of the Society
, in 1884, to the time of his death. Approximately 
150,000 votes were represented in person and by proxy. The 
session was opened by Vice-President Brother A. I. Ritchie 
with devotional services. He stated that the first work would 
be the appointment of a Committee on rules and regulations. 
As it would take a little time for the Committee to complete 
its work, four o'clock in the afternoon was set to heaj its 
report. It was nearly five when the Chairman called the 
meeting to order. The report of the Committee was read and 
adopted by the convention. 

The next order of business was the nomination and election 
of a President. Brother Pierson, with very appropriate remarks
 and expressions of appreciation and love for Brother 
Russell, stated that he had received word as proxy-holder from 
friends all over the land to the effect that he cast their votes 
for Brother J. F. Rutherford for President, and he further 
stated that he was in full sympathy with this and therefore 


would place his name in nomination. This was seconded by 
various brethren from Pittsburgh, Boston, Cleveland, Washington
, Pa., New York, and other cities. There being no further 
nominations, a motion was made that the rule of balloting 
be suspended, and that the Secretary of the convention be 
directed to cast the entire vote for Brother J. F. Rutherford. 
Thereupon the Secretary cast the ballot as directed, and 
Brother Rutherford was declared the unanimous choice of the 
convention as President of the Society for the ensuing year. 

Nominations for Vice-President were then called for, and 
Brother A. N. Pierson and Brother A. I. Ritchie were nominated
, both nominations being seconded by various brethren. 
The counting of the ballots showed that Brother Pierson received
 the larger number of votes. A motion then made the 
election of Brother Pierson as Vice-President of the Society 
unanimous. 

There was but one nomination for Secretary-Treasurer, and 
the Chairman was requested to cast the vote of the convention 
for Brother W. E. Van Amburgh, who was declared elected. 

The friends everywhere had prayed earnestly for the Lord's 
guidance and direction in the matter of the election; and when 
it was concluded, everyone was content and happy, believing 
that the Lord had directed their deliberations and answered 
their prayers. Perfect harmony prevailed amongst all present. 
A resolution was passed to the effect that while the President
 is the Executive Officer and General Manager of the 
Society's work and affairs, both in America and all foreign 
countries where the Society has branches, he might appoint 
an Advisory Committee from time to time to advise and consult
 with him concerning the conduct of the affairs of the 
Society. It was understood that this resolution was passed 
at the suggestion of Brother Rutherford, to the end that the 
President might have certain ones upon whom he might call 
at any time for aid and advice in the weightier matters pertaining
 to the affairs of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society. 

Following the election Brother Rutherford, addressing the 
meeting, said in part: 

"Dear friends, I cannot let this occasion pass without 
saying a few words to you. My heart is full to overflowing
. You will bear me witness that I have not in any 
way sought the offitee of President of this Society. Up to 
this hour I have not discussed it with any one. I have 
purposely avoided doing so, believing that the Lord would 
accomplish his purpose. What has been done here today 
I feel that the Lord has directed, and I humbly bow to 
his will. To him alone is due all honor and glory. 

"The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is the 
greatest corporation in the world, because from the time 
of its organization until now the Lord has used it as 
his channel through which to make known the glad tidings 
to many thousands, which glad tidings the whole world 


[6033] 


(22-28) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


soon shall know. It 19 a great privilege to be one of its 
officers, I am mindful of the great responsibility resting 
upon the one who attempts to fill the office of President. 
I am especially mindful of my inability to measure up to 
the full requirements. 

"One who follows a great man in office always finds it 
a more difficult task to fill the office than it was for his 
predecessor, due largely to the fact that his acts are 
measured by the high standard set and maintained by the 
great man who preceded him. Brother Russell was truly 
a great man, because especially fitted for the use to which 
the Lord put him. No one can fill his place. While I 
am fully conscious of this fact, yet I realize that through 
Christ Jesus who strengthened me, I can do all things 
that it is his will I shall do. I will therefore attempt, 
hj his grace, to continue to make known the glad tidings 
of Messiah's kingdom, which Brother Russell did as no 
other man has done since the days of the Apostle Paul. 
The policies which Brother Russell inaugurated I will attempt
 to carry forward. Brother Russell was deeply convinced
 that there is a great work yet to be done; that the 
Jordan must be smitten; that the people must know of 
the kingdom message, and that the Lord will use his people
 to give much of this knowledge to the world before 


the kingdom is fully established. No doubt there is yet 
much work for you and for me to do, 

"In the performance of the duties of President I shall 
feel more keenly than ever that I am your servant. It 
is my desire to serve faithfully. I will need, and therefore 
ask, your united prayers, deep sympathy and unqualified 
co-operation. I believe that I shall have such. You will 
have my prayers and love and sympathy. 

'The year past has been a very eventful one. The year 
opening may be even more eventful. Let us feel therefore
 not in the least discouraged. He who has thus far 
led us will continue to lead us. Let us have brave hearts, 
ready minds and willing hands, trusting implicitly always 
in the Lord, looking to hirn for guidance. He will lead 
us to certain victory. Renewing our covenant with him 
today, united in the holy bonds of Christian love, may we 
go forth proclaiming to the world, 'The kingdom of heaven 
is at hand.' *He that reapeth receiveth wages.' Let us 
do our part in the reaping faithfully while the opportunity 
is here. Be strong, be brave, be loyal! May his blessings 
be upon you who are here and upon the Lord's children 
everywhere! Thanks be to God that h& has permitted us 
to be members of such a favored company!" 


FIRST DISCIPLES OF THE LORD JESUS 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "We Have Found the Messiah, " published in issue of January 1, 1905, which please 

see.] 


JOHN THE BAPTIST AND JESUS 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled " Witnessing for Jesus," published in issue of December 15, 1904, which please see.l 


DESTRUCTION OF THE TWIN MONARCHS 

'Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not 

serve sin." — Romans 6:6. 


The Apostle Paul in his epistles represents the world as 
being under an evil reign of Sin and Death. (Romans 5:12, 14, 
17, 21; 6:12; 1 Corinthians 15:26.) He presents the matter 
as though these were Twin Monarchs. Sin and Death have 
been reigning over the world for six thousand years. Sin 
binds and fetters mankind, and finally turns them over to 
Death. Under their blighting reign thousands of millions have 
gone down into the tomb, mentally, morally and physically 
degraded. 

It is not in our power to destroy these great monarchs. 
They can be destroyed only by the One who has been given 
all power. This great One can rescue all mankind from Sin 
and Death and* lift them out of their misery and degradation 
up to purity and life and happiness. Eventually he will fully 
destroy these great enemies. Then Sin and Death will be no 
more. 

CALLING- OUT THE VOLUNTEER OOBPS 

During this Gospel age God is calling for a volunteer corps 
of brave soldiers, who have his Spirit and will fight a good 
fight against sin — a good fight on the side of truth and righteousness
. These are called into this great warfare. Whoever 
is following Jesus, the great Captain, is a soldier in this special 
corps of volunteers. These are the chosen band of Gideon. We 
who have answered the call are expected to show our loyalty to 
our great Leader and Head. 

We must first make a full consecration of our lives to God, 
in order that we may be begotten of his holy Spirit and become
 new creatures. It is our love for God and for righteousness
 that leads us to hate iniquity and to walk in the 
footsteps of our Leader, Christ Jesus. After having been as 
aliens adopted into God's family, begotten as sons, as members
 of the body of Christ, we have a new relationship to him, 
and any sympathy for sin would be so much of disloyalty 
to our Captain. Hence we are bound, as true soldiers of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, our Gideon, to fight a good fight against 
sin. 

Our old man, our human nature, which otherwise would 
have been made just and perfect in the Millennium, we have 
surrendered voluntarily to a sacrificial death, just as Jesus 
surrendered his human nature. This old man of ours is 
covered by the imputed merit of Jesus Christ. Our Lord 
says, "Now ye are clean." The Apostle in enumerating the 
works of the flesh practised by the world, says, "And such 
were some of you, but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye 
are justified." The new creature is that which is begotten of 


the holy Spirit and is to develop to completion, andvthe creature
 that must be killed is the old man. Much of our battle 
with the giant sin is within. And not only so, but we must 
remember that our old man, justified, is our sacrifice. But 
while we are laying down this sacrifice, consuming it day 
by day, the merit of Christ's righteousness covers our flesh, 
so long as we are loyal to God. And we must keep this sacrifice
 on the altar until it is completely consumed. 
CRUCIFIED WITH C HEIST 

Our Lord was crucified in conjunction with the divine arrangement
. He did not die a sinner, but he died as the Redeemer
 of men. And so our human nature goes down into 
death, not as a sinner, but as a justified creature, by God's 
arrangement. The Word declares that we are to be dead with 
Christ, to suffer with him, to be crucified with him. This 
does not mean that our new mind3 are being crucified. It 
means that as our Lord as a man was crucified as a sinoffering
 for the world, so we as his members have died as 
men, sharing in this crucifixion of Christ. We are already 
reckoned dead; but the natural process is now going on, and 
will not be consummated until these bodies have been actually 
laid down in death. 

So the sufferings of Christ, the crucifixion of Christ, in this 
larger sense of the word, have been in process all through 
this Gospel age. The sufferings being completed, the glory and 
honor and the change to the divine nature promised to the 
"more than conquerors" will take place, and the purchase-price 
for the world will be applied. 

What is the end of this crucifixion of each member of the 
church with his Lord? The Apostle states it in our text. 
It is in order that the body of sin may be destroyed. Sin once 
ruled within us. But he has been dethroned. His power 
over us has been destroyed. Sin is the great giant that has 
been ruling the world for six thousand years, in conjunction 
with Death. These giants have made' a terrible reign of suffering
, but they are about to be vanquished. The church is now 
suffering with Christ. And if we faithfully suffer with him 
unto the end, we shall reign with him and bring about the 
destruction of sin and death, which will be accomplished in 
his Millennial reign. — Ramans 5:17; Revelation 3:21; 5:10; 
20:4-6; Daniel 7:22; Psalm 149:6-0. 

"That henceforth we should not serve sin." We as the 
Lord's people are delivered from this reign of sin. We are 
no longer under bondage to sin. God counts us as having 
passed from death unto life, from sin unto righteousness. We 


[60S4] 


January IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(29-30) 


are new creatures, and he does not hold us responsible for 
the unintentional weaknesses of our flesh. We are covered 
by the imputation of our Savior's merit. This merit was 
imputed to us for past sins, and also covers us now, as a 
robe, because of our imperfect bodies. It avails for us as we 
shall need and call for it for daily shortcomings. We do 
not serve sin any longer. We are now set free from the one 
who was our taskmaster. 

The Son has made us free. He has made U3 free by faith. 
We shall be made free in the absolute sense when we receive 
our resurrection "change." We read respecting the new age 
that the groaning creation shall then be delivered from the 
bondage of corruption [Sinl into the glorious liberty of the 
sons of God. ('Romans 8:19-22.) The world will be delivered 
from sin and death actually during the thousand years, by 
their flesh being restored to perfection and their minds restored 
to the image of God. But as the church of Ohrist do not 
receive this full deliverance now, except by faith, they must 
wage a constant warfare against entrenched foes within as well 
as foes without. This warfare calls for great courage and 
determination, in the strength of oUr great Captain. How 


many of us will be of the noble "Gideon's band"? 

" 'Count me the swords that have come.' 
'Lord, thousands on thousand-s are ready.' 

'Lo, those are too many! and with them are some 
Whose hearts and whose hands are not steady. 

He whose soul does not burn, 

Let him take up his tent and return.' 

" 'Count me the swords that remain.' 
'Lord, hundreds on hundreds are daring.' 

'Those yet are too many for me to attain 
To the victory I am preparing. 

Lead them down to the brink 

Of the waters of Marah to drink.' 

" 'Lord, those who remain are but few, 
And the hosts of the foe are appalling! 

And what can a handful such as we doV 
'When ye hear from beyond my voice calling, 

Sound the trump! Hold the light! 

Great Midian shall melt in your sight!'" 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


WHO WILL BE OTJB PASTOB? 

The following is a sample of inquiries received by Brother 
Rutherford since his election as President of the Society, and 
his reply thereto : 
Deab Brother Rutherford: — 

Greetings in the name of the Lord! Last night we as a 
church elected you as our Pastor. Let me inquire, dear 

brother, is this the correct procedure or not? 

Reply 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Since my election aa President of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society, I am advised that your Eeclesia has 
elected me as its Pastor. I beg to assure you, dear brethren, 
that I very much appreciate this expression of confidence and 
loving-kindness, but I take this occasion to advise you of 
the policy we have adopted. 

All of us realize the peculiar relationship that our dear 
Brother Russell bore to the church as "that servant." It 
was therefore entirely appropriate that he should be elected 
as Pastor of the various Ecclesias. In view of this, and in 
deference to his memory, it is my opinion that no one should 
be elected, henceforth, Pastor of any Eeclesia. At a church 
meeting of the Brooklyn and New York congregations, a 
pastor was not ejected, but a resolution was adopted to the 
effect that the President of the Society, should at all times 
be Chairman of the congregation and of the Board of Elders. 

It is my opinion, dear brethren, that if we adheTe to the 
order of electing elders and deaeons alone, and avoid the 
election of pastors, we shall find it more profitable and in 
keeping with the Lord's will. The Lord has long used the 
Society to aid his people, and we believe he is still using 
it to forward the message of the kingdom. If, therefore, 
you should feel that because I am President of the Society 
my name should be connected with your Eeclesia, then permit 
me to suggest that you might, if you see fit, designate me as 
Counselor, and elect me as such. By this term we would 
understand that the church, at any and all times, would 
feel free to call upon me for counsel- and advice concerning 
any matters. I assure you it is my sincere desire to serve 
not only your Eeclesia, but the church everywhere, in the 
capacity of counselor, adviser and helper to the extent the 
Lord may see fit to use me. I hope this meets with your 
approval. 

Please feel at liberty to write me or call upon me at any 
time for aid, advice or counsel. As you know, I am assisted
 here by able brethren, who faithfully supported Brother 
Russell, and we shall be glad to aid the friends by answering
 questions along doctrinal and other lines. For several 
years I served as counselor to Brother Russell and other 
friends, and will be glad to continue in this capacity to the 
friends generally. 

Wishing you one and all increased opportunities for service 
in the Lord's vineyard, and with much love in the Lord, 
I remain 

Your brother and servant by his grace, 

J, F. RUTHERFORD. 
A VOICE FEOM GLASGOW 

Deab Brethren: — 

The Glasgow church desire to convey to the members of 
the Bethel Family at Brooklyn a message of sympathy and 
love in connection with the passing beyond the veil of our 
beloved Pastor, dear Brother Russejl. 


We held a Memorial Service on Sunday, November 12, 
when an appropriate witness was given to the Truth, as well 
as a tribute of respect paid to the memory of the one we all 
loved so dearly. We know that nothing would have pleased 
our dear Brother better than to take advantage of such an 
opportunity for such a purpose; and we trust that some 
amongst the crowded audience who listened to the discourse 
given by Brother Tait, the oldest Elder in the Glasgow 
church, may have had some seeds of truth lodged in their 
hearts that will bring forth fruit in due time to the praise 
and glory of God. 

The following evening, we arranged for a special Prayer, 
Praise and Testimony Meeting, so that an opportunity might 
be afforded for individual expressions of appreciation of the 
life and work of our dear Pastor and of gratitude to God 
for his faithful ministry. It was good to listen to the various 
testimonies. It reminded one of the incident recorded in 
Acts 9:36, 39, when, at the death of Dorcas, the widows stood 
by> the Apostle Peter, showing the coats and garments which 
Dorcas had made while she was with them. All felt more 
deeply than they could express how much they owed to Brother 
Russell as the channel of God's grace for the spiritual clothing, 
in the possession of which they were rejoicing that day. 
Some had but recently come into the light of present truth, 
never having seen the Pastor's face in the flesh. Others could 
look back to the time when he first addressed a meeting in 
Glasgow thirteen years ago. Grief and joy mingled together 
as we thought, on the one hand, that we should never see him 
again on this side of the veil, and on the other hand, of the 
abundant entrance into the kingdom which we believed he had 
obtained, and a participation in which we all hope to experience 
very soon. 

We all desire to express to you our heart-felt sympathy 
in our common loss, and to send you as a message the following
 Scriptures: "Grace be to you, and peace, from God 
our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be 
God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
Mercies and the God of all comfort, who comforteth us in 
all our tribulation that we may be able to comfort them which 
are in any trouble by the comfort wherewith we ourselves 
are comforted of God." "For the Father himself loveth 
you." The latter text was one that Brother Russell used in the 
last meeting for the brethren that he addressed in Glasgow. 

Although our dear brother has been removed from us 
and we shall miss very much the influence of his noble example
 and the power of his effective ministry, we have no 
reason to think otherwise than that the work will go on. We 
would, therefore, at this time, assure you of our prayers on 
your behalf and of our hearty co-operation in connection with 
the arrangements which those left in charge might make from 
time to time, so that the grand work so nobly begun and 
carried on by our dear Pastor, under the guidance of our 
Lord and Head, might be continued, and in his own good 
time and way completed. 

Your brethren and fellow-servants, 

Glasgow Church. — Scotland. 

AS EXPRESSION OF CONTCDEHCE 
Beloved Brethren: — 

We at Cleveland desire to convey to you our Christian 
love and sympathy in this dark hour of bereavement at the 
loss of our beloved Pastor. Surely the death of such a noble 


[6035] 


(30-31) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Christian character as our Brother was, one so faithful in 
laying down his life in the service of the Lord and the 
brethren, must cause us some -sorrow and pain; and yet a 
sense of joy comes to us as we picture him now in glory, 
clothed upon with immortality, in the presence of our heavenly 
Father and our Lord Jesus. 

We assure you, brethren, that the death of our dear 
Brother has not caused us to slacken our zeal in the least in 
the service of the Lord; but that, on the contrary, we have 
determined to be more faithful than ever before, so that we 
too may finish our course with joy and enter upon broader 
fields of service in ministering to the world the kingdom 
blessings and joys. 

We are pleased to note that Brother Russell had so arranged
 matters that in case of his death the work would be 
carried on without interruption. We assure vou of our confidence
 and trust in whatever arrangements brother Russell 
has made for furthering the harvest work, believing that our 
Lord Jesus, the Chief Reaper, had especially chosen our Pastor 
as his mouth-piece and servant. We will continue as in 
the past to look to the Lord for his guidance and direction in 
all our affairs. 

Wo hereby pledge the co-operation and support of the 
Cleveland brethren to whatever further arrangements for promulgating
 the glad tidings of the kingdom the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society may deem to be the Lord's will. We 
who are of the Cleveland Ecclesia desire to assure you of 
our resolution to continue faithfully in the service of the Lord 
by his grace, even unto death, and of our resolution to be 
ready and willing to assist in any work which has been outlined
 by our dear Pastor, in which we have the privilege of 
assisting. 

Assuring you of our continued prayers that the Lord will 
grant you wisdom in connection with the harvest work, we are 

Yours in Christian love, Cleveland Ecclesia. — Ohio. 
LOVING SYMPATHY FROM SWXTZEBLAJTD 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

The news of the going home of our tenderly beloved 
Brother and Pastor C. T. Russell, reached us unexpectedly 
on the 14th of November. He had once advised us not to 
be surprised if one day we should hear of his having left 
this life. How we do sympathize with all the dear friends 
everywhere — and especially with the dear Bethel family nt 
Brooklyn! The French brethren especially the dear ones of 
La Chaux-de-Fonds and the Jura, send you their deep condolence
, praying that our Lord will give the spirit of love 
and wisdom to those upon whom the responsibility rests, that 
the harvest work may continue uninterruptedly, and the "meat 
in due season" never fail to come through the chosen channel 
of our Lord — The Watch Toweb. 

It is a deep loss to us who remain : yet as it was good for 
the early disciples that the Lord left them, so our Master 
found it for our good that dear Brother Russell pass before 
us beyond the veil. We may well believe Revelation 14:13 
fulfilled in him! 

The writer first knew him in 1890, being then immersed 
in Bible House Chapel, Allegheny. I wae also one of the 
first to read the Studies in the Scriptures ( then Millennial 
Dawn) in German, and to canvass for the same in Pennsylvania
 and adjoining states. 

Next to the Lord it was dear Brother Russell who made 
it possible for me to become the translator of the Studies 
and most of the other publications into the French, until 1913. 
He also permitted me to be one of the first to introduce 
present truth on this continent, especially into Switzerland 
and France, and to act as his interpreter on several occasions. 

May the Lord forever bless his memory! 

Adolphe Weber. — Stoitzerland. 

PLEDGE OF LOYALTY 

Whereas, it has pleased our heavenly Father to call home 
our dearly beloved Brother and Pastor, Charles T. Russell, 
from the scene of his earthly toil and labor to that of greater 
service in the great harvest work in which he was manifestly
 bo faithful; and 

Wihereas, we believe that the Lord will not scatter, but 
will "turn his hand [power] upon the little ones," in this 
dark hour of trial (Zech. 13:7) ; and 

Whereas, it would seem fitting at this time to express our 
words of encouragement to the brethren of the Bethel family 
and Brooklyn Tabernacle; therefore, be it 

Resolved, that we pledge our continued loyalty to and 
hearty co-operation with the dear co-laborers at Brooklyn, and 
also that we extend our deep Christian love to the brothers 
and sisters of the Bethel family and to all "the sanctified in 
Christ Jesus" everywhere. Be it further 

Resolved, that we wish to assure the dear brethren of our 


full confidence in them, and that we feel assured that the arrangements
 left by our beloved Pastor for the carrying on 
of the work, will be continued in perfect accord with his 
wishes, which, we believe, were directed by the "Chief Reaper," 
our Lord and Head. Be it further 

Resolved, that these resolutions be spread upon the minutes
 of our Ecclesia and that a copy be sent to the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society. 

Quincy A. B. S. — Mass. 
A VOICE FROM COSTA EICA 
My Dear Brethren: — 

While on a trip visiting the classes in this country, news 
reached me of the passing away of dear Brother Russell; and 
you know what a mixed experience it is — sorrow and joy — 
joy that he has entered into his reward, and sorrow that we 
must do without him for awhile. Yet with tears I sing, 
"Blessed Lord, thy will be done!" 

I know what an experience it is for you; yet I only hope 
the sweet Spirit of the Lord, which our brother alway3 manifested
 among you may continue and that wisdom from above 
may be yours in the selection of a president for the W. T. 
B. A T. Society. 

I am making mention of you in my prayers, and have 
called upon the classes to this end, to join me in prayer for 
you, that you may continue in the same until we are called 
to join the church in glory and meet our dear Pastor again. 

Brother Browne, of the office at Kingston, Jamaica, was 
with us. W T e had a blessed time. He is now at Panama. 

Your Brother in the Lord's service, 

V. E. Samuels. — Costa Rica* 

A MESSAGE FBOM EDINBURGH 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings on behalf of the Edinburgh church! We desire
 to express to you our deepest sympathy in the great loss 
we have sustained through the passing beyond the veil of 
our beloved Pastor. We, however, rejoice in the confident 
assurance that his work here on earth has been completed, 
and that now he has gone to his eternal reward. He has, 
we believe, gone to be with and like our dear Redeemer, and 
is now in possession of the crown of life, the promised 
blessing of our heavenly Father. 

Our heart-felt praise and gratitude ascend to him from 
whom all blessings flow for our dear Brother's long life of 
self-sacrifieing labors in the service of the truth, for the 
glory of God, and for the spiritual interests of his people. 
We will ever cherish the charm of his great spiritual personality
. His wonderful example of life and work will also 
continue to inspire us all onward toward *the goal he has 
reached, that we also may make our calling and election sure. 

Our united prayer, dear Brethren, ascends on your behalf
 to our loving heavenly Father, that his holy Spirit will 
guide and support you in carrying on the work of the Society, 
for the comfort and upbuilding of the Lord's people in their 
most holy faith. 

With love in the Lord as always, 

Edinburgh Ecclesia. — Scotland. 

WEARINESS ENDED AND GtLOBY BEGUN 

My Dear Brethren: — 

Through the newspapers we have learned that our dear 
Brother Russell hae entered into the 'Courts of Glory, having 
finished his earthly career while traveling from San Diego, 
Cal., to Kansas City. The news could not be otherwise than 
& shock to us, but, as we contemplated upon the honor and 
glory into which our dear Brother has entered, our sorrow 
was turned into joy. Our Lord, the great Chief Reaper in 
the harvest work, could have kept our dear Brother with us 
longer had it been necessary; but the time had come for his 
weariness to end and his glory to begin. And what rejoicing 
there must be in heaven now at the passing over of one who 
has been truly great in serving all! There can be no doubt 
in the minds of the faithful left behind that our dear Brother 
Russell is now a "gem of purest ray serene," in the Lord's 
Royal Diadem. 

May grace sufficient be your portion, and in the wisdom 
that cometh from above guide you in the further work which 
remains to be done. With much Christian love, I am 

Yours in the Redeemer, E. J. Coward. — Barbados, B. W. 1. 

"A WOBD TO THE WISE" 

Dear Friends: — 

In a recent trip through the Southwest, covering about 
seven thousand miles and making twenty stops, we observed 
that in many of the stations there were neatly framed notices 
of religious meetings of the various denominations, also? 
Christian Science notices with boxes underneath containing 
literature. Only at one station did we see any of the I.B.S.A. 


[603*3 


January IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(31-35) 


literature, and then it was on a rack mixed up in a disorderlyway
 with Christian Science literature. At one station we 
saw an I. B. S. A. box with no literature. 

We know from The Watch Tower that many of the 
towns have I. B. S. A. classes, and we could not help thinking
 an opportunity for spreading the truth was being missed 
by not providing notices of meetings and literature with 
boxes to keep it, at every available station. If this suggestion 
were followed it would provide not only reading matter for 
the public, but also information regarding places of meeting 
for the benefit of traveling friends. 

Yours in the Lord's service, Mrs. Ellen Hunter. — III. 
CRT FOB LIGHT ANSWERED 
Dear Brethren: — 

We regret to hear of our beloved Pastor's passing away; 
for it was one of his sermons in the Winnipeg Free Press 
that started us in the truth. We were sick and tired of what 
the churches were giving us; so we left them. But we did 
not leave the Lord. We cried aloud unto him and he heard 
us by sending a little light in that sermon. Then a few 
months later, we got the Studifb in the Scriptures; and 
now we know that we read and understand the Scriptures: 
not through the wisdom of man, but through the wisdom 
which cometh down from above. 

We are glad to see that our dear Pastor, whom having 
not seen yet we loved, has left his house in order, that all 
things may continue the same. My wife and I are alone here 
in the truth, yet not alone, as he that is for us is more 
than all that are against us, We pray that God's richest 
blessing may continue to rest upon the Bethel home. 

Yours in his service, J. H. and A. M. Hoskin, — B. C. 
A VOICE FROM THE COLPOETEUB BANKS 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

Would like to thank you for your good letter of encouragement
 in regard to the colporteur work and the advanced
 price of the books. Thank you for the trial credit 
also. I go on rejoicing, thankful for this further opportunity 
of telling out the glad tidings. 

In about four hours recently I took orders for three full 
sets at the new prices; also orders for three first volumes. 
(This, by the w T ay, was in the follow-up work and quite a 
little of the time was spent in explaining the chart to interested
 ones.) 

Thanking you so much for your labor of love to the 
Lord, and for the encouragement and help you extend to 
all the co-laborers in the vineyard, I am, "Strong in faith," 

Your sister by His grace, Adelaide Woolgab. — Oolp. 
Dear Brethren: — 

As announced in The Toweb regarding extra copies of 
the Memorial Number, I wish to advise that the Wneeling 
class desire one hundred and fifty. Enclosed please find 
$7.50 to cover price. 

Yours in the service, W. H. Scattebday. 

ONE WHO OAK CHASE A THOUSAND 
Dear Brethren: — 

Enclosed find Report ending Sept. 30, I am glad to say 
that of late I fiad more interest manifested in the truth than 
ever before. Another thing very noticeable is that some 
people are becoming less prejudiced and are investigating, 
and others are becoming so prejudiced that they will not 
investigate. One class is talking more favorably of the truth; 
the other is denouncing it more vehemently. 

I have met several of the latter class who would make 
things pretty lively for the I. B. S. A. if it were in their 
power. I was recently told that I was doing more harm 


putting out those books and explaining such "devil's doctrines
" than all the preachers put together could rectify; and 
that something ought to be done to stop those people calling 
themselves Bible Students going around and deceiving people! 

It occurred to me that if I, one of the least in the work, 
am doing so much damage to the devil's cause that all the 
preachers can't rectify it, what will the end be — soon ! 

Your fellow-servant in the Master's cause, 

Wm. R. Ernst.-— Colp. 
A PEXVlIiEOE TO UPHOLD THE WORK 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

We desire you to know that we have been greatly blessed 
through our late Pastor's faithfulness. We sympathize with 
you in our mutual loss; and yet we feel thankful that our 
Pastor's trials are over, and that he has entered into his 
reward. 

We wish to assure you that we will consider it our duty 
and privilege to uphold those who endeavor to carry on the 
work of serving the household of faith, which our Beloved 
Pastor strove so faithfully to do. We are praying for those 
upon whom thi3 responsibility will fall. 

Your fellow-servants, The Montreal Church. — Quebec. 
TRUSTING IN HIS BRACE AND WISDOM 
Dear Brethren: — 

The secretary is instructed to convey to you the assurance 
of our continued co-operation in the service of our Lord and 
Master, even unto death. 

While our hearts are torn with grief at the loss of our 
friend and Pastor, we nevertheless bow in humble submission 
to the will of the Lord, patiently waiting for whatever experience
 he may have in store for us in the future. Trusting 
in his grace and wisdom to accomplish in all of us his good 
pleasure even unto the end, we are praying ever to remain 
in the favor of our 'Lord and the light of his Word. 

Riverside Ecclesia. — Cal. 
WORE WILL PROCEED WHILE YET DAT 
Dear Brethren: — 

While we deeply feel the loss of our dear Pastor, we are 
glad to know he has made ample arrangements for the continuation
 of the work. Our faith and confidence is in the 
Lord, who has directed the harvest work thus far, that he 
will continue to direct it until finished. 

We are both glad and willing to continue to co-operate with 
the Society as the Lord sees best. We pray the Lord's blessing
 on the Bethel family and on our further efforts in his 
work, and assure you of out continued love and confidence. 

Auburn Church, — Ind. 

LONO-FELT REPUGNANCE TO DOCTRINE OF ENDLESS WOE 

Dear Friends:-— 

I thank you for your letter of Nov, 13 and have read The 
Tower of Dec. 1. I am glad to see the tributes to my old 
friend, and, wish to send them to some who did not know 
him so well as I. Please send me such number of copies of 
the issue as convenient for enclosure. Long before I first 
met Brother Russell I felt the same repugnance to the doetrine
 of endless human woe that formed the main spring of 
his study and work, so well outlined in your obituary of him. 

Cordially your friend, J. A. Stowe, — tf« J. 

Dear Friends: — 

Please find check enclosed for $5, for which send 100 of 
Memorial Number of The Watch Tower. 

Walter Kitchen. — Pa. 
Dear Brethren: — 

Please send 300 Memorial Numbers of The Tower to 
Your brother in the Lord, E. 0. Miller. — Ore. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., FEBRUARY 1, 1917 


No. 3 


HOW THE CHURCH RENDER JUSTICE AND JUDGMENT 

'To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice." — Proverbs 21:3. 


Justice and judgment are two words which are very closely 
allied in meaning. Justice represents that principle of right* 
eousness, truth, honesty, which is the basis of the divine law; 
and judgment seems to mean the enforcing of the principle ot 
justice and the giving of rewards or punishments in proportion
 as justice would be obeyed or infracted. 

All of God's people should, to the best of their ability, 
live justly. Justice — the Golden Rule — should be the standard
 of life. All those who desire to be pleasing to God should 
measure with the Golden Rule every act, every word, every 
thought. 

Nothing is said in our text about doing more than justice
; it states simply what is just, what is right. Judgment 
might come in respecting the punishing of ourselves or respecting
 our dealings with any one else over whom we properly 
have control; as, for instance, the parent with the child. If 
you are a parent, you render judgment to the child for WTongdoing
 and commend him for well-doing. It is the duty of the 
parent so to do. A magistrate, also, might have the right to 
punish for wrong-doing. God would expect these to render 
judgment — the proper reward or punishment for the well-doing 
or evil-doing — because that is in their province, in their control
. 

It is not for each individual to mete out judgment to other 
individuals; for this would make a kind of anarchy throughout 
the world, quite out of harmony with the divine law. In society
 we have laws to which, if any one does another an injustice
, the injured one would have the right to appeal for pro- 


[6037] 


(35-36) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


tection, or to stop the injustice. But we are not to take the 
law into our own hands. There is this difference, then, between 
the position of a parent toward his child or a magistrate 
who represents justice, and other individuals, 

Each person, however, may in his own case exercise judgment
, for as the Apostle says, "If we judge ourselves, we shall 
not be judged of the Lord. 1 * (1 Corinthians 11:31, 32) In 
other words, if we have the principle of justice well defined 
before our minds and find that we have come short of its requirements
 in act, word or thought, then we should render 
judgment upon ourselves, should punish ourselves, and require 
some kind of compensation to be made, so as to impress the 
matter upon our mind3 and to accomplish some rectification 
to the person to whom the injustice has been done, whether 
intentionally or unintentionally. 

WE CANNOT ENRICH THE LORD BY SACRIFICE 

Such a course of life is more acceptable to the Lord Jehovah
, than sacrifice. The sacrifices which were in the mind of 
the Wise Man in connection with this proverb were those 
which were made at that time according to the Mosaic law. 
Some of them were offerings to the Lord from the flocks or the 
herds. There were sin offerings, burnt offerings, peace offerings
, thank offerings, etc. Now the declaration here is that if 
any man would live according to these principles of justice 
and judgment, he would be more pleasing to God, more acceptable
 to him, than if he should make many of these offerings 
from his herds and from his flocks. 

This declaration might perhaps have been a surprise to 
some, until they would think of it, when the correctness of the 
thought could be readily seen. God's love for righteousness is 
the foundation, the establishment of his throne; and sacrifices
 without justice preceding and accompanying them are 
unacceptable in his sight. God has plenty; he needs nothing 
from us; the giving of a sacrifice on our part would be the 
doing of something that would neither advantage the Lord nor 
increase his wealth. It would merely be an expression on our 
part of our appreciation of his goodness and our desire to show 
this appreciation. 

JUSTICE AND JUDGMENT FIRST— THEN SACRIFICE 

We are here shown that God in his greatness and perfection 
of character appreciates those who exercise the principles of 
righteousness, the Golden Rule, who seek to have these principles
 in their heart, mind and conduct and to carry them 
out in all of life's affairs. Nothing in this text, however, 
contains^ the thought that God did not especially appreciate 
the sacrifice of Jesus or that he does not especially appreciate 
the sacrifices of those who are walking in the footsteps of 
Jesus. God did not command these sacrifices of Jesus and his 
followers, but he intimated that he wished to have a very 
special class for a very special purpose — to reign over the 
earth to bless all the families of the earth in due time; and 
that the persons who would be accounted worthy of this great 
honor of being God's servants to bless mankind would be those 
who would not only love and exercise the principle of justice, 
but have also a large degree of the spirit of sacrifice. The 
Lord commands justice and judgment; for nothing short of this 
would be right. But he does not command the sacrificing, for 
a sacrifice must be a voluntary offering. 

The intimation of the text, then, is that in order to offer 
a sacrifice which would be acceptable to God, pleasing to him, 
the Bacrificer must first of all have the principles of justice 
and of sound judgment well in mind, and should exemplify 
them in order that he might become a sacrificer who would 
be doubly acceptable to God. Thus it is with our Lord and 
the church, The principle of righteousness, or justice, is 
paramount. Our Lord Jesus, according to the divine arrangement
, was first of all required to demonstrate that he could 
keep the law. His sacrifice would not be acceptable otherwise. 
That is exactly what is Bhown in this text — justice and 
judgment first — then sacrifice. 

Herein we see that God's arrangement is working out 
grandly and beautifully; for our Lord Jesus actually kept 
the law. "He was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from 
sinners." and in every way he fulfilled all the requirements of 
God's Law; and his having done this made him an acceptable 
sacrificer. Then he offered the greatest sacrifice imaginable — 
his own life. He did not offer this sacrifice to men. He did 
not offer it to Satan, in order to rescue men from his dominion 
and power. He offered up his life in sacrifice to God, as an 
expression to the heavenly Father of his full trust in him, and 
his eamest desire to do the Father's will in everything and 
at any cost. We Tead of him, "I came not to do mine own 
will, but the will of my Father which sent me." 

The sacrifice, then, that Jesus laid down was the sacrifice 
of his will; his human rights, his human life. This influenced 


him to the extent that he offered no resistance to those who 
took from him his rights and finally took away hi3 life at Galvary
. He submitted to these indignities. He did not sacrifice 
himself to the Jews, and his submitting to the Jews did not 
mean that he was compelled to serve them. All the while the 
unswerving thought before his mind was, "This is the Father's 
will, that I should testify my love, loyalty and obedience to 
him in respect to this matter, and I will submit to everything 
that he permits, in order to be pleasing to my Father, in order 
to be what he would desire." 

Thus the Father's highest wishes and ideals in respect to the 
future Governor of the world were fully met in our Lord 
Jesus when he showed his obedience to God's will unto death, 
even to the death of the cross; "wherefore also God hath highly 
exalted him, and hath given him a name [Immanuel or Messiah
] which is above every name." And the Father arranged 
that at Jesus' name and in obedience to him, every knee should 
bow, both in heaven and on earth.— Eph. 1:20-23; Phil. 
2:9-11. 

OUR EXTREMITY IS GOD'S OPPORTUNITY 

As respects ourselves, the Apostle assures us that our Lord's 
course is a grand example for us. He hath set us an example 
that we should walk in his steps. (1 Peter 2:21) This 
means that as Jesus did, so we should seek to do. Here we 
meet a great difficulty. Our Lord could do perfectly the things 
that he wished; hut, as the Apostle says, f, We cannot do the 
things that we would." We inquire for the difference, and 
find that it is this: Our Lord was born in a special manner; 
he had a special, unblemished life, transferred from the 
heavenly estate; we are members of Adam's fallen race, and 
therefore are contaminated with the evil environments of sin 
and death which have come down upon the human family for 
six thousand years. Because of the influence and the effect of 
sin and death working in our mortal bodies, we cannot do the 
things that we would prefer to do. We find it impossible. 
We would keep God's law perfectly. 

We have learned that God's law is that we should do justice
; and that law we approve. We admire God's justice. 
We wish to do justice and judgment. We should rejoice to see 
justice and judgment exercised everywhere. We are in full 
sympathy with, and rejoice in the great arrangement which 
God has made. We love his law, even that portion of it which 
punishes unrighteousness. We see that his commands are wise. 
loving and good. We appreciate our God and all his ways and 
we desire to do perfectly those things which are pleasing in 
his sight. But we are unable to do these things perfectly; we 
are unable to keep the Law, therefore we are unable of ourselves
 to offer any sacrifice that would be acceptable to God; 
for he enjoins justice and judgment in preference to sacrifice. 
They must come in first; and being unable to render these 
perfectly, what shall we do? 

We find that God has made a merciful arrangement for us; 
and this arrangement is made through Jesus and his sacrifice, 
the benefits of which are also designed to be for the whole 
world of mankind eventually. When the last member of the 
Spirit-begotten class shall have passed into death, Jesus will 
then make application of the merit of his ransom-sacrifice for 
the whole world. The merit of Jesus, now in the hands of 
justice, he has already embargoed, or mortgaged, as it were, 
in the interest of the church. So, then, his merit is imputed 
now to all those who wish to come up to the requirements of 
God's law; and who wish additionally to follow Jesus in sacrifice
. To these, according to the Father's plan, Jesus becomes 
the great High Priest and Advocate, their Representative; and 
to these comes the merit of hia sacrifice, already laid down. 
We therefore are directed to the Lord Jesu3 as the one through 
whom we can come into this blessed relationship with the 
Father which Jesus had; and he brings us into this relationship
 by making up what we lack in respect to justice and 
judgment. 

Jesus would not make this up to us without our cooperation
; but since we desire his assistance, since this is the sentiment
 of our hearts, we are accepted on the profession of full 
consecration to God, to seek to the best of our ability to do his 
will, to love and practise justice and to exercise judgment in 
our lives. We are accepted in the Beloved. All of our imperfections
 are covered through the work of Jesus, by an imputation
 of his merit. Thus we are enabled to join with Jesus 
our Lord in sacrifice, laying down with him our little all upon 
God's holy altar of sacrifice. 

HOW THE OHXTROH KEEPS GOD'S LAW 

This is not merely a matter of consecration at the beginning
 of our Christian lives, but is something that is to progress
 and continue so long as we have life. We are more and 
more to learn to let justice and judgment have control in 


[6038] 


FltBKUARY 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(37-38) 


our lives, and more and more we are to bring ourselves into 
full accord with the Lord, daily presenting our bodies living 
sacrifices, and realizing that these continue to be acceptable 
only through Jesus. Thus, as the Apostle says, "The righteousness
 of the law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit" — Romans 8:4. 

What does St. Paul mean? How can we fulfil God's law? 
The Apostle evidently refers to us as new creatures. When we 
presented ourselves to God through Christ Jesus, consecrating 
our hearts and lives and agreeing to keep the law to the 
best of our ability, it was the Father's arrangement that Jesus' 
merit should complete for us all that we were lacking. We 
were then begotten to a new nature, a new life. This is the 
start of an entirely new being. In God's sight the flesh is now 
reckoned dead- — and in our own sight also. We start as new 
creatures in Christ, to walk in this new and heavenly way. So 
then, as the Apostle says, in us as new creatures the righteousness
 of the law is fulfilled. Every one of us who is a new creature
 is thinking justly, speaking justly and acting justly 
to the very best of his ability. This is the will of the new 
creature. 

As for the flesh, the new creature controls the flesh so far 
as he is able; and the merit of Jesus, the merit of the sacrifice
 of Jesus imputed on behalf of these, covers all the 


blemishes and shortcomings of the flesh that are unintentional. 
The Father encourages these to come to the throne of heavenly 
grace to obtain mercy for all such imperfections and blemishes. 
If any of the transgressions of a child of God should have a 
measure of wilfulness, he must suffer "stripes" as an expiation, 
to the extent of the wilfulness; but upon application to the 
Lord, he will be forgiven all that was not wilful, and be fully 
reinstated in the Lord's favor. The child of God should earnestly
 strive, however, to keep so close to the Lord that there 
will be no measure of wilfulness in his trespass. 

This is a class that is offering sacrifice acceptable to God, 
as well as serving him acceptably. It is not that we do the 
sacrificing ourselves; for that is the work of the great High 
Priest. We present ourselves, he receives us, and day by day 
the sacrificing is under his supervision and is acceptable to the 
Father through his merit. And so the church of Christ, the 
body of Christ, is going grandly on in the footsteps of our 
Lord, reckoned as absolute in justice and judgment, and sacrificing
 additionally. Eventually, she will be completed 
through the grace of God and by this arrangement which he 
has made. Then will come the time for dispensing God's 
blessings to all mankind, and this class, so especially called, so 
especially favored, will be highly exalted and honored to this 
great office with their Lord, next to the Father. 


CHRIST JESUS— OUR ILLUSTRIOUS EXAMPLE 

"Consider him who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds." — Hebrews 

12:3. 


The Apostle's argument in our text is that the Lord's people
 need to be of good courage, need to remember that they 
have enlisted in a war on the side of righteousness and against 
sin, and that the enlistment is for life. The condition of their 
acceptance by the Lord was to this effect: "Be thou faithful 
unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life." — Revelation
 2:10. 

In the Apostle's day, as in our day, there was a tendency 
on the part of some to espouse the cause of the Lord and to 
run faithfully for a while, and then to become discouraged, disheartened
, and turn away to something else. In a previous 
chapter the Apostle has pointed out that some of those whom 
he was addressing had been faithful and courageous for a 
time, l^ad "endured a great fight of afflictions," and then had 
become as babes, requiring milk, and needed to be taught again 
by others what were the first principles of the doctrines of 
Christ. They seemed to have lost their zeal to a large extent, 
and to have become discouraged in some way. They were 
not alert as servants of the truth, and as servants of the 
Lord, as at first. They had permitted the opposition to wear 
down greatly their zeal and energy. 

In Chapter 11 of this epistle, the Apostle calls attention 
to the fact that all through the past there had been noble 
witnesses to God and his cause, to whom the church might 
well look as patterns of faithful endurance of opposition, and 
from whose course they might take encouragement. He cites 
the case of Abraham and his faith in God's promises. He recounts
 many of those who had endured great sufferings and 
privations, and were exiles from home — some of whom were 
even stoned to death or sawn asunder, etc., "of whom the 
world was not worthy." These were to be considered by the 
church of Christ as glorious examples of faithfulness. And 
now, in our text, the Apostle brings us down to the grandest
 example of faithfulness to God ever known- — our Lord Jesus 
Christ — and says that we should all especially consider him 
who endured so much. 

The word "consider" is here used in the sense of study, appreciate
, take knowledge of. The more we study our Lord's 
course in life and realize what it cost him to be faithful to 
the Father, to the principles of righteousness and truth, the 
more we see the exaltation of his character. He loved not Ms 
life. He withheld nothing, in order that he might do the will 
of the Father. He made no effort to be sensational, that thus 
he might attract attention to himself; but humbly, quietly, 
went about his Father's business. 

RELIGIOUS TEACHERS CHRIST'S OHIEP OPFOJtEKTS 

Our Lord Jesus was loyal to the principles of righteousness
 as expressed in the law and the prophets. "In his mouth 
was found no guile" — no deception. No one found in him an 
attempt to curry favor with the multitude by saying something
 that would please the ear, and yet not be true. We find 
that he was absolutely faithful to God's law. When the 
matter came up as to how this law should be interpreted, 
he would give full, plain instruction respecting it, holding 
nothing back. He was loyal to the heavenly Father in that 
he never claimed that anything he said or did was of himself
, but declared that it all came from the "Father who sent 
him." He was loyal to the Father and to the truth in everything
. This loyalty brought him much of opposition; for 
when he said that he was the Son of God, of "the Father 
who sent him," the Jews were angry, "If you, a mere man, 
make yourself the Son of God," they said, "you are putting 
yourself on an equality with God. We never claim anything 
of this kind. We are the children of Abraham." Then they 
charged that he was fraudulent; whereas he was speaking 
the plain truth.— John 10:31-39; 8:59. 

Thus the opposition to our Lord began — contradiction, as it 
is called in our text. There was opposition to him in proportion
 as he presented the truth. As the Jewish leaders began 
to see that the message Jesus proclaimed was contrary to the 
one that they had given, or that they had received, antagonism 
sprang us. He did not make as many disciples as might have 
been expected, considering that "never man spake like thi3 
man." ' There were only something over five hundred of his 
followers altogether in the three and one-half years of hi& 
ministry. Five hundred seemed a small number amongst the 
one nation that had been expecting Messiah for over sixteen 
hundred years, ! 

We inquire, How did the Master receive the opposition, the 
contradiction of sinners, and who were the sinners? The 
answer is, he received the contradiction with meekness and 
self-possession. The sinners were those of the Jewish people 
who, having a measure of light, were not obedient to that 
light. The Apostle "does not wish us to consider how the 
Gentiles failed to receive the Lord, for he did not come to the 
Gentiles. His preaching was simply to the one nation to whom 
God had especially manifested himself, and for whom were the 
promises and the first opportunity to become heirs to those 
promises. 

We note that these sinners were chiefly found amongst the 
learned Jews — the scribes, chief priests, Pharisees and Doctors 
of the Law. These, having knowledge, having experience, 
knowing the law, failed to appreciate the spirit of the law, 
and were out of accord with it. Therefore to that extent they 
were sinners, The teachings of Jesus manifested this fact and 
led them to take their side with positiveness. In- taking sides 
against him they were taking sides against much that they 
recognized and knew to be right. 

We perceive that the Master met the attacks of his enemies
 with gentleness, kindriess, yet with logic — not sentencing 
them to eternal torment — no suggestion of the kind. ^ He 
knew that they were largely blinded. He said to his disciples, 
"Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they 
hear," thus intimating that the great majority of the nation 
were blind and dull of hearing. They were not in a condition 
to receive his message, and Jesus know that they would need 
more experiences before they would be ready. We see that 
they got these experiences afterwards, in the great time of 
trouble, which doubtless made many of them think more 
seriously of what Jesus had said. 

The numbers who came to the Lord on the day of Pentecost
 are to be accounted for by the fact that at this par- 


[6039] 


(38-45) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ticular feast, the Feast of Harvest, the most religious Jews, 
the most honest Jews from all over the world gathered at 
Jerusalem. On this occasion when the Apostle Peter preached 
the Gospel, many of these Jews for the first time, perhaps, 
heard about Jesus in any definite way. 

NO COMPROMISE WITH EEROB 

The Apostle urges us that as Jesus endured all these things 
and they did not change his course or purpose, so should we 
endure steadfastly. He remained loyal to the principles of 
righteousness; he did not swerve; he 'did not attempt to come 
down to meet the demands of the Pharisees and say, "I will 
put on phylacteries. I will be a Pharisee; and if you will 
support me, we will get along nicely together. " No. He endured
 their opposition. Let them oppose as much as they 
would, he would not alter his course from that which was 
right, loyal to God, loyal to the truth. He would even denounce
 the Pharisees as a class when necessary, to show them 
how much in them was hypocrisy, thereby to awaken some to 
a realization of what they were doing, in order that they 
might be benefited thereby, and also to show the people that 
they should not be bound to leaders who were hypocritical. 

This was Jesus' course. The Apostle urge's us that we 
should consider him and his course, his patience in dealing 
with opposition. The opposition that he dealt with led him to 
death. St. Paul adds, "Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, 
striving against sin." Jesus did resist unto blood — unto death. 


As we consider our Lord, then, and see how faithful he 
was to every principle of righteousness, even unto death, 
although his faithfulness cost him his life, it should make 
us very appreciative, very courageous; for we have no such 
great opposition of sinners as Jesus had. We have indeed some 
opposition — sometimes jn the family, in the home, in the 
church — wherein we need to stand up for principle, for truth; 
but our enemies have not the power to give us the persecution
 that Jesus endured. They have not the power at this 
time to take our lives for our faithfulness to God. 

Considering all this, we may feel that, comparatively 
speaking, "our lines have fallen to us in pleasant places." We 
have comparatively little to suffer for righteousness* sake; 
and we should all the more gladly appreciate our every 
opportunity for showing forth "the praises of him who hath 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous tight." No matter 
whether it does or does not bring opposition, we should, indeed
, while not courting opposition and persecution, be very 
ready to receive these and to appreciate them as an indication 
that we are on God's side; for these we are to expect. The 
Apostle Paul assures us that "whosoever will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution" (2 Timothy 3:12) ; and 
the Master intimates that this persecution will come largely 
from those who profess to be God's people. If we have more 
of this to meet later on than we have yet received, let us be 
strong and courageous, "speaking the truth in love," looking 
ever to him who is our great Exemplar. 


REVERENCE OF JESUS FOR HIS FATHER'S HOUSE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Cleansing the Temple," published in issue of January 15, 1908, which please see.] 

JESUS THE SAVIOR OF THE WORLD 


[This article was a reprint of that entitled 


'Regeneration and fche Kingdom,' 
please see.] 


published in issue of January 15, 1908, which 


JESUS AND THE WOMAN OF SAMARIA 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Give Me to Drink/' published in issue of February 1, 1908, which please see.l 

OUR BELOVED DEAD 

Beloved Pastor, Charles Taze Russell.] 

"It told of sweet, unselfish, patient service, 

Of two hands full upon the altar laid; 
A pouring out of life itself for others, 

In loving, loyal service to his Head. 
The way grows steeper, and the 1 feet grow weaker, 

He struggles on, the end is just at hand ; 
The song has changed into a burst of triumph, 

He stands a victor on that summit grand! 

"The music ceased ; and then I saw in vision 

The Master standing by the silent dead — 
Not weeping, as before the tomb of Lazarus, 

But wearing such a look of joy! He said, 
'Thy sacrifice was very sweet, beloved, 

And very precious in the Father's eyes; 
This dear, devoted -flesh was freely given, 

And thou hast won the grand, immortal prize.' 

"Beside Him stood our own beloved Pastor, 

In all the splendor of his spirit birth, 
Surrounded by those glorious heavenly beings 

Who with our Lord had walked upon the earth. 
And still they came; it seemed the hosts of heaven 

Had met with us beside that silent bier, 
And oh, our hearts went out with such a longing, 

To greet our own beloved, they seemed so near ! 

"The vision fades away, and standing o'er him 

Those who had toiled beside him long, sweet years, 
And gladly shared in all the fiery trials, 

Poured out their love for him, mid sobs and tears. 
There we, with them, renewed our consecration 

To carry on the work he had begun, 
To herald forth the Gospel of the kingdom, 

Till we should hear the Master's sweet 'Well done!' 


[In loving memory of our 
"They laid him there so cold, so still, so silent, 

There in the place where oft in days of yore 
He loved to speak the message of the kingdom; 

To tell the same sweet story o'er and o'er. 
That voice is silent, those dear hands are folded, 

Dear, restless hands that never would stay still j 
The work was pressing, 'twas no time for slackness; 

Those hands must be about his Father's will. 
"Dear, willing feet — though faltering in their weakness, 

Though bruised and bleeding, yet they still held on 
Unto the very end, and only halted 

When every step of that rough way was done! 
Those loving eyes; oh, what an inspiration 

To those who fainted 'neath life's heavy load ! 
So quick to see the likeness of the Master 

In each dear saint he met along the road! 

"They laid him down among the fragrant flowers; 

Ah, who can paint the beauty of that scene! 
Death had no victim here; death had no triumph; 

This was the coronation of a king. 
Around him hung the garlands of his vict'ry, 

Beside him was the cross he had laid down, 
The dove of peace was brooding softly o'er him, 

And at his head was placed the victor's crown. 
"It seemed the earth had brought her choicest treasures 

And poured them at that faithful servant's feet; 
For everywhere the eye could look, were blossoms 

Of glorious hues, of fragrance rare and sweet. 
The palms waved softly in the scented breezes, 

The rose and lily shed their perfume there, 
A silent tribute to the power and beauty 

Of that rich life, poured out as incense rare. 

,c Now on the air came softest music stealing, 

Like heaven's benediction on that throng; 
It seemed to hush the sounds of quiet weeping, 

It lifted hearts and carried them along. 
It told of thorny paths his feet had traveled, 

Of battles fierce with foes on every hand; 
Of meek acceptance of the bitter hatred 

Brought on him by proclaiming God's great plan. 


"One more fond look on those beloved features, 

And then the slow, sad journey was begun; 
We thought of all the journeys he had taken, 

And now had come the last, the final one! 
The setting sun had left a ray of glory, 

The evening star was shining overhead, 
As in the silent tomb we gently laid him, 

And left him there, our own beloved dead." 


[6040] 


THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 


The following letter is one of many inquiries now coming 
to the Society in regard to the Mena Film Co. We publish 
it, together with our reply thereto, that the friends of the 
truth may know our position with respect to the matter in 
question : 
Dear : — 

Last evening our Secretary read a letter from the Brethren 
who have purchased the Photo-Dbama rights. I would like to 
get straight on this for my own good, and for the* good of 
the many who will be certain to ask my advice respecting it* 
Already we have been asked regarding it. I do not wish to always
 seem unduly careful, and am trying to watch my heart 
very closely, so that no wrong suspicions creep in. On the 
other hand, I am deeply impressed with the necessity of being 
very careful to be identified with only those things which are 
"simon pure," and which have the unqualified approval of 
those into whose hands the Lord has now placed the direction 
of the present efforts and work of the saints. 

The thought that any feature of the work is to have increased
 activity brings a blessing. It did seem strange, however
, that the various classes should be thus approached to 
assist in financing a project which has admittedly been thoroughly
 commercialized. To the consecrated, the possible dividends
 on a commercial proposition would be a small inducement
, indeed, when all that they have is held as a stewardship
 from the Lord to be used in whatever way the Lord directs
. It seems to me that the better way would be to turn 
over any money, that could be spared, to the Society to be 
used by them. If the Society wished to assist in financing 
this matter, then we would understand that to be what the 
Lord would seem to direct. 

You can readily see my perplexity. I am not sure if this 
reasoning is sound. I am very well acquainted with some of 
these Brethren, and do esteem them highly for their work's 
sake, and \o\e them very dearly as fellow-pilarrims in the 
narrow way. I could see no objection to their securing 
financial assistance for an attractive dividend-paying project 
from those who are looking for dividends of this sort, but 
it was the matter of using the influence of their connection 
with the work of the harvest as an inducement to influence 
classes, and as to what should be my attitude in the matter, 
that has perplexed me. I have noted the wording and construction
 of their letter very carefully. Does the Society, 
without restriction, approve of this letter? Will you please 
give me a little hint? With fervent Christian love I am 

Your Brother by His Grace, . 

Our Reply. 

During the year 1014 the Photo-Dbama of Creation was 
shown free of charge in practically all of the cities of the 
United States. The expense was a heavy tax on the Society 
and on the local friends. Later Brother Russell undertook 
other methods of exhibiting it, that it might be self-sustaining
. These were not successful. The available cash has not 


since been sufficient to exhibit it free, as was done during 
1914. 

In the latter months of Brother Russell's service he was 
perplexed as to just what to do with the Drama. After his 
death all these questions came up for determination by the 
Board of Directors. On taking inventory of the Dbama parts 
and on examination of the same the fact was disclosed that 
a large amount of money would be required to repair and 
put the Drama in proper condition to be used. The Board 
was perplexed as to what to do. 

While thus considering the matter the Board was approached
 by some brethren who stated that arrangements liad 
been made by them to stage an all-film production showing 
the divine plan of the ages from creation to restitution, 
which they expected to put upon a commercial basis. An 
offer was made to purchase the Drama for a money consideration
, with the understanding that the Drama should be 
used by the Society until the 31st day of March, and that one 
outfit should be kept always at The Temple. The Board considered
 this proposition as a provision the Lord had made for 
a disposition of the Photo-Drama and a relief from the perplexing
 questions. 

The Mena Film Company was formed and a contract was 
made with the Society for the purchase of the Drama, the 
purchase to be completed February 1, the said Mena Film 
Company thereby absorbing the Drama. At the time of the 
execution of this contract it was represented to the Board 
that the Mena Film Company could be financed without difficulty
. There was no intimation that money would be solicited
 from the friends. It is the expressed wish of the 
brethren named to do nothing that would in any manner interfere
 with the policy and work of the Society. 

That the friends may know the exact position of the Society
, we here state that the Society is in no wise interested 
financially in the Mena Film Company. As all readers of 
The Watch Towjeb know, it has at all times been contrary to 
the policy of the Society to solicit money from any one, 
either directly or indirectly. We therefore advise the friends 
everywhere that no one in the service of the Society is authorized
 to solicit money from the friends or from any one else 
for the Mena Film Company or for any thing. No one 
in the employ of the Film Company has any authority from 
us to call a meeting of any Ecclesia at any place for the purpose
 of discussing the investment of the Mena Film Company; 
nor has any Pilgrim brother or anyone else in the sirvice of 
the Society been authorized to encourage any one, either 
directly or indirectly, to subscribe money for stock in any 
company. The Society's position in this matter is entirely 
neutral. Our thought ib tnat each one should be left to exercise
 his own will with reference to what he should do with his 
money. We make this statement in view of the numerous 
inquiries coming to us as to whether or not the Society is 
backing the Film Company. 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


"WILL TTON MINE HAND UPON THE LITTLE ONES" 
To the Dear Ones in Christ: — 

We were so dazed, and our hearts so riven with sorrow 
at the death of our dear Pastor that it seemed impossible to 
write sooner. Nevertheless our prayers have been daily ascending
 to the heavenly Father to give you wisdom, courage 
and grace in abundance to continue the glorious harvest 
work. 

How we miss that dear one of whom it can truly be said 
that his very presence radiated peace and comfort and joy! 
There were none like him. He lived for others, and has left 
behind him a "monument of virtue which the storms of time 
can never destroy." His name and his deeds shine as the 
stars of heaven! 

We picture him now free from all pain, all care, all sorrow
, free from the fiery darts of the evil one, resting at last 
from his labors, with our blessed Lord and like him, a glorious 
being, immortal, divine! Blessed indeed is the memory of our 
beloved Pastor! 

One of the most precious promises now to be fulfilled 
we see in Zech. 13:7: "I will turn mine hand upon the little 
ones." "The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away; blessed 
be the name of the Lord!" What a precious gift our dear 
Pastor was to the church! and now that the Lord has taken 
him from our midst, we know we shall be especially cared for 
because of our loss; and that the time is near when, if 
faithful, we shall see him face to face again in the presence 
of our blessed Master. 

We take this occasion to assure you of our continued 


prayers for you and cooperation with you in spreading the 
Gospel of the kingdom. Stirling Ecclesia. — Ont. 

ACCEPT THOSE APPOINTED BT HIM 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

The Watch Tower of November 15, having confirmed 
the news of the death of our Pastor, dear Brother Russell, 
we are embracing this our first opportunity of sending you 
our token of sympathy in the loss of our faithful leader. 

But our sorrow must give place to an eternity of praise 
and thanksgiving, to the Great Jehovah and our Lord Jesus 
Christ, for having enabled our Pastor to finish his course 
with joy, to come off more than a conqueror, in the good 
fight of faith, against the powers of darkness, to enter into 
his Master's glory and to partake of the divine nature. 

We note with pleasure the assurance that the publication 
of The Watch Tower will continue, and thus bring us "meat 
in due season." We pledged to accept the Committee appointed
 by him, as his personal representatives, and shall endeavor
 to cooperate with them as though he were still present
. 

It is still our privilege to remember you at the throne of 
heavenly grace, and we shall be mindful of the severe tests 
of loyalty, humility and love for the brethren, to which the 
church is likely to be subjected between now and the time 
of its glorification. 

That it may he our mutual endeavor to watch and pray 
and hope unto the end for the promised reward is the earnest 
prayer of your yoke-fellows in the school of Christ. 

The Bridgetown Class. — B. W. /. 


[6041] 


(45-46) 


(46-47) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn j N. Y, 


NOBLE EXAMPLE OP CHRISTIAN FOROOTUDE 

Dear Brethren: — 

While we grieve in the flesh for the loss of our dear 
Pastor, counselor and friend, our last earthly court of appeal 
in all of our difficulties, nevertheless we rejoice in the spirit 
that he has at last reaped the reward of his labors, and is 
now with our dear Lord, High-Priest and King, in glory. 
Hence we desire to place upon record our deep appreciation 
of his disinterested, devoted labor in behalf of the brethren 
literally laying down his life in sacrifice for them. 

We thank God continually that he provided "that faithful 
servant" to dispense the meat in due season to "the household
 of faith"; and that through his ministrations, the eyes 
of our understanding were opened to a knowledge of Jehovah
's glorious character and plan, "calling us with an heavenly
 calling," not according to our works, but according to 
his own good pleasure and grace that was given us in Christ 
Jesus before the world began. We glorify his name, that 
our beloved Pastor was to us so noble an example of Christian
 fortitude and loyalty — exemplifying indeed all of the 
Christian graces and that he is a worthy pattern for us to 
follow, even as he followed Jesus. 

Our sincere prayer is that the saint3 will continue to grow 
in grace and love and will be knit more firmly together by 
the bonds of faith, hope and love. 

Yours in the one calling, Cincinnati Ecclesia. — Ohio. 
god's stone witness helped heb 
Deab Brethren : — 

Feeling impelled to write you of an experience of mine, 
I trust you will pardon my taking a few minutes of your 
valuable time. 

A few months ago I consecrated my all to the Lord, as I 
understood it then, but my real joy and blessing have tarried 
until now. While I had the assurance of being in the right 
path, I did not have the sweet peace and joy that I had seen 
possessed by the friends, in walks of life, both above and 
humbler than my own. 

It was while reading about the Pyramid that the picture 
of our consecration given there showed me in just what position
 I stood. I had renounced my own will, pictured by the 
low entrance passage to the Ante-Chamber; "dared not trust 
the sweetest frame'* if I wished to advance, pictured by the 
small space of the Ante-Chamber before passing the Granite 
Leaf, but had not bowed entirely to the will of God. In 
other words, I had not submitted to the heavenly will in 
everything. I had not passed the Granite Leaf and my feet 
were not on the solid granite. 

But having to pass through a severe trial at that time, and 
being drawn to the feet of our 'heavenly Father perhaps by 
necessity, as well as the desire to be submissive in all things, 
I have learned something of the joy that comes with complete
 submission, and sweet communion through the Spirit. 
i( sacred union with the Perfect Mind 

Transcendent bless, which thou alone canst give; 
How blest are they this Pearl of price who find, 
And, dead to earth, have learned in thee to live!" 

I desire to thank our heavenly Father for the many, 
many stepping-stones which by divine grace The Watch 
Tower publications hare placed in my path to assist me 
heavenward. 

By His grace, G. S. 

LOVE AND COOPERATION IN EVERY WAT 
To the "Stewards of the ' Mysteries of God": — 

You know of our daily prayers in your behalf, but this is 
to assure you of our continued loyalty to the cause, and of 
our love for you and cooperation with you in every possible 
way, since the death of our beloved Pastor has caused the 
responsibility to fall upon your shoulders. 

It is indeed a joy to know that our dear Pastor was "faithful
 unto death," and as we now look upon God's plan as being 
reasonable, the uncertainty of spiritual birth has been removed
; therefore we see, with the eye of faith, the reception 
accorded our pastor, by the "Alpha and Omega," together with 
all those who have had a part in the first resurrection ! 

We ask a continued interest in your prayers, that we may 
be "strong in faith," and that we also may come off "more 
than conquerors," to meet our Pastor again in the presence 
of the King. Bristol Ecclesia. — Tenn. 

WILL COOPERATE AS HERETOFORE 
Dear Brethren and Fellow-servants in Christ: — 

We, the undersigned, desire to convey to the members of 
the Bethel family, our fervent Christian love and heartfelt 
sympathy in the loss of our dearly beloved Pastor, Brother 
Russell. We desire also to assure you of our determination to 
cooperate with you, as heretofore, in the completion of the 


harvest work. We will continue to remember you at the 
throne of grace, and desire your prayers also. 

Marietta Ecclesia. — Ohio. 
BOW TO A FAULTLESS FATHER'S WILL 
Whereas, The sad intelligence has reached us of the passing
 under the veil of our dearly Beloved Pastor, Charles 
T. Russell, we meekly how in submission to a faultless 
Father's will, and okdge Tmr prayers and cooperation in the 
harvest work, knowing that the night when no man can work 
is fast settling over us. 

We also wish to assure you of our confidence, believing 
that the work entrusted to you will be done in perfect accord 
with the teachings and wishes of our dear Brother Russell 
as well as with those of our heavenly Father and our Elder 
Brother Jesus. Emerson Church., — Neb. 

UNQTJALIFIEI) SUPPORT 
Dear Brethren: — 

We took a vote on a resolution of loyalty to the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society and it had our unanimous 
and unqualified support, respecting the great work which 
was begun long ago. 

Those at Brooklyn will be in the lime light, as it were, 
so we pray for you wisdom from on high. Think of the 
stars in our Pastor's crown! Think of the many he turned 
to righteousness! Abnett Church. — Okla. 

EDITOR THOS. E. WATSON'S TRIBUTE TO PASTOR RUSSELL 
My Dear Mr. : — 

Your letter was read with deep appreciation. I thank you 
very much for the friendly expression it contains. 

The editorial on Pastor Russell was an unstudied tribute 
to a man who must have possessed much goodness and greatness
 to have won so high a place in the hearts of so many 
estimable people; and the fact that so many grateful letters 
have been written me about it makes me doubly thankful for 
the impulse which prompted me to write. 

Very truly yours, 

Thos. E. Watson. — Editor Jeffersonian. — Ga. 
LIKES THEM BEYOND EXPECTATION 
Dear Sirs: — 

I received my books in good condition, and am much 
pleased with them; in fact, they are better than I expected 
them to be. 

If you would care to send me about 100 tracts, "Our Lord's 
Return," I would like to place one in every home in this 
town. There are no Bible Students here. 

Yours tTuly, Mrs. Addie Edwards. 

CALLING HIS CHILDREN HOME 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

One by one God is calling his children home, and since 
he has seen fit to call our beloved Pastor to the glories 
which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath the 
heart of man conceived, we humbly bow in submission. 

Assuring you of our loyalty to the cause, our fidelity to 
the truth and our continued cooperation, we are 

Evans ville Ecclesia. — Ind. 
WILL REMEMBER THE WORK AS BEFORE 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Our ecclesia expressed a hearty cooperation with you, 
that the cause of the truth may continue to be advanced 
throughout the world; and that the work which yet remains
 to be accomplished may be fully carried out. To 
this end we will daily remember you at the throne of 
grace, as we have done in the past. 

New Albany Class. — Ind. 
DESIRE TO REMAIN FAITHFUL 
Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

We desire to notify you that the class here held services 
in memory of our dearly beloved Pastor Russell, which included
 the reading of the sermon which he was to have delivered
 on that day. We wish to cooperate fully with you 
in the remaining work of the harvest. We desire a pilgrim 
whenever convenient for you to send one as per enclosed card, 
and to remain faithful to the end. 

Tarpon Springs Ecclesia. — Fla. 
WILL COOPERATE MORE FULLY THAN EVER 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

The Muskegon class join in assuring you of our mutual 
sympathy and Christian love. We are determined also to continue
 in the service of the glad tidings, and assure you that 
we will continue to pray for you and to cooperate as in the 
past, or more than we have. God bless you! 

Your brethren in the Lord, Muskegon Class. — Mich. 


[6042] 


F*B*UA*Y 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(34-52) 


PBAYIira WISDOM FOB PROSECUTING THE WORK 

Dear Beethben: — 

We wish to assure you of our continued love and loyalty 
in the Lord; and that you will have our support, our prayers 
and material things as we have ability to give them. 

We pray that the wisdom from above may be yours to 
prosecute the work of the Lord that remains to be done. 

Aztec Ecclesia. — New Mex. 


LOYAL AS IV THE PAST 

Beloved in the Anointed: — 

We wish to convey to you our deep Christian love, with 
mingled sorrow. We rejoice to know that the loss of our 
beloved Pastor is his gam; and with renewed determination 
we wish to assure you that we shall be loyal to the Society 
as in the past The Denison Class. — Texas. 

Deab Bbethren: — 

Kindly send me 10 copies of The Watch Tower Memorial
 Number. H. E. Spear. — Mass. 


ONE MILLION ALREADY ORDERED 


During the past month we have received orders from Ecclesias
 for the 1917 Volunteer Literature — "The World on 
Fire" — amounting to over one million copies. This number is 
very large; but many classes have not yet been heard from. 

This is the second mention we have made that the classes 
should take prompt action in advising us of the number they 
can use judiciously for Volunteer purposes. When ordering 
please mention B. S. M., Vol. 9, No. 1. Volunteer numbers of 
B, S. M. are supplied free, transportation charges collect. 


While the presses are running we need to know how many 
to print. Orders from individuals will be received where 
there are no classes. In estimating do not figure on more 
than one copy to each English-speaking home. 

The friends will better realize the importance of care in 
the distribution of the Literature this year when we inform 
them that at the present cost of paper each million of the 
B. S. M. amounts to about $3,000. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., FEBRUARY 15, 1917 


No. 4 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


GREAT STRIDES IN TEMPERANCE MOVEMENT 

While the church nominal makes little or no effort to correct
 the errors in her creeds, handed down from a dark and remote
 past, but exhibits a declining interest in real Bible study 
and rather encourages every effort to fasten still more firmly 
upon the minds of her supporters the doctrines of Higher 
Criticism and Evolution, nevertheless we cannot observe with 
indifference her interest in the direction of placing still further
 restrictions upon the liquor traffic in the various States 
and territories of the country. We quote from the Literary 
Digest: 

"The past twelve months in the religious world, comments
 a writer in the New York Herald, witnessed a 
great stride forward in the temperance movement, when 
four more States went dry at the elections in November, 
so that now there are twenty-three States in the 'dry* 
column. In this connection we learn from the report 
of the Board of Temperance of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church, that 

" 'The Territory of Alaska, by a 5 to 3 vote, expressed 
itself in favor of prohibition on November 7, 1916; but it 
is necessary that Congress put the policy into effect, as 
that body reserves the right to legislate on the liquor 
question for Alaska. Utah, by action of a pledged Legislature
, will pass a prohibition law, to become effective 
August 1, 1917. Florida, also by pledged legislative action
, will submit a prohibition amendment to the Constitution
 to be voted upon in the general elections of 1918. 

" 'Wyoming has a legislature pledged to prohibition 
submission, but the details of its action are not determined
. New Mexico is expected to vote upon the question
 in 1918. The Democratic primary of Texas has instructed
 the Legislature to submit the question to be 
voted upon July 28, 1917. Minnesota has a substantial 
dry majority in its Legislature, and will probably go dry 
in 1918. 

" 'It is practically assured that Kentucky and Nevada 
will vote upon prohibition, but, the time is not certain. 
Nevada will almost certainly go dry, and the result in 
Kentucky cannot be predicted. In Missouri and Indiana 
Btrong effort to induce the forthcoming sessions of the 
Legislature to enact statutory prohibition will be made. 
Iowa, with statutory prohibition, will, by its Legislature, 
submit prohibition for the Constitution for the second 
time, as is required by law before it may be voted upon/ 

"In evidence of the growth of church unity, our Herald 
informant points toward the merging of the two great 
branches of the Methodist church, North and South, and 
he recalls that last winter commissions of all American 
PTote&tant churches met at Garden City, L. I., for the first 
time, and adopted a general platform on which it recommended
 that the World Conference on Faith and Order 
proceed. We are reminded also that Pope Benedict XV. 
sent a letter to the commissions, assuring them of his 
'deep interest and prayers.' " 

THE ONE TBtTE CHXTRCH 
We view with increasing interest also the various moves 
made during the past year in the direction of "Church Unity." 


But Watch To web readers are not ignorant of what will follow
 the realization of "Church Unity," which would not be 
genuine church unity, but a Federation influenced, no doubt, 
by conditions of a threatening character growing out of the 
European War, and formed for self-protection and advancement
 at almost any cost. — Revelation 13:15-17. 

The desirability of oneness in the church of Christ is beyond 
dispute. The impropriety of sectarianism, or division, is after 
centuries of separation generally conceded. But so recently as 
twenty-five years ago many still defended the divided condition
 as being helpful. Invariably they pointed to our Lord's 
words, "I am the Vine ; ye are the branches. Every branch in 
me that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth 
more fruit." (John 15:1-5) It was claimed that the denominations
 are the branches. But the teaching of the Master here 
in that his people are related to him in an individual sense, 
and not as parties, sects^ or denominations. 

St. Paul sets forth the same great truth, declaring that 
Christ Jesus is the Head of the church which is his body; and 
that as the human body has many members under the full 
control of the head, except when diseased, so the church, as 
members in particular of the body of Christ, are all to be 
subject to the Lord as their Head. They are to be so connected
 to their Head, and thus with each other, that when one 
suffers, all suffer with him, and when pne rejoices, all rejoice 
with him, because they have fellowship "in the one Spirit of the 
Head. 

This true church has never been divided. Each member is 
united with the Lord, the Head, and through him to every 
other member of his body, which is the church. In this 
church there has always been maintained one Lord Jesus — 
one faith, his word of promise — and one baptism, consecration 
into his death. — 2 Timothy 2:11, 12; Ephesians 4:4-6. 
"IMAGE OP THE BEAST* '—GIVING IT IJFB 

Recently there was published in the leading newspapers of 
the country a dispatch from Washington, D. C M which bears 
the appearance of great significance to many of our readers. 
Several copies of this dispatch have been forwarded to us by 
persons deeply interested in the fulfilment of prophecies respecting
 Church Federation and in the manner in which the 
impartation of "life unto the Image of the Beast" will be 
brought about. — Rev, 13:15. 

While later developments will doubtless hurry along the 
fulfilment of Scripture relating to Babylon's downfall — "in 
one hour" — God's faithful people, "the wise/' will continue to 
walk in the light of his Word and rejoice in every evidence 
of its fulfillment, remembering that before Zion travails, she 
shall bring forth; before her pain comes, she shall be delivered 
of a man child. (Isaiah 66:7-9) The Head of this man 
child — Christ Jesus, glorified — was delivered before nominal 
fleshly Zion's travail eighteen hundred years ago. The body — 
"the church which is* his body" — shall be delivered prior to 
the collapse of nominal spiritual Zion, toward which we believe
 Babylon is now fast progressing. We give following a 
portion or the article referred to : 

"Private letters from the Vatican, received by Dr. A. 

Palmieri of the Library of Congress, a recognized writer 

on ecclesiastical subjects, announce that Pope Benedict 


[6043] 


(52-53) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


B*ooxi<yjc, N. V. 


XV. is about to appoint a commission of four cardinals 
to renew a movement begun by Pope Leo XIII., and abandoned
 by Pope Pius X., looking to a reunion of Christianity
 and the cultivation of friendly relations with the 
Anglican Church. A public announcement on the subject 
from Rome in expected soon. 

"Dr. Palmieri said that the new movement, as outlined
 in his advices, will be directed particularly toward 
an establishment of the reunion of the Russian church 
and the Papacy and to a thorough re-examination into the 
validity of Anglican or Episcopal ordinations, which was 
settled in the negative in a papal bull 'Apostolica Sedis,' 
by Pope Leo X. The interest of the pope in the problem 
of Christian unity is said to have been intensified by the 
recent progress of the world congress, initiated by the 
American Episcopal church, 

LONGS FOB REUNION 

" The new pope/ said Dr, Palmieri, summarizing the 
information received from Rome, 'has taken a considerable
 part in the efforts of neutral nations to establish 
peace among nations. The Vatican's efforts have been 
suggested not only by a humanitarian spirit, but by a 
longing for Christian unity and to end the conflict which 
long since has divided Christian churches. Efforts of 
Leo XIII. for carrying out the reunion of Christianity 
were abruptly stopped by Pius X., who aimed at an inner 
reform of the Catholic clergy and turned all his energies 
to the crushing of modernism [Higher Criticism and Evolution
]. 

" 'Benedict XV. thinks it is time to renew the policy of 
Leo XIII., also that a reestablishment of a political peace 
would be the first step toward renewed attempts to stop 
the splitting of Christianity into a greater number of 
sects. 

" 'It seems to the Vatican that the Orthodox Slavs will 
be very soon called to take a more active part in the 
life of western nations, either Protestant or Catholic, 
and that it is necessary to come to an understanding with 
them to avoid evils produced by religious intolerance. 
The newly planned commission of cardinals will pay attention
 to yearnings for unity, which from time to time 
manifest themselves in the Orthodox church, and to cultivate
 friendly relations with the Anglican church. 

WUJi REEXAMINE ARGUMENTS 

" 'One of the most important tasks of the new commission
 will be a thorough reexamination of the arguments
 pro and con on the validity of Anglican ordinations. 
The Bull 'Apostolica Sedis' by Leo X. has settled in the 
negative the problem of that validity, but generally theological
 schools assume a more favorable attitude toward 
acknowledgment of the validity of Anglican orders, and 
the new commission of cardinals will carefully ponder the 
reasons set forth by Russian and Anglican divines against 
the decision of Pope Leo X. The friendship of the Anglican
 church is appreciated by Roane, for she may be as a 
link of union between Roman Catholicism and Russian 
Orthodoxy.' » 

"SO MIGHTY AN EARTHQUAKE* ' 
The New York American continues to see and boldly proclaim 
editorially the "Earthquake" of Scripture. We quote as follows: 
"What direct effect the President's address will have upon 
the Governments of Europe we shall soon see. That his high 
object of universal justice, liberty and permanent peace 
can be obtained without a more definite and adequate plan 
and programane we frankly doubt. 

"But we suspect that the President was not speaking 
alone to governments. His notable address is an address to 
peoples, and we cannot help thinking that no man understands
 better than Mr. Wilson that this is the true purport 
of his words. 

"It is apparent to thoughtful men that this war, huge as 
it is, is only the prologue to a greater drama; that when 
the ruling classes have settled upon terms of peace with one 
another, they must then settle with the peoples they have so 
long ruled, and whom they have led or driven into this 
dreadful massacre. 

"Nothing that is still in the future can be more certainly 
expected to happen than a series of revolutions in the European
 States which will change the whole 'face of society; 


which will probably result in the complete overthrow of royalties
 and aristocracies and privileged classes, and out of which 
may form a federated, cooperative commonwealth of Europe. 

"We have said more than once, and we still firmly believe
, that the thrones of aristocracies of Europe are on their 
swift way to the junk-heap; that the moment the crushing 
pressure of military dictatorships is removed by peace, and 
the peoples of the warring nations are free to discuss with 
one another the leadership and policies and conditions which 
resulted in this gigantic crime against mankind, the fate of 
the old order of government and society in Europe would be 
written in unanimous revolution. 

"We do not believe that such an ideal peace concert of 
European governments as the President pictures so brightly 
can be achieved at a near-at-hand congress, for the very reason
 that we have no faith in the stability of the present 
European governments or the present political and social 
systems of Europe. 

"This, the most dreadful and destructive of all wars, will, 
in our judgment, usher in revolutions that will succeed both 
with the sword and with the ballot, and that will change 
the whole aspect of Europe and profoundly modify human 
society all over the globe. 

"Until that time, until the earthquake has spent its 
force, until the architects of ruin have levelled Europe's 
governments and social systems, and the architects of construction
 have erected new governments and new social systems
 on the destroyed foundations of the old, there can be 
no permanent concert of Powers for the purpose of maintaining
 peace or for any other purpose." 

THE BURNING BUSH 
The child of God needs no demonstration to prove the 
truthfulness of the Bible statement that a "bush burned 
with fire, and the bush was not consumed"; as, for instance, 
that respecting Moses and the "burning bush" (Exodus 3:1-3) ; 
but the following from the Scientific American will be of interest
 to Watch Towee readers : 

"One of the most remarkable plants in the world is 
certainly the so-called Burning Bush, Dictarrmus frominella
. This species is native to Western Asia, though 
nowadays commonly to be found in gardens in temperate 
regions. 

"A great many people who grow the plant are quite 
unaware of its strange habits. As a matter of fact the 
Dictamnus secretes a fragrant essential oil in great abundance
. This is produced in especially large quantities 
by the flower stems, in warm weather volatilizing so that 
the air surrounding the plant is impregnated. Further, 
this vapor is highly inflammable and, if a naked flame is 
brought near to the plant, the fumes at once take fire 
with a most singular result. The whole plant is surrounded
 with crackling shooting flames, reddish in color, 
and leaving a highly aromatic odor behind them. The 
Burning Bush is not injured in any way by the fire; for 
the flames do not actually come into contact with the 
plant itself. 

"Several conditions are needful if the experiment with 
the Burning Bush is to be a success. Thus it is essential 
that the air should be very dry and warm, also that 
there should be practically no wind. The best effects are 
secured only just after the opening of the flowers. It will 
be realized that these conditions cannot always be relied 
upon. A plan has recently been devised by means of which 
the inflammable nature of the vapors given out by the 
Dictamnus may be shown with startling effect, 

"A strong plant of the Burning Bush is raised in a 
pot. At the time when the flowers are just reaching perfection
 the plant is placed in a glass jar or a shade. 
This is closely covered for some hours before the time of 
the experiment. On removing the cover a light is held 
over the plant, when there is at once a tremendous 
outburst of flame. So great is the rush of fire that it is 
wise to keep one's face away from the top of the jar; a 
nasty burn is not by any means out of the question. 
After an interval of an hour or so with the jar or case 
closed up the experiment may be repeated with similar results
. 

"In connection with the Dictamnus St is rather remarkable
 that the species is common where the incident 
of Moses and the Burning Bush is said to have occurred." 


EXEMPTION OF SOCIETY PROPERTY FROM TAXATION 


Since there has been so much published by various newspapers
 concerning the taxation of the Association's property, 
and our effort to have the same exempt from taxes, we deem 


it proper that we should here give to the friends a statement 
of the facts. 

The laws of the land usually are very just. It is rather 

[6044] 


February IS, \$l? 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(53-54) 


remarkable that so many righteous laws have been enacted 
by imperfect men. It is quite evident that the law-makers have 
been guided in a large measure by the code of perfect laws 
which God gave to Israel through Moses. The law has been 
brought into disrepute in the minds of many, not because the 
laws are wrong, but because they are ofttimes enforced without
 reference to justice. 

Under the Membership Corporation Law of the State of 
New York, a corporation created and organized for the purpose
 of the mental and moral improvement of men and 
women, and for religious, charitable, scientific and historical 
purposes is exempt from taxation. This exemption is based 
upon the theory that the corporation is engaged in a work 
that is beneficial to the public in general, and therefore such 
work should be encouraged. 

In 1909 the Peoples Pulpit Association was created and 
organized under the Membership Corporation Act of the State 
of New York, for the purpose of aiding in carrying on the 
work in which the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
has been engaged for more than thirty years. The Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society is incorporated under the 
Pennsylvania laws, but certain legal requirements made it 
necessary to have a New York corporation in order to facilitate 
the work of the Society. Hence the Peoples Pulpit Association
 was organized. Its charter declares that it is organized 
for the purpose of the mental and moral improvement of men 
and women by teaching the Bible and preaching the Gospel 
by word of mouth and through the printed page, and for 
historical, scientific and benevolent purposes. This corporation
 first purchased the Beecher Home on Columbia Heights, 
thereafter, as the harvest work expanded, purchased an adjoining
 piece of property, and later constructed on the rear a 
new building, joining the three, thereby making one property, 
which is designated as the "Bethel Home." 

For some time after the organization of the Corporation 
the Tax Commissioners of the City of New York, upon examination
 of the property and the uses to which it was being 
put and is now put, readily exempted the property from taxation
; and for a time it was free from the burden of taxes. 
Later, some of the enemies of our work, seeking to make us 
all the trouble possible, filed a petition before the Commissioners
 of Taxes and Assessments of New York City, demanding
 that the Bethel Home be taxed. Considerable pressure 
was brought to bear on the Commission. A public hearing 
was demanded and had, at which hearing strenuous efforts 
were made to show that the Peoples Pulpit Association is 
not entitled to the benefit of the exemption law. The Commissioners
 were divided as to what they should do, and concluded
 that the matter should be submitted to the courts in 
order to get a final decision. The Commission therefore assessed
 the Bethel Home at the sum of $100,000. Counsel for 
our Association thereupon instituted a proceeding in the Supreme
 Court of New York upon a Writ of Certiorari. The 
Corporation Counsel, after long delay, filed and returned an 
answer in the Supreme Court, and the case came on for 
hearing in that Court before Mr. Justice Callaghan on the 
15th of January. The issues to be determined by this case 
involved not only the taxes upon the Bethel Home, but also 
those upon the New York City Temple; and there was involved
 the aggregate sum of between twenty-five and thirty 
thousand dollars, which the Association would be required to 
pay as taxes if the decision should be against it. 

The taking of testimony in the case occupied the greater 
part of one week. At the close of the hearing of the testimony
 the Corporation Counsel, who appeared on behalf of 
the Tax Commissioners of the City of New York, moved to dismiss
 the case and to leave the assessment standing, upon the 
ground that the Peoples Pulpit Association had not shown 
from the facts that the property was and is used exclusively 
for the purposes for which the corporation was organized, 
and was therefore not entitled to exemption. The Court 
overruled this motion. Counsel for the city then asked that 
the court permit the filing of- a written brief and argument 


in support of the city's contention, and that the court defer 
the decision until some future day, that such brief and argument
 might be considered. Mr. Justice Callaghan thereupon 
remarked from the bench : "I have not the slightest doubt 
that this organization comes clearly within the statute; if 
there were the slightest doubt in my mind I should give you 
an opportunity to submit briefs. It is shown conclusively that 
these premises as a whole are devoted to the purposes provided
 by the statute." 

The Court thereupon decided that the Peoples Pulpit 
Association was and is entitled to the benefits of the statute, 
and that it should be exempt from the payment of taxes upon 
the real estate involved. 

THE EAGLE 

The Brooklyn Daily Eagle, as is well known by the many 
readers of The Watch Tower, has for several years unjustly 
persecuted Pastor Russell and our Society; but we hope that 
its action wa3 based entirely upon a misapprehension, and 
that now, since that paper sees the true situation, its attitude 
may be different. In its issue of January 20, commenting upon 
the result of this case, the Brooklyn Daily Eagle said: 

"The People's Pulpit Association, founded in 1909 by 
the late Pastor Russell, yesterday won its suit for exemption
 from taxes on the property owned by it at 122-124 
Columbia Heights, known as 'Bethel Home/ and valued 
at $100,000. 

"Justice Stephen Callaghan of the Supreme Court, 
before whom the trial was held during the week, at the 
conclusion of the testimony yesterday afternoon, announced
 from the bench, without giving the Assistant 
Corporation Counsel an opportunity to present briefs on 
the case for the city, that he was satisfied that the Association
 was engaged in religious work within the meaning
 of the statutes and therefore entitled to exemption 
from taxes. 

" *I haven't the slightest doubt that this organization 
comes clearly within the statute,' Justice Callaghan Baid; 
'If there were the slightest doubt in my mind, I should 
give you an opportunity to submit briefs. It may not be 
true that every room in this house is used for the work 
of disseminating Bible tracts and literature, but it is 
shown conclusively these premises as a whole are devoted 
to that purpose. 

" It is not for me or any other judge to say whether 
or not these men are sincere in their work. For myself, I 
believe that they are and that their purpose is a righteous 
one.' 

"Mr. Durham tried to bring out the fact that when 
124 Columbia Heights was occupied by Henry Ward 
Beecher taxes were paid upon it, but Justice Callaghan 
rejected that evidence. 

"Joseph F. Rutherford, Pastor Russell's successor as 
head of the Watch Toweb Society, was the last witness. 
He testified that in 1909 he and four other gentlemen 
raised $10,000 between them to settle Mrs. Russell's 
claims for back alimony against the Pastor, and that 
these five gentlemen continued to subscribe $100 a month 
to pay alimony to Mrs. Russell from 1909 until the Pastors
 death in October, 1916. He declared that not one 
cent of this* alimony came from the treasury of the Society
. This arrangement to pay the Pastor's alimony, 
he said, was made while Pastor Russell was in Europe 
and was done without the Pastor's knowledge and consent. 
The money all came from the private resources of the five 
subscribers, he said. The expenses of Pastor Russell in his 
libel Buit against The Eagle were met in the same way, it 
was testified." 
It is understood that the City will appeal the case to a 
higher Court. Our counsel, however, feel confident that the 
higher Court will sustain the position of Mr. Justice Callaghan
, and that the tax* matter will be definitely settled in 
favor of our Association. 


The great Master, Christ Jesus, began to promulgate in 
the earth God's message of salvation to mankind. He pointed 
out that the forgiveness of sins and the blessings of life everlasting
 could come only to those who accept Jesus as their 
Redeemer and who walk in the ways of righteousness in the 
reverence of God. The apostles taught the sa*me doctrine 
as long as they were upon the earth. The teachings of Jesus 
and the Apostles pointed out that "the wages of sin is 
death"; that sin is the result of the disobedience of Father 
Adam; that this death sentence came upon all men by inWHO
 IS RESPONSIBLE? 

heritance as the offspring of Adam; that God provided redemption
 through the merit of Christ Jesus* sacrifice; that 
those in this age who exercise faith in the merit of nia 
sacrifice and who present themselves in full consecration 
to do the will of God receive the imputed merit of Christ and 
are accepted by Jehovah as joint-sacriflcers with the Lord 
Jesus; and that if thus continuing faithful unto death they 
are to be changed in the first resurrection to the divine nature 
to live and reign with Christ for the blessing of mankind and 
for the carrying out of the eternal purpose of Jehovah. They 


VII— 15 


[6045] 


(54-61) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, in. Y. 


further taught the coming of Messiah's kingdom; that this 
kingdom would be set up when the church is complete; that 
the church is the body of Christ and is selected without reference
 to creed or denomination, Jesus taught his disciples to 
pray, "Thy kingdom come," well knowing that the establishment
 of the kingdom would mark the beginning of blessings 
to the poor, groaning creation. 

After the death of the Apostles, false teachers arose 
and erroneous doctrines were put forth. Contrary to the 
Scriptures, the clergy was formed, as distinguished from the 
laity of common people. The clergy began to teach that the 
wages of sin is purgatorial torment or eternal torment; that 
the souls of all are immortal; and that death does not mean 
death, but the beginning of either bliss or torture; that only 
a comparatively small number would be saved and taken to 
heaven, and that all the others would be forever damned. 
They taught the divine right of kings to rule the people, and 
asserted that this right came to the kings through the ecclesiastical
 systems. Numerous sects and denominations were organized
, and spread these doctrines throughout the earth, 
each claiming that these teachings are supported by the Bible. 

In more modern times teachers of Higher Criticism have 
arisen in the church nominal, who have repudiated the Bible 
altogether, denying that any part of it is inspired; and denying
 that it is God's Word to man, but instead that it was 
written by men in ancient times who were less capable of 
writing than the modern clergymen. These and other clergymen
 calling themselves Evolutionists, teach that the Genesis 
story of the creation of man a perfect being and of his subsequent
 sin and fall, and of God's plan for redemption of man 
through the blood of Christ, is all nonsense and not worthy 
of the consideration of thoughtful men and women. The 
church nominal throughout the world for some time has been 
devoted chiefly to social functions and the teaching of almost
 everything except the Scriptures, The effect upon the 
people has been demoralizing to an alarming degree. 

ADVANCEMENT IN THINGS MATERIA!— DECLTJTE IK 
THINGS SPIRITUAL 

We call to mind that the forefathers of America migrated 
from Europe to New England because they believed the Bible 
and desired to teach it and to serve God according to the dictates
 of their own conscience. They taught and followed the 
Scriptures as best they could. After several hundred years we 
mark a great advancement in material things and a great decline
 in wrings spiritual. The Boston American, in its issue 
of Sunday, January 21, publishes almost a full page concerning
 the conditions prevailing especially in New Hampshire, 
under the title, u Grave Moral Decay Threatens Future New 
Hampshire." We quote from that article as follows: 

"Eighteen years ago the Governor of New Hampshire
 flaid: 

41 'The decline of the Christian religion, particularly in 
our rural communities, is a marked feature of the times, 
and steps should be taken to remedy it. No matter what 
our belief may be in religious matters, every good citizen 
knows that when the restraining influences of religion are 
withdrawn from a community its decay, moral, mental 
and financial, is swift and sure. 

" There are towns where no church bell sends forth 


its solemn call from January to January ;- there are villages
 where children grow to manhood unchristened; and 
there are communities where the dead are laid away without
 the benison of the name of Christ.' " 
Continuing, this article gives many instances of moral depravity
, attributing such to the fact that the people have lost 
faith in the Bible and do not hear its teachings. 

"THE HIRELING CARETH NOT TOE THE SHEEP" 
To whom then does the blame attach for this moral degeneracy
 — to the people themselves or to those who have 
claimed to be their teachers? The clergy have occupied, and 
yet occupy, positions of great influence amongst the people. 
A repudiation of the Bible by them could have none other 
effect than to destroy the faith of the people in the Scriptures
. Jehovah foreknew that such a condition would arise 
as we now witness; and he attached the blame therefor to 
the men who claim to preach the Gospel, but who in fact have 
turned the minds of the people away from his Word. Through 
his prophet, he said: "For amongst my [professed] people are 
wicked men ; they lay wait as he that setteth a snare ; they set 
a trap; they catch men [they set the snares and traps of 
Higher Criticism and Evolution]; as a. cage is full of birds, 
so are their houses full of deceit [they have practiced deceit
 upon the people] ; therefore they have become great and 
waxen rich [naany of the clergy say, "W)e are rich in wisdom; 
and none can teach us, not even the prophets and the 
apostles"] ; they are waxen fat ; they shine ; yea, they pass by 

the deeds of the wicked [unnoticed] Shall I not visit 

them for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be 
avenged on such a nation as this? A wonderful and horrible 
thing is committed in the land. The prophets [preacher si 
preach falsely and tlje priests bear rule by their means; and 
the people love to have it so." (Jeremiah 5:26-31) Had the 
clergy faithfully performed their duty to teach the people 
the sweet message of salvation as spoken by Jesus and the 
apostles, and had pointed them to the coming of Messiah's 
kingdom, a different condition would prevail. 

The article above referred to is proof of the fact that the 
world now is experiencing what the Lord foretold through the 
Prophet Amos, saying, "Behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land ; not a famine 
of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of the hearing of the 
words of the Lord.' 1 — Amos 8:11. 

The Watch Towee Bible and Tract Society was organized
 for the very purpose of the mental, moral and spiritual 
improvement of men and women by teaching them the Bible. 
The Peoples Pulpit Association was organized under the 
law3 of New York for the same purpose. These two organizations
 have been spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to 
enlighten the people; while the majority of the clergy, claiming
 to be Christians, devote their time and efforts to the persecution
 of Brother Russell, whom the Lord bo wonderfully 
used to make known his message, and all who have assisted 
in making known the glad tidings. On the other hand, the 
lawmakers, who have not pretended to be interested in teaching
 the Bible, have enacted liberal laws granting to Bible societies
 and churches privileges that individuals and other corporations
 do not have. 


JESUS HEALS A NOBLEMAN'S SON 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "The Bewards of Faith/' published in issue of February 1, 1908, which please see.] 

JESUS AT THE POOL OF BETHESDA 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "He Went About Doing Good," published in issue of February 15, 1908, which please 

see.] 

JESUS FEEDS THE FIVE THOUSAND 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Ever Give Us This Bread," published in issue of February 1, 1905, which please 

see.] 

SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


30 TEARS 07 ASSOCIATION WITH PASTOR RUSSELL 
Dear Bbethren: — 

My heart goes out in love and reverence to the memory 
of our beloved Pastor Russell, and it is indeed a privilege 
to give testimony to his services and faithfulness. 

I was carefully reared under Christian influence, and 
tihus taught and learned reverence for God and his Christ, 
with confidence in his Word. However, with maturity 
came analysis of creeda, and their confusion and blasphemy, 
misrepresenting the character and plan of the Father of 
mercies and God of all comfort. This soon led me into 


agnosticism, in which there is neither chart, compass nor 
anchorage. In this state I floundered for some years, and 
finding no rest of heart, naturally became careless and at timee 
reckless. Finally, I determined to go direct to the Word 
of God and Btudy it; for I retained my faith in God and 
in Jesus as his Son and the Christ, though grasping . these 
fundamentals but vaguely, as I now discern. And I was rewarded
 by a growing knowledge, peace and assurance of 
faith that led me to more earnestly plead at the throne of 
grace for more light and strength to walk in it. 

Looking back, we all can discern the leadings and guid- 


[6046] 


FEBRUARY 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(6I-«2) 


ance of our Lord — his over care — and truly happy it was for 
me that I had come to a place of more knowledge of and 
trust in our heavenly Father and our dear elder Brother — 
Jesus; for at this period I entered one of the severest 
ordeals of my life and could only cry out for more light 
and more strength — for more power and faith to endure. 
In this crisis there came to me unheralded in the mail a blue 
paper-hound copy of Millennial Dawn, and thinking I saw 
in it something of Adventism, which in ignorance I disesteemed
, I promptly threw the book into my waste-paper basket
. Later in the day, and that I might make a seemingly 
intelligent and courteous acknowledgement to the donor, should 
he make himself known, I rescued the hook from the wastebasket
 and began what I purposed to be a cursory examination
 of its contents. Beginning at the dedication, I was at 
once impressed with the assurance that one who could so 
aptly quote Scripture as this writer, could surely teach me 
in the Word, and thus I met my brother and fellow-servant, 
Charles T. Russell. 

It is no disparagement to my revered father and mother, 
who richly deserve the love, honor and esteem in which I 
hold their memory, to say that the influence of Brother 
Russell on and in my life was the most salutary and beneficent 
that had entered it; and after nearly thirty years of various
 and intimate association with him, I can gladly say this 
influence was but deepened and broadened. His service and 
fellowship constantly led to the Lord. With the Apostle 
Paul he constantly preached, not himself, but Jesus Christ 
as Lord, and himself the servant — bond slave — of the brethren 
for Jesu3' sake. To me his life and memory are an inspiration
 to faithfulness even unto death in following the Lamb 
whithersoever he goeth, 

I thank God for Pastor Russell in his life, in his service 
and in his death. 

Yours in our Redeemer, W. E. Page. 

SOME THOUGHTS OF PILQRIM WISDOM 
Dkar Brethren in Christ: — 

I feel I should send you a few lines to tell you how 
much — yes, how deeply — I appreciate The Tower of January 
1. My heart overflowed with joy as I read and pondered its 
precious message. How strong is the evidence that God's 
arm is not in any sense shortened! Then the wonderful 
fulfilment of his promises to supply all our needs! Marvelous
 in our eyes is the work of our God! 

The masterful treatise of the world- situation ("Views 
from the Watch Tower"), and the concise, forceful presentation
 of the real conditions as they exist can have but 
one effect upon every truly and fully consecrated heart — to 
cause all such to lift up their heads and rejoice, for surely 
the "day is nigh!" What more convincing evidence could we 
possibly have than is here given of the final crash, the near 
approach of the end, the collapse of all earthly governments 
and the immediate setting up of Christ's kingdom for the 
bringing in of peace and righteousness, blessings for all 
mankind ! Surely all the faithful will soon be with the 
King in Glory ! Certainly such a review Bhould stimulate our 
faith and tend to energize us to renewed activity to press 
along the narrow way of sacrifice to final victory! And this 
spells the crown of life. 

May God continue to bless your every effort to serve him 
acceptably and further the interests of his cause. No, he 
has not deserted his people, even though it seemed good to 
him to remove our beloved earthly leader, "that servant." 
Yes, may God bless his memory to the eternal good of all 
the faithful in Christ. 

I am daily remembering you and all the dear colaborers 
at Headquarters at the throne of grace. To me the blessed 
truth is more precious than ever. Please bear me up in 
your prayers. I feel the special need of them. The toils of 
the way are many and sometimes burdensome, strenuous are 
the times, great is the power of the adversary, and continuous
 are his attempts to "beat our courage down"; but greater 
is he who is for us; for our armor is divine. 

In sincere Christian love to you and all the dear ones at 
the Bethel home, I am 

Your brother by his favor, W. M. Wisdom. 

A MESSAGE FEOM SCOTLAND 
Dear Brethren: — 

At the half-yearly business meetings of the class here it 
has been our custom to formally elect Brother Russell as the 
Pastor of our class; and, as a token of confidence and esteem
, to advise him that such had been done. 

The passing hence of our beloved Brother rendered this 
impossible at our recent business meeting; and instead, we 
unanimously agreed to send you a message of sympathy and 
encouragement. 


The news of the death of our beloved Pastor came to us 
with mixed effect — sorrow, because we had lost a faithful 
servant and guide ; gladness, because we are confident he has 
entered into the presence of the Master he loved so much 
and served so devotedly. He has entered into his rest; 
surely none deserved it more! His life and work on earth, 
his example and devotion, will ever continue to be an inspira* 
tion and encouragement to all of us. 

We desire to let you know that it is our intention as a 
class to follow faithfully our beloved Pastor's teachings. The 
truth we have came to us through him, and we recognized 
him as the one especially appointed of the Lord to feed his 
flock in this harvest time. The rich store he has left behind 
will continue to be respected as the Master's message to all 
who have the hearing ear. We have loved and followed our 
dear Pastor through "evil report and good report these many 
years; and we desire to follow him still, realizing that if we 
follow him, even as he followed Christ, we too shall hear that 
desired "Well done!" 

We pray for heavenly wisdom to guide the dear brethren 
who have been left in charge of the different departments of 
the work. With much love in the Lord, 

Yours in our One Hope, Class at Dundee. — Scot. 

ELECTION AS PASTOR RESCINDED 

The following letter from the Boston Ecclesia, which had 
elected Brother Rutherford Pastor, will be of interest to 
Watch Tower readers: 
Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

Although you had not receive official notice from the 
Boston Ecclesia that you had been elected Pastor, Brother 
Margeson read to the Ecclesia last night your position in 
regard to the matter and I am glad to say that it rejoiced 
our hearts for the stand you have taken. 

Immediately the original motion by which you were elected 
Pastor was rescinded, and availing ourselves of your kind 
opportunity, you were duly elected Counselor of the Boston 
Ecclesia by a unanimous vote. 

We feel that this experience has drawn us closer to 
you than before, and we shall continue to pray God that his 
grRce may be sufficient to keep you humble and faithful as you 
endeavor daily to he pleasing to him in your new duties. With 
Christian love from the Boston Ecclesia, 

Yours in Christ, Alexander Ogston, Secretary. 

"STRONG IN THE LORD" 
Dear Brethren: — 

Resolved, That we convey unto the brethren at Brooklyn 
our heartfelt sympathy, love and fellowship in the spirit, in 
this our mutual loss. 

Wherefore, beloved, we wish to renew our Christian allegiance
 and fellowship to you in whom is reposed, more than 
in others, the continuance of the harvest work and the further
 carrying out of our beloved Pastor's wishes. It is further
 

Resolved, That we encourage you to be "strong in the 
Lord." 

Vermillion Ecclesia. — S. Dak. 
NOBLEST OF GOD'S CREATURES IN THE FLBSH 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

I feel that this is the time to express the deep sympathy 
T have for yourselves and for all the beloved of the Lord 
in every place. We have all lost, in one sense, the dearest 
and noblest of God's creatures that we have known in the 
flesh! He seemed by his life to revive and make keener our 
perceptions of what our dear Lord was like. His life was 
such that it directed us to the "beauty of holiness." 

I thank my God for the truth as it is in Jesus, and for the 
light of his character, as both were revealed to me by his 
spirit through the instrumentality of our noble and beloved 
Pastor Russell! I am but fourteen years in the truth, but 
during that time I have never swerved from the one determination
 to be a follower of the Lord Jesus. I wish ever to 
support, to the best of my ability, with the help of the Lord, 
your efforts to supply our spiritual needs. My prayers shall 
ever ascend for your guidance and blessing. 

We in London have received much comfort and blessing 
from the ministrations of our beloved Brother Paul Johnson. 
His coming has helped us at this time to realize that h» who 
.has guided us thus far will guide us still. I pray I may 
strive to fill my own place and work for which I am called, 
that I may in the age to come, and in the glorious ages to 
follow* show forth the glory of so great a God, and live 
in everlasting praise to the Lamb of God, who gave himself 
a ransom for all. 

Your brother in the Anointed, 

Frank E. Barnett. — London, Eng. 


[6047J 


(62-63) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


MORE DETERMINED TO FOLLOW HIS WISE COUNSEL 
Dear Bbethben: — 

Our heavenly Father, in his infinite wisdom, has called 
our beloved Pastor to a higher station. As "that servant" 
to whom was entrusted the dispensing of "meat in due season 
for the household of faith," he has done his work well. 
Surely we shall miss him! but we would not call him back, 
for we know he is now partaker of the divine nature — jointheir
 with our Lord — even better able now than heretofore — 
associated more closely than ever with our Lord — to assist 
in directing the harvest work. 

Our love for him should make us more determined to 
follow his wise counsel, even as he was a true follower of 
the Master. Our prayer ia that our heavenly Father will 
continually watch over those to whom our dear Brother has 
entrusted the work yet to be done, strengthening them to 
discharge faithfully their responsibility. 

Resolved, That we will render loyal support to the work, 
as in the past, that when the night shall close around us, 
"in which no man can work," we may, like our dear Pastor, 
hear the Master's words : "Well done ! Thou hast been 
faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler over 
many! . . . Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord!" 

Easton Ecclesia. — Pa. 

COOPERATING WITH THEIR PASTOR'S INSTRUCTIONS 
Dear Brethren: — 

We assure you of our love and sympathy, and also of our 
desire to cooperate with you in any way possible for the 
furtherance of the work. 

The Wichita Ecclesia has been blessed with abundant opportunities
 for service of late. We have had Pilgrim Brethren
, our dear Pastor, and this coming week we are to have 
the Photo-Drama in West Wichita, and the following week 
it is to be repeated on the East Side. Then, too, we are 
busy with the District work. 

It is our great desire to be faithful, and to continue in 
the work as long as we are permitted to do so, as we know 
was our dear Pastor's wish. 

We assure you of our love and sympathy and also of 
our desire to co5perate with you in every way possible for 
the extension of the work. 

With Christian love, Wichita Ecclesia. — Kans, 

CONTINUED LOVE AND LOYALTY 
Dear Friends in the Lord: — 

At our business meeting Sunday, December 3, the Detroit 
Ecclesia, after the reading of the December 1 Watch Tower, 
passed a vote of confidence in all of the arrangements of the 
Society and in those who have been left in charge at the 
Bible House, and we wish to assure you of our continued 
love and loyalty and of our further cooperation. 

With loving Christian greetings, 

Detroit Ecclesia. — Mich. 

HIS "HAND UPON THE LITTLE ONES" 
Dearly Beloved Colahorers: — 

We were for a moment bewildered by the sudden demise 
of our beloved Pastor. We sorrow, knowing his loving watchcare
 over the Lord's flock; yet we rejoice, knowing "whither 
he went." 

We shall feel a vacancy which henceforth cannot be filled. 
But "our will is the will of our God"; we bow in humble 
submission unto it, endeavoring day by day to "gird up the 
loins of our minds [more fully] and hope to the end for 
the grace that is to be brought unto us at the [fuller] revelation
 of Jesus Christ." 

One faithful promise reads, "I will turn mine hand upon 
the little ones." Surely his care is around each one! Therefore
 will not we fear though the earth be removed, and 
though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea f 

We assure yon of our continued effort to cooperate in the 
harvest work. Believing our beloved Pastor's death has 
had a blessed effect in this community, we trust by divine 
grace to give a better testimony in future to our Father's great 
plan of salvation. We need your prayers and co5peration. 

Our petitions continue to ascend to the throne of heavenly 
grace for the dear friends at Bethel, and for all who labor in 
the vineyard. 

With loving Christian greetings, your servants in the 
Lord, Prince Rupert Ecclesia. — £. C. • 

assurances of full confidence 
Dear Brethren of the Bethel Family: — 

We esteemed it a great privilege to pay our last respects 
co the memory of our dear Brother Russell in the flesh by 
attending the funeral services. A man not in the truth 
said, "The world has lost its brightest star," We miss our 


beloved brother so much! We did not know how much we 
loved him until now. We know that Brother Russell loved 
the colporteurs, for he manifested this in many ways. This 
was a great help and inspiration to us. 

But, dear brethren, if we miss dear Brother Russell, we 
are thinking how much more you of the Bethel family must 
miss him, as you surround the table each day without his 
blessed influence and face in your midst! And also the 
great responsibility that now rests more fully upon you as 
you continue to minister unto the saints, and to herald the 
glad tidings of earth's new King. We believe that one reason
 for Brother Russell's great achievements was that he 
had many loyal supporters, long tried, tested and proved 
faithful under many circumstances and conditions, which 
were the means of sifting out the unfaithful; and that having
 been so thoroughly tried and proven loyal to our dear 
Pastor as the Lord's chosen servant you will continue faithfully
 to carry on the work to its grand completion. We 
have always appreciated your loving and cheerful service in 
our behalf. We wish to assure you of our full confidence. 

No doubt there will be trials and testings, strong delusions, 
etc., to the end, but you shall have our prayers. We shall 
be glad to support you in every way possible. 

Mr. and Mrs. Ray van Hyning and Ruth. 

will hold up the hands 

Dear Brethren: — 

Resolved, That to the dear Bethel family and brethren 
of the Society at Brooklyn we extend our heartfelt sympathy
, our warmest love and earnest prayers for comfort in 
their bereavement, and for guidance in the continuance of 
the harvest work. 

Resolved, That we desire to express our confidence in the 
brethren whom our dear Pastor has left in charge, and to 
assure them that we will earnestly cooperate to the extent 
of our ability in the ■ furtherance of the Lord's work entrusted
 to them, "holding up their hands," until the dark 
night shall close down upon us. 

With sympathizing and loyal hearts, 

Cortland Ecclesia. — N. Y. 

ALL CONFIDENCE IN THE BBETHBEN 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Enclosed you will find for our free will offering. 

We wish to assure you of our interest in the Society, and 
that we have all confidence in the brethren whom our dear 
Pastor left in cbarge of the work he loved so well. Pray 
for us, as we will continue daily to do for you. 
Yours in his dear name, 

Brother and Sister S. D. Lemley. — Wash. 

HIS NOBILITY OF LIFE AND LOVELINESS OF CHABAOTEB 

Dear Brethren: — 

WJiile we rejoice with our dear Pastor in his privilege 
of being with the Lord, away from all personal suffering and 
trouble, and while we recognize the loss to be as much ours 
as your3, we desire to extend to you our heartfelt sympathy; 
for, coming so often in contact with "that servant" of God 
and having become accustomed to fellowship with his grand 
personality, nobility of life and loveliness of character, the 
loss to you may seem the greater. 

We wish also to say that as the dear Master may be 
pleased to bless and assist us we will by his grace continue 
to do what we can to help to spread the glad tidings of 
truth, and to stand for the principles of righteousness as 
exemplified by the dear Lord himself and by his servant, 
our beloved Brother Russell. 

Praying the Lord's continued blessing and direction for 
you, with increasing supplies of wisdom from above (Jas. 
3:17), we are 

Your Brethren in Christ, 

The Port of Spain Ecclesia. — B. W. I, 

GOOD NEWS FOB COLPORTEURS 

Dear Friends: — 

We wish all the colporteurs could know how convenient 
it is to deliver in the country by Parcel Post, C. O. D.! We 
frequently find people in the rural districts who are interested, 
but who cannot pay cash. We now tell these, "We will take 
your order. What date will suit you? We will 'send the books 
by Parcel Post, C. O. D. You pay the mail-carrier, and 
he will send the money to us. You will have no trouble at 
all, and the money will be perfectly safe." Then on the date 
that suits them we mail the books at a cost of 5c for postage 
and 10c for C. O. B. A full set of Scripture Studies will 
cost no more for C. O. D. charge, and can be sent into the 
second postal zone for a few cents. 

Please let all the colporteurs know of this as soon as 


[6048] 


February 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(63-68) 


possible. It applies to small towns as well as to R. F. D. 
routes. We received several Money Orders one day recently. 
In love and service, J. & L. Hutchinson. — Pa. 

OUE LOVING CHIEF SHEPHERD CALLED HIM 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

We, the members of the Hatfield class, have unanimously 
voted to express hereby our heartfelt sympathy in the bereavement
 that has come to us, but particularly to you, 
through the death of our beloved Pastor. Nevertheless our 
sorrow is not unmingled with joy; for we firmly believe that 
what is our loss is his gain. We are also convinced that our 
loving Chief Shepherd, who has called our under-shepberd 
to his reward, is not only willing but abundantly able to use 
and direct other humble, loyal, willing hearts and heads 
from among our late Pastor's faithful coworkers, who will 
continue the work so grandly outlined by him before his departure
. May the all- surrounding love of our heavenly Father 
and our Elder Brother, with the assurance of their continued 
nearness, so encourage and strengthen your hearts that finally 
you may, like our Pastor, hear his "well done!" 

Yours in the hope of again greeting Brother Russell face 
to face, Hatfield Class. — Jamaica. 


XAST TRIBUTE OF BESPECT 
Dear Friends: — 

In memory and honor of our beloved Pastor Charles T. 
Russell, we wish to pay our last tribute of respect: 

Whereas, It has pleased our heavenly Father to call home 
our faithful and beloved Pastor, we cheerfully submit to him 
who is "too wise to err and too good to be unkind.'* 

We therefore tender our loving testimonial regarding him 
whose life was such a noble example and which was laid down 
in self-sacrifice in the interest of the truth and for us. 

Watertown Church. — N. Y. 
SPURRED TO GREATER EFFORT 

Dear Brethren: — 

The friends gathered here wish to convey to you a vote 
of sympathy. We are sure, that you will especially feel the 
loss of our dear Brother Russell, and we pray that the Lord 
will guide and direct all the efforts you may put forth in 
the harvest work. We trust, also that our dear brother's 
love and zeal may continue to spur us on to greater effort. 

May the Lord be with you! 

B arts olds wick Ecclesia. — England. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, K Y., MARCH 1, 1917 


No. 5 


PROCLAIMERS OF THE KINGDOM MESSAGE 

"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation ; that saith unto Zion, thy God reigneth ! ' '- 


Looking down through the corridors of the ages, and viewing
 the closing part of the Gospel age, the Prophet of the Lord 
wrote concerning that time in the words of our text. The 
Gospel age opened with the clarion notes of the Master announcing
, "The kingdom of heaven is at handl" The King was 
then upon the earth ; but before he could attain to the glorified 
condition and assume the authority of his great office he must 
suffer, die and rise again. So those who compose the members 
of his body must likewise suffer and die and rise from the 
dead before the kingdom will be fully in operation. Throughout
 the Gospel age, therefore, the body members have been in 
course of preparation, and many Scriptures teach thiat at the 
close of the age those remaining in the flesh to finish the work 
would be especially honored by the Lord. 

"FEET MEMBERS" OF THE MYSTICAL CHRIST 
St. Paul, in addressing the Corinthian church, uses a human
 body to illustrate The Christ, saying, "For as the body 
is one and hath many members, and ail the members of that 
body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ." (1 Oor. 
12:12-27) The Apostle calls attention to the importance of 
each part of the body, and the office that each performs. In 
another place he says, "He (Jesus) is the Head of the body, 
the church; who is the beginning, the first-born from the 
dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence." 
(Colossians 1:18) The Head, Christ Jesus, was born first, 
and it follows, therefore, that the last members of the body 
to be born would properly be designated "feet members." 

Hence the Prophet Isaiah refers prophetically to these last 
members of the body, who would participate in the glorious 
privilege of announcing the glad tidings on the earth. He describes
 them as "beautiful." Evidently their beauty does not 
appeal to the world. Their special beauty is not a beauty of 
the flesh ; they are beautiful by reason of the sweet, unselfish, 
sacrificing spirit manifested. Their great desire is to announce
 the King and the blessings which his kingdom will 
bring. 

TTie word "mountains" in the text symbolically represents 
kingdoms. At this time we see the kingdoms of the earth 
torn with the strife of the most horrible war in history. Ejrery 
nation is threatened with disruption. All peoples desire lasting
 peace, yet know not how to obtain it. Everywhere men's 
hearts are failing them for fear because of what they now see 
upon the world, and they are fearful that even worse things 
will come. "All faces gather blackness." — Joel 2:6. 

The Prophet Isaiah contrasts this condition of distress 
amongst the peoples of the earth with the condition and work 
of the "feet members" of the body of Christ, and with ecstasy 
exclaims, How beautiful are the feet of the Messiah now engaged
 in publishing peace, in giving to the«world the message 
that will bring a lasting peace; who bring good tidings of good; 
who are bringing to the dying race the sweet message of salvation
 ! Truly wonderful is the position occupied by every spiritbegotten
 one who in this harvest time fully appreciates the 
privilege of serving the Lord! These are coworkers with the 
present King, engaged in a special sense in proclaiming the 


-Isaiah 62:7. 

closing message of the age — "The kingdom of heaven is at 
hand'^fche King is present! 

It has been the privilege of the Watch Toweb Bible asd 
Tract Society since its organization to send out brethren designated
 as pilgrims, or lecturers, to proclaim this glorious 
message to those who have hearing ears. The Lord gave the 
harvest message to the Laodicean church, the faithful ones 
of whom compose the "feet members" of Christ; and he gave it 
through his especially chosen servant, according to his promise. 
(Matthew 24:45-47) All. the "feet members*' who are now 
engaged in proclaiming this precious message received their 
enlightenment by partaking of the "food" which the Lord sent 
through his chosen servant. The Watch Toweb unhesitatingly 
proclaims Brother Russell as "that faithful and wise servant" 
He delivered the message faithfully, finished his course and has 
now entered into his reward. Through him the Lord gave to 
the church the message that is so essential to each one who in 
this harvest time would win the glorious prize. 

We cannot too strongly urge upon the pilgrim brethren, 
therefore, that they emphasize to the various classes the necessity
 of adhering strictly to the message which the Lord gave 
through this chosen channel. Any departure from tihe message 
at this time must necessarily be displeasing to the Lord and 
work a detriment to those thus turning aside to accept some 
other message or scheme. 

The pilgrims have the privilege of opening the way. It 
has been found necessary for others to follow up the pilgrim 
work, that those who have manifested some interest in present 
truth may be encouraged to greater growth in knowledge. 
THE COLPOKTEUE WORK 
The Society has long recognized the importance of the colporteur
 work. If we were to draw comparisons, we would say 
that the colporteurs do the most important work of all, because
 they are bearing this message of glad tidings of peace 
and good will in a form that enables the one receiving it to 
feed upon it in the quiet of the home, and thus to grow thereby. 
The colporteurs, therefore, enjoy a wonderful privilege as 
coworkers with the Master in the field. The strongest of our 
pilgrim brethren are unable to deliver more than three lectures 
daily, whereas the colporteur who places only one volume in 
the hands of the interested thereby preaches many discourses, 
and in such connected and convenient form that they may be 
referred to as often as desired. The colporteurs are in no sense 
book agents, but are truly ambassadors of the Lord, delivering 
his message of reconciliation to the world. It is our desire to 
encourage the colporteurs all we can to be as diligent as ever, 
and rather to speed up than to become faint or weary in their 
minds. 

At this time the majority of people have some ready money 
and are anxious to know the meaning of the great distress 
among the nations. The colporteurs, by placing the Scripture 
Studies before them, thus bring that which will fully answer 
their questions and satisfy their desires. We hope to hear of 
more becoming active in the colporteur field by Spring time, 
and trust that they may labor with diligence before the great 


[6049] 


(68-69) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BXOOKLYN, N. Y. 


night of darkness, when no man can work, fully settles down 
upon the world. Truly the harvest is white, but the laborers 
are few! 

THE PASTORAL WOBX 

t We do not always have the foresight that we desire. Often 
mistakes are made unwittingly. The Lord permits such experiences
 to teach us lessons. It now appears that there is 
danger of the colporteur and pastoral work conflicting at times, 
whereas these two important branches should be a great aid 
one to the other. 

A man who attempts to walk and steps with one foot on 
the other must necessarily impede his progress. The "feet 
members" that go forth to declare the message of Messiahs 
kingdom would not look so beautiful if one foot interfered with 
the progress of the other. 

During the time Brother Russell was with us as our leader, 
several hundreds of classes of Associated Bible Students elected 
him Pastor, and the Pastoral work was under his direct supervision
 as shepherd of these congregations. lie afterwards 
thought well to suggest this work to all the classes, limiting it 
for a time to the sisters in the congregations. 

After Brother Russell's death, the Society continued the 
name "Pastoral Work" because of having no more appropriate 
name. It was not until about this time that the work was fully 
developed, and the advantages and disadvantages of the first 
outlines could be properly weighed. It has taken time to get 
the work well in hand, and we are convinced that it is now 
no longer wise to limit this work to the sisters, but rather that 
the responsibility should rest upon all the congregation, that 
all should have a voice in it. 

As has already been advised, our new President has 
counseled against the electing of pastors by any of the ecclesias, 
believing that in view of Brother Russell's peculiar relationship
 to the church and out of deference to his memory, none 
should attempt to fill the place of Pastor to the church at this 
time. It is therefore impossible to carry out fully Brother 
Russell's original ideas about the Pastoral work ; hence it becomes
 necessary to make some changes, that the work may 
be conducted efficiently and in harmony with all other branches. 

When a general dies, the members of his .personal staff cease 
to be officers in that capacity; so when Brother Russell died 
those who had been selected as lieutenants under his direction, 
technically speaking, were no longer officers. Acting upon this 
situation, and with perfect harmony, at a business meeting held 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle by the New York City congregation, 
a lieutenant and other officers for the New York Ecclesia were 
elected by the congregation. 

It is now the suggestion of the Society that this course 
be followed by the classes everywhere; or, if it is deemed better
, those holding the positions mi^it resign and the congregation
 proceed as soon as convenient to elect a lieutenant and 
other officers necessary to conduct the work; or, if thought 
wise, reelect the present incumbents. 

The lieutenant elected should then communicate at once 
with the Society's Office at Brooklyn and she will receive from 
the Office assignment of territory and further instructions. All 
territory will be assigned by the Brooklyn Office, but when assigned
 will be districted by the local Lieutenant. The territory
 for both the colporteurs and the pastoral workers being
 assigned from this Office, as is now done in Greater New 
York, will avoid any possible confusion. The pastoral work 
will then be carried on practically as before, with the exceptions
 herein stated. 

BOOK-LOANING FEATURE ONLY INCIDENTAL 
The book-loaning feature of the pastoral work instituted 
by. Brother Russell was originally intended by him to be merely 
incidental and not to be a prominent part of the work; the 
chief part of the work being to call on those who already have 
the books, to interest them in reading, to encourage them to 
attend Chart Talks, and then to organize classes for Berean 
Bible Study. 

Indiscriminate loaning of books in territory where colporteurs
 are canvassing must of necessity be detrimental to 
the colporteur work. Thus one foot would interfere with the 
other, impeding progress. This we all desire to avoid. We 
therefore ask the friends to adopt the following . course, especially
 in cities or towns where colporteurs are at work, in order 
that we may not hinder the colporteurs and yet may still grant 


to the pastoral workers the same privileges they have heretofore
 enjoyed. 

OBDEB OP PBOCEDTJEB 

Al] territory for both the colporteur and the pastoral work 
will be assigned by^the Society, but one map will be used, and 
that the map now used for the colporteur work. The colporteurs
 will first canvass the territory; afterwards the pastoral
 workers will follow in the same territory. Both colporteurs
 and pastoral workers receiving their assignments from 
the Society, there can he no conflict and no interference with 
each other's work. 

When following in the territory that has been colporteured, 
should the pastoral workers find those who desire to purchase 
books, the colporteur still being in the city and working in 
any part thereof, should be sent to that person with the books 
for sale. The pastoral workers should sell no books whatever 
in cities where colporteurs are at work. The names of those 
who have purchased books from the colporteurs should be furnished
 to the pastoral workers, who will call upon suoh and endeavor
 to interest them in reading and in attending Oh art 
Talks, as heretofore outlined in The Watch Tower. After 
the city has been gone over in this manner, the colporteurs 
might then go again over the same territory covered by the 
pastoral workers, this time selling the Manna and Dbama 
iScENARio, and again the pastoral workers could follow the colporteurs
, and thus keep in touch with the people who are 
manifesting interest. The only possible way to avoid one department
's interfering with another is to have everything managed
 from the Society office at Brooklyn. 

As to the loaning of books, this can be done to those who 
•had a chance to purchase from the colporteur, but had not 
done so. Our experience is that one who buys a book is much 
more likely to read it than one who borrows it. We therefore 
would not encourage the loaning of the Studies in the Scriptures
 where this would in any wise interfere with the colporteur
 work. 

VOLUNTEER WOBK 

Where it is possible, it is always better that the volunteer 
workers follow, in the district, both the colporteur and pastoral
 workers. If it is not found practicable to follow the 
pastoral work, the volunteer work should come in between 
the colporteur and pastoral work, thus stirring up as much interest
 as possible in the minds of those in the community. 

The volunteer matter is very valuable. I>o not waste it. 
We earnestly recommend volunteers, where it is possible, to 
Ting the door-bell and hand in the paper to some one in the 
household, or to put it in the doorway. Throwing them ou the 
street, or placing them on empty car seats, or on the ground 
near mail-boxes is not wise. Let us keep in mind t£e importance
 of the message and the necessity of putting it where 
it will do the most good. 

OoncernSng the selection of the district, the canvassers, the 
canvass to be given, and the Chart Talks, we refer the friends 
to the November 1, 1016, Watch Tower. Since the pastoral 
work will henceforth be under the supervision of the entire 
congregation and not under the sisters alone, it would be proper 
that the entire congregation select the speakers; or, in harmony 
with the custom we have oft-times followed, the selection of 
the speakers may be delegated bv the congregation to the elders, 
who will choose those best qualified to deliver such talks. 

We hope that every ecclesia of Associated Bible Students 
in the land will at once organize for the pastoral work, elect 
their lieutenant and have that lieutenant communicate at once 
with the Office of the Society at Brooklyn for instructions and 
the assignment of territory. The Society will see to it that 
this assignment does not in any manner conflict with the colporteur
 assignment, but that it works in conjunction therewith. 

Let us arouse ourselves to the importance of the hour, dear 
brethren. The opportunities are great; the laborers are few. 
The Lord has been pleased to place in the bands of each of us 
the wonderful privilege of publishing the message of salvation. 
As we go forth in the field of labor, let us be inspired with the 
words of Jehovaih spoken through the Prophet: "How beautiful
 upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringetn good 
•tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of 
good ; that publisheth salvation ; that saith unto Zion, thy God 
reigneth! . . — Isaiah 52:7. 


PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

In the early part of January the Board of Directors of the pauy. This contract was to be fully consummated by March 

\yATCH Toweb Bible and Tract SocrsTr entered into a condi- 31 next. 

tional contract for the sale of the raoro-DBAMA of Creation As many friends throughout the country have since expressed 

with certain brethren who had organised the Hena Film Com* the feeling that the Society should retain the Bbama, it has 

[60501 


Maich 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(69-70) 


been mutually agreed by the Board of Directors of the Society
 and the Film Company that the contract of sale for it 
shall be cancelled, and it has been cancelled, the Societt to retain
 the possession and ownership of the Photo-Dbama of 
Creat/ton. 

It is fully and mutually understood by all the parties that 
the cancellation of this contract is without prejudice to any. 

We take this occasion to announce that the Mena Film 
Company is entirely independent from the Watch To web Bible 


and Tbact Society, is not financed by the Society, and the 
Society is not at all interested in it financially, but has the 
kindliest feeling toward all the brethren who are interested 
therein. The Film Company believes that it will produce an 
all- film exhibition which will be instrumental in teaching God's 
plan. 

The friends everywhere must exercise their own will and 
discretion in reference to subscribing for stock, as the Society 
will not attempt to influence them one way or another. 


THE V. D. M. QUESTIONS 

"And the things which thou didst hear from me through many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men, who will be competent 

to instruct others. "— -2 Timothy 2 :2— Diaglott. 

In March, 1915, a student in the Kentucky Wesleyan College
 wrote to us concerning the degree of V. D. M. He had 

read the second page of The Towek, and was deeply impressed 

by the following words which he had found in the second 

paragraph of the standing article on "This Journal and its 

Sacred Mission": 

"Our Berean Lessons are topical rehearsals or reviews of 

our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, 

and very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary 

degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister 

(V. D. M.), which ; translated into English, is Minister of the 

Divine Word." 

Consequently, he wrote to the Society asking that they inform
 him what would be necessary for him to do to merit this 

degree. In reply, he was informed that if he would read carefully
 six volumes of Scbiptube Studies, and then read them 

again to impress their lessons upon his mind and heart, and 

would then write us, we would submit to him a set of questions
, which, if he could answer correctly, would enable us to 

recognize him as a V. D. M. 

In March, 1916, the Society received the following letter 

from this student in the Wesleyan College: 

"I have been a Bible Student since January 4, 1915. 
I ordered a set of Studies in the Scbiptubes at that time 
and I have been very deeply interested in the books ever 
since. I am also a reader of The Watch Toweb, and I 
like it fine, especially its treatment of the International 
Sunday School lessons. I have just completed a careful 
reading of Studies in the ScbiptTjBES. I have read the 
entire set of six volumes twice, and I have carefully looked 
up and read each Scripture citation in the meantime. I 
have read several B, S. M.s also. I am now reading carefully
 twelve pages of the Studies each day, reading each 
Scripture citation as I go. I am consecrated to the Lord 
and his work. 

"It is wonderful what a fine spiritual atmosphere Pastor
 Russell leads one into, if one will read carefully and 
prayerfully his Studies in the Scbiptubes. This fact 
emphatically contradicts the many false and slanderous reports
 made by the modern Pharisees in their ridiculous 
and absurd attempts to assassinate his character. I 
never saw Mr. Russell in my life, but I would stake life 
itself on the above statement I have made. Such a character
 as he is painted to be could not create any such impression
 on people in general as he invariably does. You 
are seized with confidence and assurance that vou are getting
 the truth, presented honestly and sincerely, from the 
very moment you commence reading Studies in the Scbiptubes
. In reading any other literature you get a little 
truth — much error; you lose your confidence, and very 
soon you are entangled in a maze of tradition and rank 
foolishness, which is absolutely revolting to one who has 
the truth. Well did our Master declare, *My people perish 
for lack of knowledge.* 

"I request that you send me your series of questions 
required to be answered by a candidate for the degree of 
Verbi Dei Minister, and also any instructions pertaining 
thereto. .... I could write a book in praise of Studies 
in the Scbiptubes, but will now close, with love and respect
 for the Society and its beloved Pastor." 
As a result, the V. D. M. questions were prepared and sent 

to him, and his were the first answers received and filed. He 

made about 90%. It was then thought well to submit the 

list to the pilgrim brethren. Others requested them and afterwards
 they were sent to the elders, then to the colporteurs, and 

.subsequently to all who sent in requests for them. The pastoral 

workers are now asking for the questions and also many sisters 

who hesitated at first because of having the impression that 

the questions were intended for the elders only. The requests 

are now general, and the Committee is kept busy in trying to 
keep up with them. This has necessitated the formation of the 


V. D. M. Kept., which is endeavoring to serve the friends a* 
faithfully and expeditiously as they possibly can. They have 
regretted their inability to serve the friends as soon as requested
 in many instances, but by the Lord's ^race they have 
"stuck to it/' until now they are getting their heads pretty 
well above water. 

No doubt some of these papers were lost in the mails during
 the Holiday rush ; others were not signed by the writers or 
full address was omitted, so that there was no means of identifying
 them, or advising the writers; still others have failed to 
obtain the required 85%. We are reserving the failures for 
later treatment and advice. For these reasons many have not 
yet heard from their papers, whereas thousands have received 
reply and been made happy. Some of the letters of appreciation
 that we receive are truly refreshing and encouraging. In 
one instance a sister failed; but the Committee thought they 
could greatly encourage this saint by sending her another set 
of questions and advising her to try again. This was her 
reply: "Dearly Beloved Friends in Christ: WTien I saw our 
Secretary, she said, 'You are turned down on your questions.' 
I said, *I am thankful for that; I am going to start right next 
time.' So if I am not right, turn me down again. I make so 
many mistakes and blunders, but I know they are steppingstones
, and make me more careful. Dear friends, I love you 
dearly, and my heart is with you in this great harvest work. 
God bless you all! Pray for me," etc. 

Some have said that they thought the questions, when first 
they looked them over, were easy and elementary, but they 
found afterwards that the more they thought and prayed over 
them, the more important they appeared. We have many letters
 telling us bow much good the preparation of their answers 
to these questions has done them. To put these answers down 
in the right way, and to give appropriate references to the 
Scriptures and Dawns after each answer takes considerable 
time. Many have spent a whole day on them, and some two 
days* These h«ve seemed to receive the largest measure of 
blessing. 

One brother wrote us, after much prayer and study over 
them, that he considered these V. D. M. questions to be "The 
pulse of the church," and a great many have testified to the 
wisdom of Brother Russell in preparing and sending them out. 
No doubt they have helped to raise the standard of eldership 
in many instances. It has certainly endeared our hearts to 
the friends as the V. D. M. Committee has so generously and 
patiently gone over the papers and made brief reply. We would 
have preferred that each paper be answered separately and 
individually, but this would have taken a year or more, even to 
handle the thousands already received, and the Btream continues
 to flow in daily. 

Various friends have requested that we send them a list 
of the correct answers; but this would have interfered with 
the work proposed. We have invariably replied that it was the 
Society's intention, after most of the answers were in, to print 
a list of the correct answers in The Watch Toweb, so that all 
might have the benefit of them in the way of comparison, correction
, confirmation and refreshment. 

The V, D, M. and pastoral work were the two features of 
the harvest which the Lord impressed upon the mind of our 
beloved Brother and Pastor shortly before his departure. How 
wonderful and various have been the mutual blessings connected
 with both of them I It will be the Society's pleasure to 
serve the friends in connection with the V. D. M. questions 
until, in the Lord's providence, they shall cease to flow in. The 
answers will be kept on file for future reference. The Lord sees 
them. It is a fine witness for the truth. They reveal, among 
other things, how the Lord's spirit teaches many humble ones 
of earth far removed from the educational facilities of men. 
"Hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, 
and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them 
that love him?" 


[6051] 


JESUS THE BREAD OF LIFE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "I Am the Bread of Life," published in isaue of March 1, 1908, which please see.] 


THE KING COMETH! 


"See, the King in beauty cometh, 

He, thy long, long absent King; 
As the light of dawn he shineth, 
And his breath is that of spring 
From the night of darkness waking, 
Zion, lift thy voice and sing! 


"From the dust of ages rising, 
Put on all thine ancient might, 

For to thee the crown belongeth, 
And to thee the raiment bright — 

Of the coming age the glory, 

Of the ransomed earth the light." 


JESUS SAVES FROM SIN 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Ye Shall Be Free Indeed," published in issue of February 15, 1899, which pleas 

see.] 


AT THE TEMPLE-SUNDAY, FEB. 4 


For years Brother Russell made the first Sunday in each 
month an occasion for especially inviting the public to The 
New York Temple. Brother Russell was the speaker when at 
home, and the public responded generously to the invitation. 
Prior to The Temple meetings, the Brooklyn Academy of Muaie 
was used in a similar way, and it was often crowded and many 
turned away. Thousands thus heard the truth proclaimed for 
the first time, and many embraced it and are now rejoicing in 
its light. 

Since the death of Brother Russell it has been thought 
well to continue the practise of extending a special invitation 
to the public on the first Sunday of each month. The first effort
 in this direction was put forth for Sunday, February 4, 
Brother Rutherford being the speaker. Advance announcements 


were to the effect that Judge Rutherford, successor to Pastor 
Russell as President of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
, would be the speaker in The Temple at 3 P. M. The results
 are considered such as to justify mention in the columns 
of The Watch Tower. The topic was, "Why Do the" Nations 
War?" About 1,600 gave earnest attention for almost two 
hours, while bo me were turned away. About 135 address cards 
were handed in requesting information along the lines of systematic
 Bible study. 

Brother Rutherford will not speak at The Temple again 
until Sunday, April 1, at 3 P. M, having started Thursday 
evening, February 8, to fill appointments at I>«nver and on 
the Pacific Coast. He will, however, return to Brooklyn about 
March 15. 


HARVEST WORK 


"I thank thee, Lord, for using me 
For thee to work and speak; 
However trembling is the hand, 
The voice however weak; 

"For those to whom, through me, thou hast 
Some heavenly guidance given; 
For some, it may be, saved from grief, 
And some brought nearer heaven. 


"Oh, honor higher, truer far, 

Than earthly fame could bring, 
Thus to be used in work like this, 
So long, by such a King! 

"A blunted sword, a rusted spear, 

Which only he could wield ; 
A broken sickle in his hand, 
To reap his harvest-field!" 


LETTERS OF DEEP INTEREST 


AN ITALIAN BE OTHER BEFORE THE MILITARY TBXBTOAL 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

I will give you a summary of the trial which took place 
at Alessandria, and in which our beloved Brother Kemigio 
Cuminetti gave a fine witness of hia faith before the Military 
Tribunal. 

Sister Fanny Luigi and myself were present at the trial, 
and were happy to have the privilege of supporting with our 
presence our Brother's confession of faith. The President 
questioned him long without finding him in a fault. Here is 
the summary in a few words: 

President: "Accused, be careful! You are before the 
Tribunal, and your position is grave. It seems as if you have 
a desire to laugh at the situation." 

Brother Cuminetti: "I cannot change the expression of 
my face. My heart is so full of joy that my face reflects its 
cheerfulness." 

President: "Why did you not put on the uniform? And 
why did you refuse repeatedly to serve the Fatherland ?" 

Cuminetti: "If it were not for that, I would not be here; 
for I have eommitted nothing reprehensible, except that I 
have refused to put on a uniform which is not suitable for the 
sons of God, whom I serve. In like manner I also, refused to 
wear the distinguishing mark in the factory in which I was 
working, because that little star represented war and hate; 
while the distinguishing mark of the sons of God is peace, and 
love for their neighbor." 

President: "Is it true that in the prison of Cuneo you 
divested yourself of the uniform and remained only in your 
underwear ?" 

Cuminetti: (f Yes; it is perfectly true. Three times I was 
dressed by force; and three times I undressed myself; for I 
was unwilling to wear a uniform which to me implied hate 
for my neighbor. By so doing I did not intend to revolt against 


doing good to others. On the contrary, if I had one hundred 
lives, I would give all my blood to the last drop for my neighbor
's sake. Give me any kind of work, even the most ignominious
 and abject, to do and I will very willingly adapt myself 
to it, to do all that I can to uplift others. But NEVER will 
I give the least help toward doing evil or any thing to injure 
my fellow-men, whom God says I should love and not hate,** 

President: "What schooling have you had?*' 

Cuminetti: "That is of little importance; I have studied 
the Bible." 

President: "I have asked you what schooling you have had. 
Answer that which is asked you." 

Cuminetti : "I have attended day school for three years, 
and night school for two years. But I repeat that this is of 
little importance in comparison to what I have learned in 
studying the precious divine revelation." 

President: "Have you passed the military visit!" 

Oumminetti : "Yes, I was visited three times." 

President: "It is a pity that you have made the acquaintance
 of some persons [Sisters Luigi and Cerulli] who have 
started you upon a wrong road. How long have you studied 
this book which you call the Bible ?" 

Cuminetti: "It is now six years that I have studied the 
Book ; and I am sorry that I did not know it long before/' 

President: "Who teaches you this new religion?" 

Cuminetti: "God himself teaches his own. The elders of 
the Bible Students help me to understand it; but God alone 
opens tiie eyes of our understanding." 

President: "Do you know that your refusal to render obedience
 is a very grave offense? Are you fully aware of what you 
are going against?" 

Cuminetti: "Yes, yes! I know very well. But I am ready 
for all that may come, even to being shot down. I cannot 


(72-76) 


[6052] 


Makcb 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(76-77) 


break the covenant that I have made with the God of the Bible, 
whom I adore/' 

The President then gave the word to the barrister, who 
asked the President to condemn Ouminetti to four years and 
four months of solitary confinement. 

The advocate who was defending our Brother then arose 
and gave a wonderful testimony to the exemplary conduct 
of Ouminetti, who had worked for six consecutive years in 
the laboratories without having a person say one word against 
him. The lawyer said: "Remigio Ouminetti has refused to 
wear the distinguishing mark of war because he already wore 
the distinguishing mark of the sons of peace, of joy. He has 
not wished to act contrary to his conscience. If he had worn 
that distinctive mark, he would have retained his position, 
been relieved from conscription and able to earn a good living 
for his family. But he preferred the way of sacrifice, fully 
conscious of what his refusal would mean to him. Calmly and 
serenely he withdrew from all. Cuminetti's case is a unique 
one in Italy; and we ought to admire hira. He read in the 
Bible that God commands, *Do not kill/ and he does not wish 
to kill. He is an apostle of love. He is in full possession of 
his mental faculties; he is neither silly nor mad. The spirit 
of the Bible has taken possession of him, and makes him act 
against his personal interests." 

The judges went out, and after five minutes returned and 
read the sentence: "For his refusal of obedience to the King 
and to the laws of the nation Ouminetti is condemned to three 
years and two months of detention/* Ouminetti then rendered 
thanks with one of his sweetest smiles* 

When the President asked him whether he had anything 
else to add to his defense, he answered: "I would have many 
things to say on the subject of God's love and on his plan of 
salvation for mankind/' The President was annoyed, and said, 
"That is not what I asked. We have already heard much on 
this subject. I asked whether you have anything to add to 
your defense/' With a smiling face Ouminetti answered, "I 
Tepeat what I have said ; namely, that I am ready to give my 
life for my neighbor's sake; but that I will not move a finger 
to help evil or to injure mankind, even if I myself should be 
shot." 

The trial is over. Sister Fanny and myself had the privilege
 of talking for about fifteen minutes with our beloved 
Brother, who has with great courage and strength stood on 
the side of God. All admired him. Even the judges and his 
accusers were astonished at his appearance — humble, but at 
the same time filled with the courage which the sons of light 
possess because they know to kneel only before the Lord, who 
is worthy of all adoration and absolute obedience. 

At present our beloved Brother is in Gaeta, <a beautiful 
place, with sunshine and the charming beauties of nature. 
He writes letters which exult in love and joy, saying that it 
does not seem like a prison to him. All certainly love him-. 
Indeed, for the sons of God walls of stone are not a prison; 
nor are railings and bars a cage. Under iron and stones the 
innocent soul finds pacific heritage. What is scorn, where 
there is no fault? Virtue despises the contempt of men; and 
unmerited punishment is a shining proof for the innocent, and 
accumulates upon their head a great weight of glory. 

Receive, beloved Brethren, and all the beloved ones in the 
lord, most affectionate greetings from all of your Italian 
brethren, who are rejoicing so much in seeing that their deliverance
 is drawing nigh. 

Your sister in the good fight of faith, 

Mrs. Glaba Cerotli. — Italy* 

A VOICE FROM AN ENGLISH PRISON FAITHTTTLHESS TO THE 
PRINCE OF PEACE 


My Deab Brother : — 

Greetings! Kindly excuse my taking the liberty of writing 
to you, and in pencil, too; but I felt I would like to do so, 
as you have taken such a brotherly and energetic interest in 
the cause for which we gladly suffer. 

Surely our beloved Master, w»ho endured such intensity of 
sorrow for our sakes, is worthy of all ths loving loyalty we 
have for him! 

I am indeed greatly comforted in my light affliction, by 
meditation upon the sources of the strength whereby, the ''Man 
of Sorrows" could so cheerfully and patiently endure! 

What a wonderful Savior is our Jesus! The very thought 
of him is a balm to our souls. 

I do not think I knew him half so well as I have done 
since this stand for principle, and the more we know him, 
the more we love him ; and the more we love him, the easier 
it is to "suffer with him." 

I wonder if we are sufficiently grateful to our dear Father 
for this magnificent gift of his Son. 


I am still waiting for my court-martial, this being the 
fourth week of my detention in safe-custody. I like that expression
, "safe-custody," for I am indeed in the safe custody 
of him in whom I have believed, and who is able and willing 
to keep that which I have committed unto him, against euch 
a time as I shall awake in his likeness. 

After the court-martial, I understand it is to be prison. 
What a privilege, dear brother, to be able to follow the steps 
of the heroes of the past! I never thought I should be so 
honored. I do pray that I may be a brilliant witness during 
this dark era. 

I can assure you, dear brother, that the chief battle is not 
to endure this detention, but to maintain the spirit of the 
Miaster at the same time. However, I find this possible by 
letting Christ's Word dwell in me richly, and by constant 
petition to the throne of grace. Whilst I take advantage of 
these privileges, naught can shake my sure repose! 

Ours is a noble cause! Our I. B. S. A. is an honorable 
movement! Its doctrines are more purifying and elevating 
than those of any other. Its founder was the most wonderful 
Biblical Expositor, and loyal disciple of Christ, in modern 
times. 

It is no small wonder, then, that the members of this 
covenant endeavor by God's grace to maintain such a glorious
 principle! 

May we ever display the banner of love, which the Lord 
hath given us, in the cause of the truth! 

There are many at Lancaster Gate, and in the Bible House, 
with whom I am not acquainted ; nevertheless, being one family 
in God, I forward through you to them my Christian love; 
and of course a goodly share for yourself. 

Praying the Father's richest blessing to be constantly with 
you and yours, believe me to be, dear brother, 

Yours fraternally, in bonds for Christ's sake, 

Joseph H. Shabman. — England. 

"IN NON-COMBATANT CAMP" 

Deab Bbethken of The Watch To web:— < 

This is my third letter to Brooklyn; but I had to destroy 
the other two, owing to the fact that the news in them had 
become out of date before they were posted. As you may 
guess, we have plenty of work to do every day. Up to the 
present the military authorities have treated us very fairly j 
and I see no reason for expecting a harder life than we are 
now experiencing. I have been in the Non-Combatant Corps 
since last* April, and have enjoyed prettv good health. 

No doubt you have received many letters from brethren 
acting as total resisters; i. e., those who refuse to comply 
with any military orders. But as there appear to be very 
few who have accepted the provision of the N. C, 0., I am 
writing to give you as much information as I can under the 
freedom of speech permitted by the censor. Only one member
 of the I. B. S. A. has found a way into this 2d Eastern 
Co., a brother from near London. We are able to see each 
other at almost any time. 

The (fellowship in general is excellent in many respects; 
and we have many a talk and helpful discussion, which you 
can imagine are often very interesting. The greater part of 
this Company is made up of Plymouth Brethren; the remainder
 is composed of many other denominations, and includes 
some atheists. I consider that my religion has already been 
through a severe test by the talks, criticisms and enticements 
that I have had ; and I feel so very happy that I have thus far 
come through stronger and more in love with my religion than 
ever before. So I can say that I feel more than ever grateful
 for the wonderful enlightenment which has come from God 
to me through our dear Pastor Russell, especially in regard 
to the philosophy of the ransom and to the clear, beautiful 
way he has revived the promises and the verity of the Bible 
itself. 

Our daily routine here is, on the average, thus: Awakened 
at 5 A. M.; ^breakfast at 5:45; parade for marching off to 
work at 6:15 or 6:30 (walk two miles each way) ; lunch at 
9:15-9:30. For the midday meal we have an hour. At 5:30 
or so we arrive back in Camp, when we have a full meal, Then 
the evening is free. 

As regards health our position here could not be better; 
for we aTe on the top of a high hill with agricultural ground 
around us and with a fine view of the sea, which is about 
two miles away. The work we have to do is always in the 
way of road repairing, loading and unloading wagons and 
traveling on them. Recently we have been put at building. 

I have seen many of the total resisters who come out 
here. On the whole I think that the newspaper reports about 
them are fairly correct. We pull along with the combatant 
regiments remarkably well ; and on taking an all-around survey 


[6053] 


(77-78) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N\ Y. 


I can easily see that we are being especially looked after from 
above. I have evidences in my diary; and after the war I 
shall be able to speak more freely for and against the military. 
With very much love and prayers from my wife and from 
Your brother in Christ, 

IT. M. Irwin, — ~Now in France. 

WISH TO OOKTHfUE WITH US 
Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

Though our hearts are sad at the loss of our dear Brother 
Russell, yet we rejorce that he has gone to his glorious reward. 

The Loveland class wish you to know that we intend to 
continue with you in the harvest work, asking God's richest 
blessing on our co-operation, and remembering you as ever in 
our daily prayers, Loveland Church. — Colo. 

A VOICE FROM PARIS ECCLESIA 
Excellent Brethren of The Watch Tower: — 

We learned of the departure beyond Jordan of our great 
friend, noble brother and revered pastor, C. T. Russell, almost 
a month after the events which occurred in the days just preceding
 October 31st last. 

Having been prevented earlier, through stress of circumstances
, from mingling our tears with yours in a solemn 
tribute to the memory of God's illustrious messenger to the 
modern Laodiceans, we then thought of immediately sending
 a word of comfort, brotherly love and encouragement 
to the dear family at Bethel, and to all those who have been 
favored of the lx>rd, through him, with the grand mission 
of carrying on the harvest work at Brooklyn Headquarters, 

But as a few weeks only separated us from our general 
assembly at the close of the year, we postponed until then 
the sending of our message, in order that it might have more 
weight and solemnity. We consider that the higher expression
 of our sentiments, permitted at this better opportunity, 
would not be too lofty for fittingly honoring the memory of 
the beloved Pastor, who himself honored us so much and so 
well during his life and by it. 

It would be idle for us at this late time to shed perfumes 
on his ashes, for, as he said once in The Watch Tower, "The 
flowers adorning the graves of the loved ones emit no retroactive
 fragrance back upon the pathway which they trod." 

Nevertheless, we are privileged to bring to the household 
of faith, all vibrating as they are with unalterable love for 
the Lord Jesus, the witness of our faithfulness, expressed as 
follows : 

As best we could, and from the very bottom of our hearts, 
we manifested to Brother Russell, during his life, our high appreciation
 of his instructions to us 5 in the Lord's name; for 
our recognition of his being "that servant" wa3 not limited 
to words only. The more we. grew in knowledge the more increased
 was our joy and willingness to abide by the least of 
his saE&cious, prudent and. forceful a4vice, drawn from the 
heavenly source \ and we attribute to this close and reasonable
 application of his methods of study and teaching, as found 
especially in Vol. o, the individual and collective prosperity of 
our dear Ecclesia. 

We believe we have in this way honored, by our obedience 
to the Lord, his faithful representative, and we desire to 
pledge ourselves before the li>rd to honor the blessed memory
 of that "faithful servant," by conveying the saintly love 
we had for him, together with our zeal, efforts and appreciation
, unto the beloved brethren separated by God for the continuance
 of the "Father's business," heretofore entrusted to 
our dear brother and Pastor, C. T. Russell, now gone to his 
reward. 

In token of our loyalty, the contents of the alabaster box 
of our hearts are- overflowing with precious oil "compounded 
after the art of the apothecary" (Exod, 30:25) — that box 
which we could not break on October 31st last — and are now 
humbly poured at your feet, excellent brethren. 

We enter the year 1917 resolving anew to faithfully stand 
with you and like you, cost what it may — to stand by the 
holy covenant of sacrifice we have made with God and By His 
grac*. We wish you all to be of good cheer, and assure you 
also of our fervent prayers that you may continue to "cry 
aloud" (Isaiah 58:1) upon the walls of Zion, in these last 
days of the Cnurch in the 'flesh; "Prepare to: meet thy God, 
Israer!"-^Amos 4:14. 

We bejieve that the death of our dear Pastor finds its true 
meaning in this supreme appeal, which will be heeded by all 
"who have an ear to hear what the Spirit saith, unto the 
churches" {Rev. 3:13), and whose ardent desire is to see its 
realization. 

We salute here the memory of Brother Russell, and all the 
members of the Elijah body, who are awaiting with us the time 


for entrance into the realms of God's immortal glory. 
"The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all!" 
The Ecclesia of Paris. — France, 

CONTINUED COOPERATION AND PRAYERS 
Dear Brethren: — 

The Altoona Ecclesia by a unanimous vote have expressed 
their determination, by divine aid, to continue their assistance 
and support in the dissemination of the Glad Tidings. You will 
have our continued prayers; and we hope that we may share in 
yours, in order that we may all come off" victorious by his grace. 

With kindest Christian love, Altoona Ecclesia. — Pa. 

PILGRIM VISITS, ETC. 
Dear Co-Laborers ■. — 

As a class, we want a little advice. We are informed that 

Brother A expects to go to Henderson, N< C. in about 

two months, and if we will pay his expenses, he will stop with 

us. Also we had a letter from Brother 33 yesterday 

from Henderson, N. C, speaking of his taking similar trips — 
expenses to be paid by the class he visits — offering to stop 

with us. Also we heard recently from Brother W , who 

together with two sisters shows the Drama. He wants to come 
here and to the neighboring places and show the Drama, we 
bearing his expenses, etc. 

Now in each of these cases please advise us aa a class 
whether to use any money we may have for the Lord's cause 
in these ways or whether we should send it direct to the Society
. We are very grateful to have two pilgrims booked for 
our place in a little over a month ; and rejoice in the blessings 
thus derived. Please let us hear from you in regard to this 
matter at your earliest convenience, as aome of these letters, 
or rather all, are awaiting our decision. 

We desire in these and all matters to do what is pleasing 
to the Lord, and to use the little (money we can spare for 
spiritual things to the best purpose, 

The Class. — Va. 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society sends out 
pilgrim brethren regularly at its expense to serve the brethren
. The classes served are not requested nor expected to 
provide any expense outside of entertainment, all the traveling
 expenses being paid by the Society, Brethren who travel 
about the country and offer their services to classes, provided 
the classes pay their railroad, and other expenses, are not doing 
so under the the direction nor with the approval of the Society
. It is entirely contrary to the policy of the Society for 
brethren to solicit funds from the friends to pay their expenses 
or for any other purpose. We heartily disapprove of such 
course. If any brethren have the time for serving the friends 
and request the Society to provide for them a route, and the 
Society is of the opinion that they are competent to serve and 
that ft is advisable for them to serve in such capacity, an assignment
 will be made and the class notified in the regular 
order. 

Our advice to the brethren is- that they do not agree to pay 
the expenses of any brother who offers to come and serve 
them ; but that all requests for pilgrim visits be made by the 
friends to the Society direct, and the Society will provide for 
service in the manner it has heretofore done. In this we are 
following the policy adopted and carried out by Brother 
Russell from the time of the Society's organization until his 
death. 

The Society attempts to arrange the pilgrim visits in such 
a way that they will in no wise conflict, and with the least expense
 to everyone. 

LOVE AKD COOPERATION ASSURED 
Dear Brethren: — 

We wish to assure you of the determination of the Milwaukee
 class to remain loyal to the truth, and of our desire 
to cooperate heartilv with the brethren at Brooklyn who we 
feel are now directing the harvest work. As you may perhaps
 know, immediately upon hearing of the death of our beloved
 Pastor, we met together and voted to support loyally 
the dear ones at Brooklyn in the continuance of the work yet 
left to be done, and wired you to that effect. We think, however
, it will bear repetition, and «k> again we want to assure 
you of our love and cooperation in every way possible. 

Praying the Lord's continued blessings upon your effort* to 
serve- Him and his cautt, 

Your brethren in Christ, Milwaukee Ecclesia* — Wis. 

HONORARY ELDER AKD COUNSELOR 

Bejjoved Brethren; — 

On the occasion of our midweek prayer, praise a*id testimony
 meeting we had a season of prayer, especially remembering
 our dear President, ajitf those closely connected with. 


[6054] 


March 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


OS -79) 


him, at the Bethel home. The friends take this opportunity 
of expressing their loyalty and love to those who, we believe, 
the dear Lord has been pleased to appoint to continue the work 
of spreading the glorious news of the kingdom, and to say 
further, that the class was unanimous in its Election of our 
dear Brother Rutherford as Counselor and Honorary Elder 
for this term. 

Vours in the Master's service, 

L0NT>U5 (O^T.) Ecclesia. 

ISCXLATION MAKES ONE SYMPATHETIC 

Deably Beloved Bbethken: — 

Some time ago I made the Vow my own. In 19*10 I first 
read Vol. I, Studies in the Scriptubes. I read the entire 
volume in two nights, and completed the second reading of it 
within the week. In six months I had read the entire six 
volumes twice. The Morning Resolve I find to be a great 
help. Sometimes I repeat during the day some clause of it 
which especially appeals to me. 

Among others I have been affected by the "lengthened 
time." I gave up my situation as teacher, also sold some 
property which brought me a small income; and, putting 
what I thought 1 could spare into the work, I apportioned 
off what I thought would supply ray needs until 1915, thinking 
that I was leaving a fair margin. I engaged in the follow-up 
work in connection with the Photo-Dbama and also as colporteur
. But not being able to pay expenses I remained, when 
need arose for me, in my old home, where I am still, although 
my people are all opposed to the truth and consider that I 
am deceived. My isolation has made me more sympathetic 
with those who, like myself, cannot fellowship with the brethren
. However, I have been privileged to speak to a few,, also 
to post tracts, etc. 

Daily I remember you, and your fellow -laborers in the 
harvest work, at the throne of heavenly grace, thanking the 
Lord for the labors of his servant and for the privilege of 
fellowship in his sufferings. 

Yours in the One Hope, .—Ireland, 

A LIFE OF IDEAL CHRISTIAN SEBVICE 
Deab Buethken of the Bethel Home: — 

The removal of our beloved Pastor from the earthly phase 
of his ministry brought to us here a great sorrow and some 
anxious thought respecting the future of the work. We have 
tried to realize how much keener must have been the sorrow 
and perplexity in the Bethel Home, How wonderfully the Lord 
is manifesting his continued care for his work! 

We rejoice for our beloved "brother that, as the victor 
crowned, no shafts of. the enemy can longer touch him. So 
noble himself, how such injustice moist have, pained hiuH But 
no murmur of complaint did he utter — onty solicitude fpr the 
Lord's flock and for the truth. What a picture of sublimity, 
pathos and heroism was his grapple with problems vital to 
the Church during those closing days of that preeiftus life Of 
ideal Christian service! 

We unite in loving sympathy and appreciation of the added 
responsibility which has come to you, and asaure yon that you 
are remembered in our prayers. We request that you pray for 
us wisdom, as we seek loyally to cooperate in whatever arrangements
 the Lord may make for the carrying on of his 
work. The Sydney Ecclesia. — Nova Scotia. 

"THE LITTLE IXOOK WILL NOT BE MISLED*' 

DEAfc Brethren: — ■ 

We realize with you that there is work still to be done in 
the harvest field; and we rejoice in the preparation which 
that faithful servant left for the continuance of The Watch 
Tower for our spiritual nourishment. (Isaiah 21:5, 6) Seeing 
with what carefulness Brother RusseU handled the Lord's 
work, we cannot do otherwise than remain loyal supporters of 
this work, until the symbolic waters are divided and we have 
done all that the Lord haw for us to do. 

So be assured that you have our prayers, our sympathy 
and our love as never before. We shall esteem it a privilege 
to cooperate with you as we may be able. Pray for us, that 
we may be faithful! 

Yours in the one hope of our calling in Christ Jesus, 

Evebett Ecclesia. — Wash. 

"EHDEAVOR TO TOttSH QTTB COTOSE WITH JOY 1 ' 

Beloved Brethren: — 

We are praying that the Lord's blessing may be upon you, 
giving you more of that wisdom which comes from above, 
that as a family we may still enjoy sweet communion with 
each other until our probation closes. 

We mourn with you the taking away of our dear Pastor 
from our midst, through whom we have 'been richly fed these 
many years. Although feeling his loss, our hearts rejoice 


to see that he was faithful unto death, instantaneously entering
 into his great reward, as promised in Revelation 14:13. 
Let us continue to do the Lord's will, that we also may finish 
our course with joy. 

Yours in Him, Camberwell Class. — Jamaica. 

SPARED AN IGNOMINIOUS DEATH 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

We desire as a family to express to you our united sympathy
 in the mutual loss we have sustained by the death of our 
beloved Pastor, and while assuring you that hi3 absence will 
be greatly felt by us, yet we realize it must necessarily be 
more keenly felt by you, who enjoyed his constant personal 
fellowship. 

While sorrowing, yet it ia not as those who have no hope, 
but rather we rejoice that he has entered into his well-earned 
rest, having faithfully laid down his life for the brethren. 

We thank our heavenly Father that his servant, who endured
 so much reproach for the truth, was spared an 
ignominious death, which we had anticipated at the hands of 
the "beast" and his "image" under the direction of the accuser 
of the brethren; also that he was counted worthy to escape 
those things coming upon the world. 

Our prayers ascend to the <*od of all grace, that he may 
richly endow you with wisdom and with the spirit of faithfulness
 to him, and that you may demonstrate this by loyally 
carrying out in every particular the instructions left by 
Brother Russell for the continuance of the work that remains. 

While we pray this for you, we also pray it for ourselves, 
and request your prayers for us to this same end.. With 
those thoughts in mind, we would here like to add that we 
shall endeavor, to the best of our ability* at all costs and 
in the strength of the Lord, to support the Society, and to 
uphold the truths it promulgates, by our hearty cooperation. 

We shall be glad to receive three forms of the V. D. M. 
Questions, which we trust we shall be able to answer satisfactorily
. With Christian love and greetings (Heb. 10:23; 
Rom. 15:4-6), 

Your brethren in the faith, 

Barbara, Mary and Richard Brumehl. — Scotland. 

ENEMIES OF THE TROTH CAN THROW ONLY DUST 
To the Dear Bethel Household: — 

I wish to add my testimony to the many testimonials you 
have received from the dear friends bo widely scattered. 

Our great chieftain has fallen. The firm yet gentle hand 
so long at the helm lies palsied. The loving heart whose 
e'very beat was one of sympathy, is stilled by the hand of 
death. Yet we sorrow not as those who have no hope. Let 
us, one and a&, resolve to 1 take -up the task where he dropped 
it, wd. with increased zeal and vigor carry on the glorious 
harvest work. 

The enemies of our beloved Pastor have made no *erious 
effort to answer his arguments,, but have found it easier to 
attack his character, thereby throwing du«t into the eyea of 
the people. Now, however, ail is changed, and the pastoral 
work is, I believe, destined to wake up the people as nothing 
else has done; and those who in the past have so complacently 
circulated the vile slanders against our beloved Pastor will 
have to face the more serious task of answering his arguments
. 

Beloved, be strong! The yesterdays are past, the present 
only is ours to labor; and if found faithful, the glorious 
after whiles will be ours, also, when we shall meet and greet 
our noble Leader. Yea, more; soon the voice of him "who 
spake "as never man spake" before shall speak back to life 
all our dear dead! 

Your brother in the one hope, 

C. A, Owen.— ^Indianapolis. 

"MAY HIS SPIRIT ANIMATE VSV* 

Beloved Brethren: — 

The news of our Pastor's death was a great surprise and 
shock to us, , but we were reminded of Rev. 14:13. We rejoiced
 to be with him here, may we have an increasing desire 
to greet him in his glorified estate! 

We wish to express to you our great appreciation of the 
character and work of our beloved Pastor, and to extend to 
you in this hour of mutual bereavement, our sincere Christian 
love and sympathy; for while we realize our great loss in his 
departure, you who were with him most and knew him beBt 
will mast keenly feel how good it was to have him with us ! 

We are very pleased to know that the affairs of the Society 
are so arranged that the work can ^o right on, and we will 
remember you daily at the throne Of heavenly grace, that 
the Lord's will may be done. May the spirit of our beloved 
Pastor animate us 'more and more to that same faithfulness 


[6055] 


(79-83) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


unto death, that when the time of our change Bhall come, we 
too may be ready ! 

Sincerely, your brethren, 

Associated Bible Students. — Rochester, A\ Y. 

KEEP HIS MEMOBY GREEN BY MOBE SELF-SACRIFICING 
SERVICE 
Deab Brethben: — 

We have heard from Brother Johnston of your loss, our 
loss and the loss to the whole world, in the death of our brother, 
Charles T. Russell. All of us loved him dearly. His selfsacrificing
 labors on our behalf have been an incentive, and 
have given us a desire to follow him as he followed the Master. 
We have been led by him to the presence of the God of love ; 
the Studies in the Scriptures have shown each of us a new 
Bible. Some of our number have known him in the flesh, and 
have a fond remembrance of the radiant happiness that seemed 
to fill his life. 

Words seem almost inadequate to express our regard for 
our brother. Our emotions at first inclined ua to weep, then our 
sorrow gave place to joy, and we expressed ourselves in the 
words of the 107th Psalm: "Oh, give thanks unto the Lord, 
for He is good; for His mercy endureth forever! 5 ' It is the 
desire of each of our class to keep his memory green by more 
self-sacrificing service, by greater love to the Brethren and 
devotion to the truth. 

Our loving sympathy goes out to all who will miss him 
most, particularly the brethren of the Bethel Home, and we 
trust that you will convey to them our love and the assurance 
that we have prayed that they may be blessed. 

By the grace of God, your Brethren in Christ, 

Durban Ecclesia, — Natal. 
A BIBLE STUDENT AT THE FRONT 

Deab Brethren: — 

You may be interested to know that I became illuminated 
with the glorious truth after having taken the oath for military 
service. I had a few months of supreme happiness and growth 
in knowledge with the Winnipeg Ecclesia. My request for an 
honorable discharge was refused. 

While in England I was able to pay a visit to the London 
Tabernacle, and had the privilege of becoming acquainted 
with several of the brethren there. I have been out here for 
eleven months, and have spent the last nine in the front line 
trenches. I have been transport driver, cook, and for the last 
five months stretcher-bearer. During this time I have had 


many blessings, being able to distribute tracts, loan my 
volumes, and have some heart-to-heart talks with some of the 
men. I have pleasant recollections of my old platoon, who are 
now nearly all gone. They always treated me with respect; 
and several of them asked me to write to their mother or their 

wife if anything happened to them While I rejoice to 

'be able to serve God out here, I look for the time when I may 
once again have fellowship with His people. 

I would like to take this opportunity, dear Brethren, of 
having my name added to the list of those who have taken the 
vow. Our dear Pastor's letter of July 14th has given me great 
happiness and encouragement. May the Lord bless richly your 
labors in His service. 

Your brother in Christ, Richard T. Wood. — Belgium. 
A VOICE FROM INDIA 
Deably Beloved Brethben: — 

We have heard with profound sorrow the news of the passing
 away of our dearly beloved Brother Russell. Bible students
 all over the world have lost in him a much revered leader, 
a great teacher, who was used of God in making known the 
divine plan of salvation, and an earnest Christian who strove 
successfully to follow in the Master's footsteps. We thank 
God for his life and work, which will be an abiding inspiration 
and a noble example to all sincere seekers after truth. 

We desire you to convey our warmest sympathy to the 
.Bethel Family, who will miss his earthly presence and his 
loving personality sadly. Let us, however, rejoice that he 
has fought the good fight, finished his course, kept the faith 
and has received the Crown of Life. 

Madras Ecclesia. — India. 
A WISE HSHEBMAN 

Peas Brethben: — 

We have now tried out the new De Luxe Scenario and 
*ur experience is that we sell them readily for 98c. We have 
been so accustomed in the past to giving the people double 
value for their money that it has spoiled us to some extent! 
While the new De Luxe is not so sturdy a book as the cloth 
(68c) edition, people seem to prefer the higher priced copy. 
We had thought of dropping the De Luxe and specializing on 
the oloth edition, but after experimenting we have decided 
to handle both. We can catch many stray fish by having two 
kinds of bait! 

With much love from us both, 

J. & L. Hutchinson. — Pa. 


WARNING TO THE FRIENDS 


During all the years that Brother Russell Berved the church 
he faithfully guarded the classes against the danger of giving 
the names and addresses of any one for publication. He acted 
upon the theory that the published addresses of the Secretaries 
of the Classes and of the friends would enable an impostor to 
appear in these Classes, claiming to come from another class 
and thereby practice some fraud upon the brethren. Past experiences
 have shown that this has been done on numerous occasions
, and the publication of the addresses of the friends 
only enhances the opportunity of so doing. The Society has 
never deemed it proper to publish the names and addresses of 
these Secretaries. It has held such names in confidence and 
the publication of such names would be a violation of that confidence
. In addition to what has above been said, it gives the 
enemies of the truth an opportunity to deceive the brethren
. Our enemies have for a long time tried to secure the names 
of our class officers and members. We deem it our duty, therefore
, to warn the friends that it is against their interest to submit
 the names and addresses of their class Secretaries or of 
any of the members to any one for publication. 

We also suggest to the friends that they exercise caution 
in entertaining any one who claims to be a brother in the truth, 
unless they are sure he is such, and that they be especially careful
 in regard to any who attempt to borrow money on the statement
 of being in the Truth. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MARCH 15, 1917 


No. 6 


VIEWS FROM THE 

"THE WORLD ON FIBE" 

The Pittsburgh Press is numbered among the great newspapers
 that apparently see some things which will follow in 
the wake of the great European conflict, which now threatens 
to engulf all nations and lead up to the "Battle of Armageddon
" of Scripture. 

As God's people observe increasing signs of the presence 
of our invisible King, preparatory to the establishment of 
his kingdom on earth, they rejoice at each evidence of the 
world's recognition that mankind is passing through the "fire" 
of purification, which shall burn until the last vestige of 
evil and selfishness shall have been consumed and God's will 
is wrought on earth as completely as it is done among the 
heavenly hosts. 

Truly the nations have been entering one after another the 
great melting pot of divine displeasure! They are fulfilling 
prophecy with amazing rapidity and accuracy: "Behold, they 
shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not 
deliver themselves from the power of the flame; there shall 
not be a coal to warm at, nor a fire to sit before." (Isaiah 


WATCH TOWER 

47:14) "Except those days should be shortened, there should 
no flesh be saved." — Matthew 24:22. 

We print following the editorial to which we refer: 
CLEANSED AS BY WBE 
"Fire has from the dawn of human history been regarded
 as a purifying agent. There have been great 
religions of which fire has been the all-pervading symbol. 
When Persia dominated the world her religion was one 
known as fire-worship. Fire purifies, molds, supplies 
the heat which gives life. And its imagery has never 
lost its earliest symbolic force and meaning. 

PBRiamyg nr the flames of the worldCONFLAOEATION
 

"The great war which is raging in Europe today is 
consuming more than the mutilated bodies of millions of 
strong and brave young men. Along with this precious 
sacrifice, there are* perishing in the flames some of the 
most ancient and tragic of human errors. 

"The diabolic lie that kings rule by divine right is 
perishing in the flames of the world-conflagration. 


[6056] 


March 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(83-84) 


'The fantastic and preposterous fiction that war is a 
biological necessity involved by the working of the socalled
 law of the 'survival of the fittest' — this is another 
untruth which will not survive the holocaust. War does 
not promote the survival of the fittest biologically. The 
brave, the healthy, the strong are destroyed by war. The 
weak, the timid and the unfit are preserved by it to 
propagate their kind. 

"The priority given to material values over moral and 
spiritual values — this, too, will not stand after the fire 
has done its work. The hideousness of the commercial 
greed, the lust for power, which are at the bottom of 
exploitation, will have been stripped of all its concealment
 and men will know it for what it i&. Mankind will 
plainly perceive that war is no more a violation of the 
laws of God than is a social and industrial organization 
which sacrifices the mass of men for the few at the top. 
In fact, the great European statesman who was arguing 
for war on a certain occasion twenty years ago attempted 
no denial of the analogy. 'Business is war/ said he, and 
'war is business/ 

PLAIN VIOLATION OF THE OHABTEB OP GOD'S 
KINGDOM 

"When peace has been restored, the purifying fire 
through which the nations are passing will have left 
little of their former patience with a form of human 
society in which war, public and private, has been allowed 
such enormous latitude in plain violation of the provisions 
of the charter of the kingdom of God which was to be 
set up on earth by Jesus. 

" 'A new commandment I give unto you/ said the 
Christ, 'that ye love one another.' The kings who are 
making war, the magnates whose chief business in life 
is the accumulation of countless millions, alike have 
trampled upon this fundamental law of the new society 
even while taking his name upon their lips. And to the 
extent that the multitude have by their sympathy and 
toleration sanctioned the treachery, mankind as a whole 
shares in the guilt which so large a portion of the 
civilized world is now expiating. 

TBUTH AND JUSTICE SOON TO FLOWER 

"That the ordeal will leave mankind spiritually chastened
 one can hardly doubt. Its physical consequences 
are wholly bad. The tongues of flame have eagerly fed 
in amazing quantities on the best blood of the race. But 
in so doing they have burned into the race consciousness 
so deep a conviction of the wicked vanity of the exploiters
, whether financial potentates or kings, that never 
again in our time will any dare to preach the doctrine 
that might makes right, and never again will government, 
either economic or military, go as far as it has gone 
during the last half century in permitting the insane fury 
for wealth and power to set at naught the supreme value 
of all values — namely, the value of the common man. 

"The seeds of protest against the perversion of the 
Christian ideal and the non-fulfillment of the great Christian
 law of love and brotherhood will now begin to 
spring up and bear abundantly. The choking weeds of 
selfish and brutal exploitation have prevented the perfect 
flowing of the grain and meanwhile the millions have been 
ground into the dust. But the weeds have been scorched 
and withered away, and truth and justice will flower in 
their place. 'There is going to be a more equitable distribution
 of the profits of industry in Great Britain when 
the war is over/ Baid Lloyd George and Mr. Asquith, in 
England, recently, and the working classes will come 
into a larger portion of their own in every other country 
involved, unquestionably. 

"Jesus' 'Love one another/ is the key to all progress. 
The science which teaches anything else is not science 
but demonstrable error. Even the Tower animals do not 
make war on one another, at least within their own 
species. Horses run in droves. Cattle herd together. 
Even the wolves hunt in packs. Bees, ants, and wasps 
have a wonderful social organization, living in highly 
co-operative communities. 

" 'Whatever men/ says a biologist, 'have accomplished 
that was really worth while has oeen done, not by competition
, but by mutual aid. The attempt to justify the 
worst side of man's nature from biology fails entirely. 
Even nations represent attempts of mutual aid on a large 
scale. What we need now is mutual aid on a world scale 
and the recognition of the fact that all men are brothers 
and that their interests are in common, and not in competition
/ 


"There is sorrow unspeakable in the path of the purifying
 fire that has overtaken us, but the law of love will 
stand out commandingly above the ruin." 

4 TIG TEEE" BUDS AFTEE CENTURIES 

SUMMER IS NEAK 

Respecting preparations made in the Holy Land by the 
Turkish government to facilitate the rapid movement of 
troops and supplies for an invasion of Egypt, a correspondent 
of the New^Rotterdam Cowrant writes: 

"A veil of secrecy covered the events in this far-off 
corner of the world during the last two years, but now 
some of the things that have been done may be told. The 
war has created new life in the southern section of the 
Holy Land and the desert. Districts which formerly were 
as desolate as the Sahara in Africa are today covered 
with a network of roads. Hundreds of miles of railroads
 have been built and the creation of innumerable 
workshops and factories has brought prosperity to the 
inhabitants of the towns and villages. 

"Syria, Palestine and Sinai have progressed more since 
the war began than in fifty years of peace. The population
 is grateful for this and views the Turkish rule with 
different eyes than formerly, 

DESEET LOSES SOLITUDE 

"The Sinai Desert has lost the solitude which made 
it so inhospitable and dangerous. A new railroad line, 
which starts at Jerusalem and is 175 miles long, runs to 
within twenty-five miles of the Suez canal over Hebron, 
Beersheba and El-Awga. Connecting lines have been 
built under the direction of German engineers from the 
Hedjas railroad to Jerusalem and from Maan to Akaba. 
At the same time the Germans have completed the railroad 
which runs from Haifa to Nazareth and Jerusalem, and 
crosses Palestine from north to south. 

"Branch lines have also been built in the Sinai desert, 
and where the difficulties proved too great for Tailroad
 construction the Germans and Turks built modern 
highways for heavy transport automobiles. Over this 
network of railroads and highways large masses of troops 
and enormous quantities of war material could be transported
 from Constantinople to the Suez canal in a week, 
if the Turkish and German general staffs should decide 
to undertake the invasion of Egypt. 

WELLS NOW FLOWING OVEB PATCHED PLAINS 

"Aiding the railroad lines and automobile roads are 
many artesian wells, furnishing good water in unlimited 
quantities. Around these wells villages with all modern 
conveniences, cool and airy stone houses, ice plants, etc., 
have sprung up. In some districts the water furnished 
by the wells is so plentiful that it can be used for irrigation
 purposes. Where no water could be found it is 
provided by pipe lines laid from the nearest wells. 

"Along the main railroad line there are numerous hospitals
, and around them villages and towns have literally 
grown out of the earth. Some of these settlements have 
several thousand inhabitants. All of them are lighted 
by electricity, and they even have moving picture theaters. 

"The economic value of the work done in Palestine 
and the Sinai desert since Turkey entered the war cannot
 be overestimated. Along the railroad line from Jerusalem
 to Beersheba the land values are rising and the 
population grows. Hebron, which formerly was hardly 
more than a collection of ruins, has been transformed 
into a lively manufacturing town. 

TOWN COMES TO LIFE AFTEE TEARS OF SLUMBEB 

"Still greater is the change in Beersheba. This once 
large city, before the war was a heap of ruins and the 
whole population consisted of half a dozen Bedouin families
, housed in miserable mud huts. Toda^y the town has 
several thousand inhabitants, a railroad repair shop, 
three or four large factories, several big storage houses, 
auto supply stations and a military hospital. 

"El-Awga, the first oasis in the desert, is under cultivation
 again for the first time in centuries. When it was 
ascertained that the artesian wells would furnish sufficient 
water, a number of Turkish farmers flocked to this Bpot 
and started to remove the layer of sterile sand which 
covers the very fertile soil, 

"Thus the murderous war, which destroys the work 
and civilization of centuries in Europe, brings new life, 
■happiness and prosperity to a forgotten and forsaken 
little corner of God's earth." 


[6057] 


(84-8S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


"KHO WLEDOE SHALL BE INCREASED" 

Readers of The Watch Toweb are deeply interested in 
all things confirming the prophecies respecting the presence 
of the Son of Man in the end of this age, Not only are 
"the signs of his presence" multiplying on every hand, but 
they are of such wonderful character as to amaze even the 
world. But while the promise is that the wicked shall not 
understand; that only the wise in the Lord shall comprehend
 the real meaning of these things, the evidences of the 
presence of our King — who has "come as a thief" — are such 
■that the time cannot now be far distant when "every eye 
shall Bee him." 

A letter received from one of the pilgrim brethren we regard
 of such interest to our readers that we publish it here: 
"Knowing your interest in everything that indicates 
that we are 'In the day of his preparation/ I am enclosing 
a newspaper announcement of a Canadian invention, which 
bids fair to become of vast importance, and especially to 
the farmer, who is about to come into his own. 

"Throughout Canada, the States and all over the world 
are immense stacks of straw (many millions of them), 
which hitherto have been useless, and were burned to get 
them out of the way. Now these are to bo very profitably 
utilized. A company has been organized here in Moose 
Jaw, capitalized for the purpose of manufacturing this 
invention and selling it to farmers. 

"Briefly the invention is this: The farmer can build 
a plant at a nominal cost which will generate gas from 
the straw. This gas will light and heat the home, furnish 
power for the threshing machine, or any other machine 
needing power, or, compressed in a tank similar to a 


Prestolite tank, will run the automobile at less expense 
by far than by present methods. Thirty minutes' work 
by a man, woman or child will generate 1,000 feet of gas, 
which is stored in a tank for future use; and the most 
'delicate' instrument necessary is a pitchfork. 

"This is not all. After the gas Is driven off (by fire) 
the coke-like refuse is utilized, and the products made from 
a ton of straw, aside from the gas, are worth $15. These 
consist of tar, oils and pitch; and lastly, that which remains
 is pressed into briquettes of coal, either hard or 
soft, which make the very best of fuel. It costs about 
$1.50 a ton to make this coal. 

"The installation expense is not high — a couple of 
ovens, a gas tank, a compressor for gas, one to compress 
the refuse into coal, and receptacles for the tar and oil. 

"This looks as though it would help solve the question 
of coal famines, strikes, and make a railway strike have 
less dangers, to the farmer at least. I visited the demonstration
 rooms, and saw all the processes. 

"Moose Jaw also has the distinction of having another 
boy inventor, who has perfected a wireless transmitter 
and receiver, so that nobody can steal the message ; nobody 
but the receiver at its proper destination can get it. 

"Moose Jaw is a homely name, but the town is not 
to be sneezed at. The States will have to 'wake up' or 
Canada will be ahead of them. 

"We rejoice in all these new evidences of the near 
approach of Christ's kingdom. 

"Great things we've seen and heard of, in the hundred 
years that are gone! But greater things we look for in 
the hundred years to come." 


THE MEMORIAL SEASON APPROACHING 


On Thursday, April 5th next, after 6* P. M., the beginning 
of the 14th day of Nisan, according to Jewish calculation, 
God's truly consecrated children who are following in the 
Master's footsteps and fully desirous of doing his will in 
the light of present truth, will celebrate the Memorial Supper. 
This season is especially sacred to Christians because it commemorates
 the death of the Lord Jesus and forcefully brings 
to mind that we are to die with him as a part of his sacrificial 
body— the church.— Eph. 1:22, 23. 

It was on the 14*h day of Nisan that the Master instituted 
the Memorial supper, According to Jewish time each day 
began at 6 P. M. It happens that on this year, Thursday, 
April 6th, 6 P. M. is the beginning of the day which marks 
the anniversary of that important event. 

THE WOBLD'S OBBATEST EVENT 

The days of the week just preceding the institution of the 
Memorial supper recorded events of great importance, culminating
 on the 14th day of Nisan with the greatest event of 
the world's history — the death of the Son of God, that he 
might thereby become the Redeemer of the whole world. The 
world knew nothing of the importance of passing events, and 
even the apostles comprehended them but vaguely. 

Likewise the importance of the present hour is not comprehended
 by the world and cannot be fully appreciated by 
any of us in our present state. The order of things that has 
existed for many centuries is now passing awaj with great 
confusion, and the body of Christ, the church, is being completed
 and the glorious kingdom is coming in. 

As we approach the Memorial of our Lord's death we 
should all have in mind the events just preceding that particular
 date. As our Lord was crucified on Friday morning 
—Nisan the 14th— the 10th of Nisan would begin at 6 P. M, 
the preceding Sunday. His triumphal entry into Jerusalem, 
therefore, was probably on Monday instead of Sunday, as 
generally accepted and observed and for that reason called 
Palm Sunday. Under the law the Israelites were required 
to take the paschal lamb into their homes on the 10th day of 
Nisan, preparatory to the Passover, to be celebrated on 
the 14th. 

It was the custom, at the inauguration of a king of Israel, 
for him to ride upon a white ass. On the 10th day of Nisan, 
Jesus, leaving the home of Mary, Martha and Lazarus, went 
as far as Bethphage, whence he sent his disciples to bring a 
young ass, on which he might ride into Jerusalem, ( Matthew 
21:1, 2.) He proceeded to the city amidst the plaudits of the 
people and offered himself as the King of Israel — the long 
promised Messiah. The populace scattered their clothing and 
palm branches before him, implying that the best of the earth 
was none too good for one so £reat. They cried out exultantly, 
"Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is he that cometh in 


the name of the Lord!" Thus he was joyfully received^ and 
acclaimed by the people as King. The scribes and Pharisees, 
however, and those of the priestly order, did not believe in 
the Master, and thinking the procedure of the people sacrilegious
, they called upon Jesus to stop the shouting. Jesus 
replied, "If they -should hold their peace, the very stones 
would cry out." 

Jesus was making history that none but Jehovah and himself
 understood. The next day, which was Tuesday, he cursed 
the fig tree and thereafter it bore no fruit, thus in symbol 
signifying that the Jewish people as a nation were fruitless. 
On the same day he went into the Temple and turned out 
the robbers and money changers, thus picturing how every 
mean and selfish thought in the minds of his followers must 
be put away. Wednesday was an exceedingly busy day with 
our Lord, as appears from the record. He taught the people 
in the Temple; he gave them parables of warning relating to 
their covenant with God; he gave the parable of the wedding 

farment; he taught concerning the resurrection from the dead, 
[is authority was challenged and he confounded the wise men 
by his questions and argument. 

After this Jesus went out to the Mount of Olives, and 
seated there he delivered to his disciples that wonderful discourse
 recorded in Matthew 24, concerning events that would 
transpire, particularly in the end of the age, the fulfillment 
of which his followers today have the privilege of witnessing. 
On the same day he gave the parable of the Ten Virgins and 
referred to the judgment of the Lord during the Millennial 
reign, and while he was doing this a conspiracy was being 
prosecuted by the Pharisees to have him put to death. 

"MY TIME IS AT HAND" 

Thursday must have been a day of keen interest to all of 
the Jews, because, between that evening and the evening following
 (Exod. 12:6, margin), was the time for the slaying of 
the lamb and roasting it for the Passover. Six o'clock that 
evening would mark the beginning of the 14th day of Nisan 
(Friday), during which day the Passover lamb must be killed 
and eaten. As the day drew on Jesus said to his disciples, 
"My time is at hand/* He then gave directions to his apostles 
for the making ready of the Passover supper; "and the disciples
 did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made ready 
the Passover." 

It was incumbent upon the Lord, as a Jew under the law 
arrangement, and also upon his disciples, to observe the 
Passover supper. At the conclusion of the supper the Lord 
instituted a new thing. 

INSTITtTTIOX OF THE MEMORIAL 

The type of the slaying and eating of the paschal lamb 
was now about to be fulfilled. It would never be proper, there- 


[6058] 


M A *cri 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(86-87) 


fore, to have another observance of the Passover, thtt antitype 
being the sacrifice of Jesus as "the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world." Our Lord there instituted the 
Memorial of the fulfillment of the type, by the breaking of 
bread, which he gave to his disciples, and by the drinking of 
the wine, which was to be a commemoration of hi a death. 

After they had withdrawn from the upper room, where the 
Memorial was instituted, Jesus and his disciples-^aside from 
Judas, who had withdrawn previously to betray the Master 
^-jourheyed across the city, over the brook Cedron, and to 
the Garden of Gethseffiane, where he said to his disciples, 
"Sit ye here while 1 go and pray yonder* And he took with 
him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful
 and very heavy. Then he saith Unto them, My soul 
is exceeding sorrowful even unto death; tarry ye here and 
watch with me. And he Went a little farther and fell on 
his face and prayed, saying, my Father, if it be possible 
let this cup pass from met Nevertheless* not as I will, but 
as thou wilt." 

Then came Judas with the mob. The Master Was apprehended
 and led into the city before Caiaphas, the high priest, 
where the scribes and elders were assembled to unjustly accuse 
him. Subsequently he was taken before Pilate, and. after 
passing through the experiences of a trial that was a farce, 
he was condemned to death without a cause, and in the morning
 he was crucified on Calvary 3 s hill between two thieves. 
The importance of that hour will never be known by all until 
the world has come to a full knowledge of what Jesus has 
done for the redemption of mankind. 

WHY JESUS DIED AT TEAT TIME 

The disciples expected the Master to set up his kingdom 
and that they would be a part of it. They were asking 
themselves, "Why should the Master die now?" They were 
perplexed; they " could not understand why he -should die. 
Jesus knew all about it. At Pentecost the diBciples began 
to understand; and today those who have been illuminated 
by the holy Spirit understand why it was necessary for him 
to die. But why should he die at that time? 

The Israelites had been for years in the land of Egypt, 
where they were in bondage. Year after year their tasks 
were increased and their burdens made grevious to be borne. 
God sent Moses to be their deliverer and Aaron to be his 
mouthpiece. Under the Lord's direction Moses and Aaron 
went before Pharaoh the ruler of Egypt and in the name of 
the Lord asked that the Israelites be released and permitted 
to leave Egypt. Time and again Pharaoh refused and God 
sent punishments upon him for refusing to let them go. 
Under the pressure of each plague Pharaoh declared that he 
would let the Children of Israel go, but each time he broke 
his word. God had overruled that this Pharaoh should come 
to the throne of Egypt at this time because of his wicked 
self-will and obstinacy. Nine plagues the Lord had sent upon 
the Egyptians, and nine times had relieved them of those 
plagues at the intercession of Moses, after Pharaoh had promised
 to let them go. Now God purposed to send the tenth 
plague, which would cause Pharaoh even to hurry the Israelites 
out of Egypt. 

Pharaoh was devoted to his son, his first-born. God directed 
Moses to prepare for the tenth and last plague, informing 
him that at midnight, on the 14th day of Nisan the death 
messenger of the Lord would pass through Egypt and every 
first-born of every family should die. He then told Moses 
of his provision to save all the first-born of Israel, should 
they be obedient to his arrangement, which was that on the 
tenth day of the month each household should take a lamb, 
and if any household was .too small his neighbor should join 
with Mm; that the lamb should he a male of the first year 
without blemish; that it should be kept in the house until 
the 14th day of Nisan, when it should be killed and the 
blood should be sprinkled upon the side door-posts and on 
the upper post; that the lamb should be roasted with fire; 
that no bones should be broken — it should be roasted whole; 
that it should be eaten with unleavened _ bread and bitter 
herbs; that those eating It should do so with their loins 
girded, their shoes upon their feet and staves in hand and 
that they should aat in haste; that when the messenger of 
the Lord should pass through Egypt, upon every house where 
the blood of the lamb had -been- sprinkled* according to 
directions given by the Lord, the first-borns should be passed 
over unharmed. 

THE BEGINNING OF THE IAW 

This time marked the beginning of the Law with Israel) as 
indicated by St. Paul. (Gal. 3:17; Exod. 12:41) Acting 
upon the Lord's instructions, Moses called together the elders 
of Israel and gave them directions as to what they should do. 


Accordingly the lamb was taken into the homes on the 10th 
day of Nisan; on the 14th day it was killed: and the blood 
sprinkled upon the door-posts and the lintel. The members 
of each family went into the house and closed the door and 
remained there under the protection of the blood until the 
messenger of the Lord should pass through Egypt, and while 
so remaining the first-born was immune from the deathpenalty
. The lamb was roasted and while they waited it was 
eaten with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. 

About midnight the first-born of all Egypt died. This included
 the first-born of the slave and the first-born of every 
Egyptian family and caste, even up to the first-born and beloved
 son of Pharaoh, the ruler of Egypt. Such great consternation
 prevailed amongst the Egyptians that Pharaoh 
immediately summoned Moses and Aaron to appear before him. 
(Exodus 12:30-32) Pharaoh not only promised to let the 
Israelites go, but commanded that they be driven out. Moses 
then led Israel out of Egypt and across the Red Sea, and 
they journeyed on toward Mount Sinai. 

ISRAEL USED OF JEHOVAH TO MAKE PICTURES 

St. Paul tells us that the things pertaining to the law 
were shadows of greater things to come. Looking, then from 
the type to the antitype, we find that all the things that 
transpired there were pictorial. The first-borns of Israel pictured
 the "church of the first-borns, which are written in 
heaven." Under the Jewish arrangement the first-born was 
the heir to the estate. In God's great plan the first-born, the 
church, are the heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ Jesus; 
and during their journey along the narrow way they are the 
heirs of the exceeding great and precious promises. They are, 
while thus journeying, subject to the second death. Only the 
first-born ones, during the Gospel age, are subject to that 
death. But being under the protection of the blood of Jesus, 
and remaining there, they are safe from that death. It is 
only by losing the protection of the robe of Christ's righteousness
 that one becomes the victim of the second death, from 
which there is no recovery. 

According to God's plan, formed before the foundation of 
the world, Jesus was to be the antitypical Lamb to be slain 
for the cancellation of the sin of the world. (John 1:29) The 
door of the Jewish house being the way of entrance into the 
house, pictured the entrance to the house of the Lord. By 
sprinkling the blood upon the door-posts, Israelites signified 
that they had faith in God's promises. Spiritual Israelites 
enter the house of the Lord by faith in the blood of Christ, 
who declared, "I am the Door"; and so long as they remain 
under the protection of this blood they remain in that house. 
The passover night pictured the Gospel age, when sin and 
darkness are upon all mankind, and the sufferings and dangers 
through which the church of the first-born pass during this 
time, while being gathered from the world. 

The lamb was a beautiful representation of Jesus. The 
lamb is noted for its innocence and its defenseleBtnesa. The 
passover lamb was required to be a male without blemish. 
Of the Man Jesus the Scriptures declare that he was "holy, 
harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners.'^ (Hebrews 
7:26) Christ Jesus was "a lamb without blemish and without 
spot, who verily was fore-ordained before the foundation of 
the world, but was manifested in these last times for you." 
(1 Peter 1:10, 20) "He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, 
and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not 
his mouth." — Isaiah 53:7. 

Jesus must eat the Passover supper at the appointed time 
—the 14th day of Nisan— in order to fulfill the terms of the 
law. His disciples, being Jews, must likewise partake. At 
no other "time could Jesus have fulfilled the type. On that 
day he must die, and he did die on that day, as the 14th of 
Nisan began in the evening and lasted until the following 
evening. He instituted the Memorial as & remembrance of 
his death, on the day of his crucifixion. 

The Lord used the moon as a symbol of the Mosaic law 
or law dispensation. The Jews calculated their time according 
to the moon. On the 14th day of Nisan, at the time of the 
crucifixion of the LoTd, the moon was full and began to wane 
immediately thereafter. This illustrated how the Jewish nation
, at the time of the •crucifixion of Jesus, had reached the 
zenith- of its favor. That marked the gteat turning-point in 
Israel's- history. 

The purpose of the picture made by the slaying of the 
paschal lamb was to point the way to life. The purpose of the 
reality — the slaying of the antitypical Lamb, Hhe Lamb of 
God" — was to open the way to life. Our Lord Jesus "brought 
life and immortality to light through the Gospel." By keeping 
God's taw perfectly, and by his sacrificial death, Jesus made 
knowifc the, way whereby the human race may attain life; 


[6059] 


(87-88) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyk, N. Y. 


and by his resurrection he opened that way — "I am the Way, 
the Truth and the Life," 

THE HOUSEHOLD ESTABLISHED 
When Christ Jesus arose from the dead a divine being, 
he ascended up on high and appeared "in the presence of 
God for us" — the church class. The merit of hia sacrifice was 
to be used throughout the Gospel age for the benefit of the 
antitypical fiist-borns — "the household of faith." Pentecost 
marked the acceptance by Jehovah of the antitypical sprinkling 
of the blood, and the opening of the way for some to become 
members of the household. From then down through the age 
those who have exercised faith in the shed blood of Jesus, and 
who have presented themselves in full consecration to the Lord 
and have been accepted by Jehovah, have entered into this 
house, under the protection of the blood, and abiding there 
until the great night has passed, they shall be delivered into 
the glorious light of the kingdom — in the morning already 
dawning. — Heb. 3:6; Psa. 27:4; 46:5, margin. 

THE MEMORIAL INSTITUTED 

From the time of his death until he should come again it 
was the will of the Lord Jesus that his followers should remember
 him; that once each year they shoud commemorate 
his death — upon its anniversary. It would be manifestly 
improper to celebrate the death of the Lord more than once 
a year, or at any other time, because only at a certain time 
did he die. After partaking at this time of the typical passover
, Jesus instituted the Memorial supper, in order that all 
of his followers shoud have in mind the purpose of his death, 
their privilege of being broken with him, and his coming again 
to receive them unto himself, as he had promised. "And as 
they were eating, Jesus took bread and blessed it and brake 
it, and gave it to his disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is 
my body." That is to say, the bread represented his flesh, 
hia humanity, which was broken on behalf of the human race. 
"And he took the cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them, 
saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the New 
Covenant, which is shed for many for the remission of sins." 
The cup here represented the pouring out of his life-blood 
as a great sacrifice on behalf of humankind. 

At the time Jesus spoke the words, the disciples could not 
understand the meaning thereof, for the reason that they were 
not spirit-begotten; none others than the spirit-begotten can 
understand. — 1 Cor. 2:14, 0, 10. 

BBEAD, BLOOD— JUSTIFICATION, IMMOETALITT 

The great Master said, "I am the living Bread which came 
down from heaven; if any men eat of this Bread, he shall 
live forever; and the bread that I will give him is my flesh, 
which I will give for the life of the world." (John 6:51) This 
represents our justification. Bating means to appropriate. 
When we appropriate to ourselves the merit of Christ's sacrifice
, by accepting him as our Redeemer in full consecration, we 
thereby are received by Jehovah and justified freely from 
Adamic condemnation. 

We read: "Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and 
drink his blood, ye have no life in you; whoso eateth my 
flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal life, and I will raise 
him up at the last day; for my flesh is meat indeed and my 
blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh 
my blood dwelleth in me, and I in him." Thus Jesus testifies 
that tfnless we pour out our blood with him, becoming jointsacriflcers
, and continue faithful as such until we are entirely 
poured out in death, we cannot have life within us; that is. 
inherent life — immortality. In corroboration of this St. Paul 
said: "If we be dead with him, we shall live with him; if 
we suffer (with him), we shall reign with him." 
OTTR PABTICIPATION 

In the celebration of the Memorial supper — the eating of 
the bread and the drinking of the winewwe not only commemorate
 the death of the Lord, but we likewise testify that 
we have entered into a covenant to be dead with him. The 
Apostle Paul gives us this thought when he says, "The cup 
of blessing for which we bless God, is i<* not a participation of 
the blood of the Anointed One 7 The loaf which we break, is 
it not a participation of the body of the Anointed OneT Because
 there is one loaf, we, the many, are one body, for we 
ill partake of Ike one loaf."— 1 Corinthians 10rl6\ 17.-— 
Diagtati 

During the Millennial age all mankind must eat of the 
Bread, antitypically speaking, by appropriating to themselves 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice as the great Redeemer of the 
world; and by thus doing they will be gradually brought 
up by restitution processes to the point of justification. During
 the Gospel, or sacrificial age, however, this appropriation, 
or eating, is by faith, and such are instantaneously brought to 


the point of justification at the time when thev make their 
consecration. Thus all who shall reign with Christ must now 
participate with him in the drinking of the cup; that is to 
say, all must pour out their life-blood, dying with Christ 
Jesus; and, as the bread was broken, even so must each be 
broken, die, as Jesus died. As the body is composed of many 
members, yet all one body, so the body of Christ is one, though 
composed of many members, all of which must partake of 
the Bread and thus be broken with Christ as members of his 
body, and pour out their lives in death as joint-sacrificers. — 
Isaiah 53:12. 

The Apostle testified further to this, saying, "For even hereunto
 were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving 
us an example, that ye should follow his steps." {1 Peter 
2:21) 'Tor unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not 
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake." — 
Phil. 1:29. 

HOW WE SHOULD KEEP THE FEAST 

St. Paul points out the necessity for previous preparation 
for the keeping of this Memorial* saying, "Your glorying is 
not good. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the 
whole lump ? Purge out, therefore, the old leaven, that ye may 
be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our 
Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the feast, 
not with old leaver neither with the leaven of malice and 
wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and 
truth." 

Every one, before partaking of the Memorial, should put 
himself or herself through a personal examination, to see if 
the heart is thoroughly purged, and if there is anything wrong, 
to make it right. The week preceding the Memorial night 
might well be one of preparation. We suggest that it would 
be in order for all the brethren who deliver discourses on 
the Sunday previous to the 5th day of April to speak upon the 
subject of the Memorial, pointing out to the brethren the 
meaning thereof and the blessings to be derived from intelligently
 observing the same. That week should be one of 
special examination, of cleansing ourselves, putting away 
everything that would be defiling or displeasing to the Lord, 
that we might be acceptable to him. The partaking of the 
Memorial means that we have covenanted with God to be 
dead with Jesus Christ — to be offered up as a sacrifice. 
"Leaven" is a symbol of sin, and old leaven would signify 
sins of long standing. These should be put away. Malice 
means ill-will and a wrong condition of heart. Let us see 
to it, then, that we purify our hearts and cleanse ourselves 
from all fllthiness of the flesh and mind, perfecting holiness 
in the fear of the Lord. 

STBITE AMONG THE BBETHREN 

Time and again our attention has been called to the fact 
that strife amongst the brethren is an evidence of spiritual 
sickness, and if persisted in would lead to spiritual death. 
All disputings and misunderstandings and strife should be 
put aside, that we may be in the proper attitude of mind and 
heart to appreciate fully the meaning of the Memorial and 
the blessel privilege of participating therein. 

The week just preceding the institution of the Memorial 
was an evenful one to the disciples. They expected the 
Abrahamic Promise to be put into operation, that the Lord 
would set up his kingdom, and that they would be a part 
of the kingdom. They could not understand the meaning 
of the types and shadows; they had no knowledge of the 
sufferings of Christ and the joys to follow; they were then 
fleshly-minded. Strife arose among them, disputings about 
which would be the greatest in the kingdom. The Lord lovingly
 rebuked them, pointing out the proper course for them 
to take. The Evangelist says, "And there was also a strife 
among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest; 
and he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise 
lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon 
them are called benefactors; but ye shall not be so; but he 
that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and 
he that is chief, as he that doth serve. For whether is 
greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that servethT Is not 
he that sitteth at meat? But ye are they which have continued 
with me in my temptations; and I appoint unto you a kingdom
, as my Father hath appointed unto me." 

May we each keep in mind that we have been called out of 
darkness into the light of the liberty of the sons of God; that 
the Lord has appointed us to a place in his kingdom; and let 
lis realize that the kingdom is near at hand ; and the great importance
 of being prepared for it. May we then all put aside 
our differences; may we be drawn closer together, having our 
hearts united in love in order to a better understanding and 


[6060] 


Makch IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(89-93) 


appreciation of theBe great things. "By love serve one 
another." 

Let us keep in mind the Bufferings through which our 
Master passed, and that we are now privileged to be broken 
with him. It was necessary for him to be broken and die 
that he might shine forth as the glorious Head over the church 
which is his body. It is likewise necessary for us to be 
broken with him, and if we are faithful in our sacrifice we 
have his Word that 'then shall the righteous shine forth as 
the sun in the kingdom." 

WHO HAT PARTAKE? 

The question may arise in the minds of some, Who should 
partake of the Memorial? We answer, Those, and those 
only, who have entered into a covenant with the Lord by sacrifice
. This means that if we have made a full consecration 
unto the Lord, trusting in the merit of Ohrist Jesus, then it 
will be our privilege and our great joy to commemorate the 
death of the Master by partaking of the Memorial emblems 
and thereby testifying that we have agreed to die with Christ 
Jesus, and with each other as members of his body. If the 
opportunity has been afforded, we should have symbolized our 
consecration by water immersion, thus testifying to the deadness
 of our wills. We suggest that provision be made for 
the symbolizing of consecration by water immersion prior to 
the celebration of the Memorial, for those not yet immersed 
who desire to partake; but the mere fact that one had not 
observed baptism since being accepted of the Lord would not 
necessarily preclude him from partaking of the Memorial. 
BE VOX DISCOURAGED 

Some of the Lord's dear ones are inclined to become discouraged
 as they approach the Memorial season, because of 
their inability to live up to the high standard that is set 
Some may be inclined to say, "I will stay away from the 


Memorial, because I am unworthy to go to the Lord's table," 
We do not consider this a wise attitude, dear brethren. We 
believe that this is the very time we should go. If on selfexamination
 we find that we have come short then let us go 
confidently to the throne of heavenly grace, claiming the 
promise which the Lord has given us, that we shall receive 
grace for help in every time of need (Heb. 4:14-16); and 
thus coming, have faith that the Lord is "faithful and juat 
to forgive us" all our sins, if we confess them. 
BITTEB TRIALS 
For some reason, which we are not able to explain, the 
trials of the Lords people often seem more severe during the 
Memorial season than at other times. Probably these trials 
are permitted to enable us to have a better appreciation of 
our privileges of suffering with Christ Jesus, that we may be 
partakers of his joy. Looking back to the typical passover, 
we recall that the children of Israel were directed to eat the 
lamb with their staves in hand and their loins girded about, 
and to eat with bitter herbs. This pictured that we are pilgrims
 and strangers in a foreign land, journeying toward 
our heavenly home. The bitter herbs very well represent the 
trials and bitter experiences through which the Christian 
must pass along this narrow way. The eating of the bitter 
herbs sharpened the appetite and caused a greater desire for 
more of the flesh of the lamb to remove the bitter taste, thus 
picturing how, when we have our bitter trials and experiences, 
there is a keener desire to partake more of our blessed Lord's 
Spirit, claiming his promises and having in mind his favor 
to us, that we may forget the bitter experiences and look forward
 to the joys that await us beyond, where there is bliss 
unalloyed and pleasures forevermore. And so, dear brethren, 
"let us keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity 
and truth!" 


JESUS THE WAY, THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "I Am the Way the Truth and the Life," published in issue of April 15, 1899, which 

please see.] 

JESUS GIVES SIGHT TO THE BUND 

[This article, with the exception of the paragraph below, was reprinted from article entitled ' ( I Was Blind, I Now See, ' ' published
 in issue of March 1, 1908, which please see.] 


A further lesson to be drawn from this incident is that 
the blind man received his sight on the Sabbath day. Jesus 
did many of his miracles on the Sabbath day, partly no 
doubt to emphasize the fact that the antitypical Sabbath, the 
thousand-year Day, the seventh thousand-year Day of man's 
history, will be the time of his kingdom. It is when we 
come to understand that the miracles of Jesus pictured forth 
coming blessings during his Messianic kingdom that we get 
the proper view of matters, and may rejoice accordingly that 
a good, a glad Day, is coming for all the blind, all the lame, 


all the deaf, as indicated by Isaiah's prophecy. (Isaiah 35:5, 
6) During that time all the blind eyes will be opened to the 
goodness, the greatness, the love, the power of God. Thus the 
world will come to know God, being helped to that knowledge 
under the influences of the heavenly kingdom; and all who 
avail themselves of the privileges then extended may attain 
to that glorious degree of knowledge mentioned by Jesus when 
he said: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the 
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." 


LETTERS OF 

ONE OF THE SHABES OF THE 70WU3B 

Deab Brethren: — - 

Through the Watoh Toweb I have learned of the election
 of Brother Rutherford as President of the W. T. B. A 
T. Society. May the Lord bless and direct him in the work 
that is before him. We feel sure that he will do his best, 
the Lord helping him. While I do not like to intrude upon 
your time, yet I would like to ask a question and get your 
thought on it. My little girl likes games, and a few days 
ago she sent to a New York firm for a game which was advertised
 in a catalogue. Another firm explains this game to 
be a game of mystery. I had seen such games before she 
sent for this one, but really believed that the people working 
it pulled it around to make it spell things they had in their 
minds. I had no fear of it at that time. 

But since my little girl got this one and I have seen it 
work, I am afraid of it, and I will tell you why. One day 
my neighbors told me that it would work itself, without 
pulling or pushing it in the least, and would work with one 
person as well as with two. I told them that I rather thought 
not, as I firmly believed it to be a game of fun. But they 
assured me it would move itself and spell out the answers 
to any question asked. I then decided to try it 1 alone to 
make sure that no one pulled it to make it spell certain 
things. I did so; I put my hands on as directed, and In a 
minute or two the small table walked around on the board 
fairly pulling my fingers. It would answer most all the 
questions by stopping on the letters to spell the words. 

I asked my age, which it spelled correctly. I asked it for 
a certain Scripture, and it spelled it out correctly. I asked 
it what worked that board, and it said, "Lucifer." I asked 
it if it knew Pastor Russell, and it spelled "Yes." I asked 


DEEP INTEREST 

it where he was, and it said, "In heaven." I asked it if he 
liked Pastor Russell, and it spelled "No." I asked why, and 
it spelled, "Because he taught against me." I said to myself, 
with my hands still on the board, "Truly this is the work of 
the devil!" and it went up to "Yes." 

Now, to make sure, I did not move it in. the least; I 
looked out of the window, and did not look at the board only 
as it would stop on a letter. Then I became nervous about 
it and afraid, and said, "I should not have it in the house if 
I found out that it was the work of the devil." Then it 
quickly told me to "Go to h— ;" -spelling the words very fast. 

I may be wrong, but I cannot help but think it is the 
work of the devil. But my little girl wants to keep it. 
I shall not have it in the house should you think there is 
any unseen power working it. My neighbors tell me it is 
electricity in the hands that move it, and to let the child 
■have it. But something tells me different. I am afraid of it, 
and grow, more and more afraid. Does this not go to show 
that it is not right to have it around? Surely no good can 
ever come from it! My neighbors laugh at me; but those 
things are not to be laughed at. I know that it spells 
those things out in answer to your questions. That is the 
truth, and there are hundreds of them all over, and some 
truth people working them, too. 

Can it be possible that the devil is trying to deceive some 
of us by that so-called game? Tell us, for the good of all. 
Enclosed you will find pictures of it, taken from catalogues, 
marked with pencil. 

Yours in the One Faith, Mbs, Wm. Ikgebmait— Pa. 

[The Watch Toweb has several times referred to the 
Ouija board and to the Planch ette as being devices of the 


vn— 16 


[6061] 


(W-94) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKI.YN, N. Y. 


stdvsrsary. The experience above related is another confirmation
 of our belief. 

NOBLE EXAMPLE OF UNU0BMUBIHG EHDtfBAHCB 
DEAB BftETHBEN: — 

We have just held our semi-annual election. It has been 
our custom to elect Brother Russell as our Pastor; but, as 
we were not able to do so this time, we concluded to send 
you the assurance that we cherish the memory of him who 
so faithfully served ua and brought us to so clear an understanding
 and appreciation of our Father's glorious plan of 
salvation and of his character of justice, wisdom, love, and 
power, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We also 
wish to assure you of our hearty, continued co-operation in 
carrying forward the work which our Pastor so wisely and 
in so masterly a manner mapped out for us as that "wise 
servant" of the Lord, "the man with the ink-horn." 

We heartily join in thanking our dear heavenly Father 
for so faithful a servant and so loving a character as Brother 
Russell, whose life aa an example of courage, zeal and love 
has been a constant stimulus to us, as a true copy of God's 
dear Son! So, having before us his noble example of selfsacrifice
, of laying down his life and strength in oub interest 
and service, and his example of faith, love, loyalty and cheerful
, unmurmuring endurance of persecution and misrepresentation
, therefore we resolve that, by the Lord's assisting 
grace, we shall endeavor more faithfully to walk humbly in 
our dear Redeemer's steps, daily striving to grow up into him 
and to develop more of the spirit of love. 

We desire to continue our co-operation with the Bethel 
family in the harvest work, in harmony with our dear Pastor
's labors; and we pray the Lord's richest blessings upon 
you, and all of the harvest laborers. Whether the work be 
much or little, while yet in the flesh, let us continue to press 
on toward the prize of the high calling which is in Christ 
Jesus, to whom he the honor, glory and praise aa Kane of 
kings and Lord of lords. Praising God from whom all blessings
 flow. 

Sincerely your fellow servants, 

East St. Louis Ecclesia. — III. 

SENDEES ALLEGIANCE TO JEHOVAH'S GOV2B1TMENT 

X>£AB BrETHBEN: — 

At our recent business meeting we unanimously passed 
the following resolution, which it was voted should be sent 
as an expression of our attitude toward the truth and yourselves
 at this momentous period in the affairs of the world. 

Resolved, (1) That having been immeasurably blessed by 
the incomparable message of the truth, which from the time 
of its advent among us has proved to be our comfort, our 
shield, the source of our spiritual upbuilding and our joy, we 
do hereby declare our gratitude for the same — gratitude first 
of all to the Father of all mercies and his blessed Son, and 
second to those noble exponents of the great Gospel message, 
who, operating in, through and from the Headquarters of 
the Watch Toweb Bible and Tbaot Society, have so earnestly 
and faithfully served our highest interests up to this present 
time. 

(2) That because of the arforesaid benefits received we 
have great confidence and love toward those officiating at the 
Headquarters in the general direction of the harvest work, 
and our prayers will ascend daily on their behalf, that wisdom 
from above may shed upon their minds its benign influence 
and power, so that the mighty forces of truth generated by 
God himself and received and expressed by his messengers 
may sweep onward to the full consummation of the present 
regime and the subsequent establishment of the kingdom in 
power and great glory. 

We furthermore take this opportunity of emphasizing our 
consecration, believing the finest thing in life to be heart 
and will in full accord with the majestic plan and purpose 
of the Most High, who is eventually to bend all things to 
his absolute sway. We realize that he graciously and lovingly
 accords us the privilege now of rendering to him upon 
invitation that allegiance to his government which he shall 
ere long demand from every living being in every sphere of 
existence. Therefore, we seek above all things to know his 
will and to conform ourselves thereto; and we do earnestly 
desire to co-operate with you in plans and ways of witnessing 
before men of the near approach of Messiah's reign, and thus 
to be used as instruments in the harvest, ere cometh "the 
night in which no man can work.'* 

In the spirit of gratitude and love, we remain, 

Yours very earnestly and with much Christian love. 

The Halifax Ecolebia. — N. S. 
A VOICE FROM JAMAICA 
Deab Brethren: — 

Until officially confirmed, the report of our beloved Pastors
 death was received with a measure of doubt, it being 
so unexpected. We bow in submission to the divine pleasure 
and unerring decision, and rejoice that our beloved Brother 
has entered fully into his rest and reward after a very extended
 ministry for Christ and his people. 

We grieve for the loss sustained, especially by you, but 
believe he is now better qualified to assist in directing the 
work which was committed to him. His loving devotion, self' 
sacrificing zeal, unflinching effort* and faithfulness, coupled 
with the nobility and purity of his Christian character, are 
most inspiring and stimulating, and worthy of imitation. 
What an example of resignation and endurance under much 
suffering, and cruel persecution unabated 1 May the blessed 
and precious memory of our beloved Pastor he perpetuated! 

With renewed resolutions and endeavors, and by God's 
grace, we hope to vie with him in all these respects, and What 
time is so appropriate as the present — the opening Of a New 
Year! We confidently believe that the Lord has made abundant
 provision for the needs of his own. 

We invoke daily in our prayers the Lord's blessings and 
favors on your behalf, that wisdom to guide, strength and 
courage to do, be bestowed from on high, that the work be 
prosecuted to its completion by those on whom the responsibility
 has devolved, I pledge myself to co-operate heartily 
with you; and may we all finish our course with joy and be 
counted worthy, so that we shall soon see our beloved one 
as he is and share his unspeakable joys and blessings. 

The harvest work here was started by myself and others 
about eighteen years ago, coming from the Isthmus of Panama, 
where I received the truth and labored for awhile. It prospered
 and we found many ready, sincere hearts, and the 
Truth continued to spread. 

With best wishes for the New Year, and prayer for comifort
 in your bereavement, I remain, 

Your fellow servant, L. A. Facet. — Jama&oa. 

THE VEHi SEEMS VBBY THIN NOW 

Greetings in the Master's name to the Bethel family and 
the friends of the Brooklyn Tabernacle I We desire very 
much to express to you our sympathy in the mutual loss 
by death of our beloved Pastor C. T. Russell, which loss, no 
doubt, you especially feel. 

We convey to you brethren as his close associates our 
deep love, and pray our heavenly Father that wisdom a.nd 
power may be yours to continue carrying out what remains 
to be done in the harvest work. Our Servant" we believe 
has passed to his reward; but though dead (according to the 
flesh), yet he speaketh. The veil seems very thin between 
us now, and the sweet and vivid realization of the presence 
of our dear Master grows stronger, while the time, we trust 
is not far hence before we too shall see him face to face. 
We wish to assure you of our continued faith in the Lord 
and of our hearty co-operation with the Society in furthering 
the harvest work, in whatever little ways we can. We daily 
remember you all at the throne of heavenly grace. 

We would appreciate very much to nave a brother come 
up to our place as soon as you can arrange for such a visit. 
We are very hungry for fellowship and a few words of encouragement
 along "the way," as we aTe quite tried by the 
opposition we sometimes meet. Our town hag of late been 
visited by two evangelists who, bv invitation of the churches, 
have conducted evangelistic services. As usual, they both 
found occasion to slander Pastor Russell's character and belittle
 his teachings. 

We tried personally and by letter to defend both Pastor 
Russell and the truth, but to no effect, only to cause more 
bitterness to be manifested. It is often difficult to stand for 
the truth in a small town, where you are known but not permitted
 to be given a hearing. We have stood thus for twelve 
years or more, and expect to stand until the^ end, by God's 
grace, endeavoring also to watch for opportunities to present 
the truth to hearing ears. Have at present a little encouragement
 in this way. We trust, if it be the Lord's will, that some 
fruit may result. Shall be very much pleased to soon see 
one of your familiar faces with ns again. The Lord's continued
-favor be with you all. 

Yours in the Master's service, Wi£, Hjobth.— N. Y. 

ANOTHER VOICE FBOM ABBOAX* 
Deab Bbethbew vsr the Lord — 

Seeing that so many dear brethren have written expressing
 continued loyalty to the truth and the harvest work 
one is also prompted to write you a line to say that the dear 
friends in Portsmouth, England, are fully in harmony with 
the expressions of loyalty that have already been given to 
the cause. 

How glad we are that our dear Pastor, who like the 


[6062] 


March 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(94-95) 


Master stood so long and resolutely against the almost continuous
 attacks of the great adversary, has now been counted 
worthy of experiencing his great change (we are sure it has 
been a great one), and is now in the actual presence of his 
Master, made like him and seeing him as he is 1 

Our loss over here is very small, dear brethren, compared
 with that which you must have experienced, because 
we still have our dear Pastor's presence with us in his writings
. But at the Bethel, what a vacancy there must be ! 

Our prayers are that you may continue faithful in the 
work of serving as "signs" to the world, and in assisting in 
building up in the most holy faith those who shall be accounted
 worthy to participate in the first resurrection. With 
continued love in the Lord n 

Yours in His Service, T. Stracy. — England. 

MEMORIAL TOWER LIKE BRIBE OF CHRIST 
Dear Friends; — 

I want to thank you and to congratulate you upon the 
Memorial number of The Watch Tower. It reminds me of 
the bride of Christ; for it is not especially beautiful or attractive
 on the outside, but it is all glorious within. Its contents
 are certainly an incentive to press on with renewed 
vigor and to strive to follow the example of our beloved 
Pastor, as he followed Christ. 

The extra copies I sent for will do good service; for 1 
want others to know something of the character of this saint 
of God who has just been taken from the earth. 

Yours in the Redeemer, Jessie I. Todd. — Ky. 

TRUTH MORE PRECIOUS THAN EVER 
To all the Precious Family at Bethel: — 

Greetings and heartfelt love in our dear Redeemer's name! 
Now that I have found my breath again, after the shock of 
my life, I just wish to write a line of loving sympathy and 
cheer to your dear hearts. You have been so much on my 
mind since our beloved one went under the veil, and we are all 
praying day and night that your dear hearts may be so 
thoroughly established that 

<f No storm can shake your inmost calm, 
While to that Refuge clinging; 
Since Christ is Lord of heaven and earth, 
How can you keep from singing!" 
We praise God more for the blessed truth today than 
ever before, and we never were more determined to press on 
to the finish, even as our dear Brother Russell did, who was 
such a noble example to us all. We have the Lord's graciou3 
promise still, that he will never leave us nor forsake us. 
No doubt that the rest of the dear "feet of him" will soon 
be with dear Brother Russell again in the grand reunion, 
where we can serve our glorious heavenly Father in perfection
, "Oh, that I may be one found worthy to reign 
with Christ a thousand years!" 

We know that we will have an interest in your prayers, 
as you have in all of ours. May the richest blessings of 
the Lord be with you all, dear friends and brethren. Please 
find enclosed $— — for "Good Hopes." By divine favor and 
love, Your brother and sister, 

C. E. Hbabd and wife. — B. C. 
HIS GLORIOUS TRIUMPH AH INCENTIVE TO AXL 
Dear Brethren of the Watch Tower: — 

We desire to mingle our joy and sorrow with all of the 
dear Israel of God everywhere at this time — sorrow because 
of the loss of our Beloved Pastor in the flesh; joy because 
we realize that his sufferings and trials now are over, and 
that having been a faithful overcomer, he has now partaken 
of the glorious divine nature. We Hfl up our hearts in 
gratitude to our heavenly Father for having spared him 
from the violent death so many of us had anticipated would 
close his earthly career. Surely God is "too wise to err, too 
good to be unkind!" 

Our Pastor's glorious triumph is a great incentive to us 
all to renew our consecration unto death, and to "strive to 
enter in." Having been elected Pastor of the little Ecclesia 
here, until his death, we desire to testify of the great help 
that we have received through his faithful ministration, although
 we have had him here only once in person. We are 
determined to go on, as if he was still here, loyally defending 
the "Faith once delivered unto the saints." Praying for, 
and supporting those who have accepted the great responsibility
 of carrying on the glorious work, we are, with much 
love in the Lord to all of "like precious faith," 

Your Brethren in Christ. Preston Ecclesia. — England. 
A MESSAGE FROM WALES 

Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

After reading in the Bee. 1st Watch Tower the wonderful 
arrangements for the Harvest work in future, dictated by 
our beloved Pastor and Brother C. T. Russell, who we believe
 was "that servant," we, as a class of consecrated saints, 


resolve that we will be faithful to the Brethren elected to 
carry on the work of dispensing the "meat in due season," 
as prepared by our departed brother, the Lord's servant, to 
build up the Church in the most holy faith and to gather the 
wheat into the garner. 

We further resolve, that inasmuch as this man of God 
has faithfully followed the Lord's instructions, has completed 
his work on this side of the veil, and has received his full 
reward, we who have been influenced by his noble life and 
Christian character feel constrained, both individually and as 
a whole body, to renew our efforts to press on towards the 
goal which we believe he has attained. Praying the Lord's 
blessing upon your labor of love, we remain, 

Your brethren in Chriat, 

Ecclesia at Pontardulais. — Wales. 
PHOTO-DRAMA IN NEWFOUNDLAND 
Dear Brethren: — 

Recently we gave the four parts of the Photo-Drama of 
Creation in our town. Much interest was manifested. One 
man who had been saying very unkind things about us seemed 
to be pleased with the pictures. We ourselves enjoyed them 
more than ever before; and the townspeople were carried 
away with them. To satisfy the public demand the Drama 
will have to make quite a lengthy visit here. It is really 
pathetic to hear people say, "We missed all this last Spring!" 
Although they were not very far from where the Drama 
was shown at that time, yet somehow it was not advertised 
in their section. Now they are hungry enough to appreciate 
the lectures and the music even without the pictures! 

One of the sisters operates very skillfully; as a Drama 
operator she knows her work thoroughly, and weaves in fine 
explanations. When we meet opposition, we tell the opposers 
to be careful not to allow their wrong views to cause them 
to miss the great prize. When the lectures were finished, a 
man said, "That is all truth." He is a very quiet man; but 
whatever he says is to the point, and he seems to be accepting
 the message thus far, even to "What is the Soul?" 

We have been looking for an opening at . Several 

there, among them a school teacher, are reading all the literature
 they can get. 

Somehow I feel that we shall not leave here very soon. 
The people seem to be holding on to us very tightly j and we 
do not feel that it is right to leave them until they are 
thoroughly grounded in the Truth. We think that more can 
be accomplished by our staying here for a time. 

Your Sister in Christian love, C. B. Parrish. 

SO WONDERFUL A CHARACTER I 
Beloved Brethren; — 

I desire you to know that I have been greatly blessed 
by reading the Memorial Number of The Watch Toweb. 

The cpnduct of our dearest brother on his last Pilgrim 
tour, as related there, shows so wonderful a character that, 
while reading, I could not restrain a tear as I thought of how 
little I am in comparison and how wonderful is the kindness 
of God to permit even me to have a share in the things of 
Christ and to be associated with his noble people; the thought 
has well nigh overwhelmed me, but I have made it another 
stepping-stone to the higher life. 

And how beautiful and appropriate is that picture on the 
last cover page! What loving compassion in His eyes! What 
tenderness in His countenance! How eloquent are the silent 
sentiments of the whole, assuring us that the Good Shepherd 
still leads the flock! Surely he will deliver thee from the 
snare of the fowler; He will cover thee with his feathers, 
and under his wings shalt thou find shelter! 

Your fellow servant, J. A. Brown. — Canal Zone. 

CANADIAN FRIENDS PLEASED 
Dear Brethren: — 

The little item in The Tower of Feb. 1, in reference to 
Canadian Towers being sent as first-class matter henceforth, 
in order to avoid delay through Canadian mails, was of 
much interest to us. Our Towers have been seriously delayed
, particularly of late. 

We have refrained from complaint; because we felt assured 
that the Society was doing all it could in the matter. We 
believe it is now in order, however, to express appreciation of 
the move made to avoid further delay, and we have much 
pleasure in informing you that our ecclesia, by unanimous 
vote, passed a resolution expressive of appreciation of your 
move, to be attested also by a contribution to the funds of the 
Society to cover the additional postage expense incurred by 
sending the Towers direct. Please find enclosed an express 
order for In lieu of the foregoing. 

Assuring you of our continued prayers and co-operation 
in this glorious service, 

Your brethren by His grace, Truro Ecclesia. — Canada* 


[6063] 


ANGELOPHONE COMPANY CLOSING OUT 


The friends who organized the Angelophone Oo. had hoped 
to furnish good records dictated by Brother Russell. Some 
of the first were not as clear as desired, and Brother Russell 
expected to re-record them, but passed away before being able 
to do so. 

Orders came in so rapidly, the number of records to be 
handled was so great, and the requests so urgent, that it was 
impossible to test each set before shipping; hence the filling 
of many of the orders in the original packages of the manufacturers
. It was later found that these records were not even 
as good as those first received, and the manufacturers claim 
they cannot do better* 

So many complaints have lately been received that the 


Angelophone Co. has decided to close out at once. Some of 
the records are quite good, and all orders on hand will be filled 
as far as possible, unless otherwise ordered. Some may desire 
to have even these imperfect records. If so, orders should be 
sent at once. 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tbact Society possesses two 
excellent Columbia records of Brother Russell's voice, consisting 
of four introductory and four intermission talks of the PhotoDrama
 of Cbeation. Each of these is a double record — two 
talks on each side. These records can be used on an Angelophone
 by reversing the reproducer. We are obliged not to sell 
the Columbia records under $1.00 per record. 


NO EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 


After the passing away of Brother Russell, who was executive
 officer of the Society by virtue of being President, the 
Board of Directors provided for an Executive Committee to 
look after the executive work of the Society. That Committee 
ceased to exist upon the election of a President; hence there 


is now no Executive Committee. To avoid delay and confusion
, please address no mail to the Executive Committee. 
The President of the Society is the executive officer of the 
Society and matters of that nature are in his hands. 


VOU XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., APRIL 1, 1917 


No. 7 


"CONSIDER HIM" 

" Consider him who endured such contradiction of sinners, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. " — Hebrews 12:3. 

[On Wednesday evening, October 11th, 19X6, at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, after the Church Activities Committee had read the 
various reports of the work done during the paat quarter, Brother Russell gave a short address to the New York City Congregation, which 
proved to be his last words to the church in the midst of which he lived and labored. Those words were taken down at the time, and are 
here transcribed for the benefit of the friends, The topic and text were those of the Manna for the week, and were the same as those 
used on the same evening by classes of the I. B. S. A. the world over,] 
There is a natural tendency amongst people to tire of a Whom? We all know that he is referring to our Lord Jesus, 


thing when the novelty wears off. Even the hearing of the 
truth, strange as it may seem, causes weariness to some after 
a time,. It is the same way with the soldier. It is easy for 
him to enlist and march forward when the drums are beating 
and the bands are playing, and enthusiasm runs high; but 
when the damp, cold weather comes, when ice forms in the 
trenches and there is no martial music, he is liable to grow 
weary j and army life does not seem to be nearly so attractive 
as it appeared at the first. This is true in our spiritual 
warfare — in fighting the good fight of faith. There are times 
when all around seem joyous, when the Christian soldiers 
are marching, and all are stimulated and encouraged; whereas 
there are times when the clouds hang low and are dark, chilliness
 surrounds ua, ardor is abated, and we are liable to get 
discouraged. It is partly for this reason that the Lord has 
directed us to "consider him," that thereby we might be 
stimulated and encouraged to press on and to inspire others. 
He knew just what we would need. 

"LEST YE BE WEARIED AND FAINT IN YOUR HINDS" 

The Apostle Paul exhorts us not to forget the assembling 
of ourselves together, and so much the more as we see the 
day approaching. Why so? Because "the day" will have its 
peculiar trials, its difficulties, its attractions in various directions
; and the story of the Cross will likely seem old — not 
as new as some things; and consequently we shall need to 
bear each other up. Because there is danger of becoming 
luke warm spiritually, it is generally recommended that the 
Lord's people meet together; for to do so is stimulating. In 
proportion as we seek to stir up others in the way by putting 
them in remembrance, we are thereby reviving our own minds. 
We can, therefore, see a wisdom in all of God's arrangements 
with respect to the truth. 

I believe that in every congregation there is danger of 
growing weary in well-doing. Well-doing coats something. It 
means sacrificing. If you are serving the Lord's cause, you 
are denying yourself in some way. Unless we have some 
special love for the Lord and for the truth, we might say, 
"This is a very tedious work, I am pressed in many other 
directions, and there are those who are inviting me to see 
them." So many things come to you, and to us all, that we 
might consequently be retarded and slacken our efforts. The 
world, the flesh and the adversary are pressing hard to draw 
us, not exactly from the prize, but from the narrow way that 
leads to the prize. They would slacken our zeal and beat 
our courage down ; they would make us faint and cause us to 
say, "Oh, I am so tired; I cannot do any more!" Doubtless 
we all have had such experiences. If we get faint in body, 
we can rest ourselves; but if we get faint in mind, it is more 
difficult to become refreshed. 

WHAT SHALL WE CON SIDES ABOUT HIM? 

What, then, shall we do, in case we get weary and faint 
in our minds ? The Apostle tells us : "Consider him ! " 

(82-100) [6064] 


the one great "him" in all the whole world. What shall we 
consider about him? His birth ? Yes, that is profitable; but it 
is not what the Apostle here suggests. His glory and honor? 
Not that exactly ; but rather, how much he endubed without 
getting faint and weaby, without giving up the work which 
he undertook to do. He undertook 5) do a certain work, and 
so have we! In some respects we have undertaken to do the 
same work that Jesus did. Let us consider him, lest we get 
weary and faint in following on in his footsteps 1 

Of course, the world is not exhorted in this text, but merely 
those who have come into the Lord's family, and have taken 
up their cross to follow him — those who have consecrated 
themselves to him, those who have made a covenant with the 
Lord by sacrifice, declaring that they will give all to him 
and his service — that they will follow him at any cost. These 
are the ones who are exhorted to consider him. 

But what about him shall they consider? What he endured
 without fainting, in carrying out the Father's will. 
What he endured in the way of contradiction of sinners against 
himself. This is the very kind of difficulty which we have in 
our endeavor to carry out the Father's will. If there were 
no devil, no sinners, and no trials, this would be a very pleasant
 world to go through. It is because we have to swim upstream
, against the current, when almost everything is going 
in the opposite direction, that we have such a difficult work. 
Watch the swimmer! He must battle up-stream against the 
down-flowing current; a moment's relaxation and the current 
carries him downward. With us there is a natural tendency 
in ourselves, as well as in the currents of thought and activity 
about us in the world, to pull us back in the opposite direction
 from which we are trying to go. 

OUR LORD'S LOYALTY AND OBEDIENCE 

Let us consider his example, his words; or else we may 
become faint. There are many reasons why we might become 
so. One of them is that we might consider that the opposition 
against us is too great. Jesus had the opposition of all 
those of national influence in his day. He was continually 
misrepresented, until finally the slanders culminated in his 
being called a profane person, one who had spoken blasphemies 
against God, who had said that he was like God, and was as 
great as God. This was a part of the charge against him. 
Although the accusation was not true, nevertheless he endured 
it, even though he had power to stop it. If he could cast out 
demons and open the eyes of the blind, then surely he could 
have done something to change things in his own case. Why, 
then, did he not do it? Because he was doing the Father's 
will; and it was the Father's will that he should bear witness
 to the truth and demonstrate his loyalty in connection 
with it. 

Is it not the same with us? But why does the Father 
care about our loyalty? Because he is seeking a certain class 
for a certain purpose. In Jesus' case, he was seeking one 
to be the Head of the church. In our case, he is selecting 


Aprii, 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(100-101) 


those who will be members of the body. He has a great plan 
that contemplates the overthrow of sin and the blessing of all 
the families of the earth; and he is now looking for a 
class who is in sympathy with all his plans and arrangements. 
He is seeking for those who would rather suffer death than violate
 his Word, or shrink from doing his will. 

This is our glorious position, and we are considering one 
who never made a mistake in carrying out the Father's will. 
Yet he suffered as though he had made a great many serious 
mistakes. He suffered as a disloyal person, although he had 
always been loyal. The Jews declared that he had no patriotism
 at all, yet he was loyal to his own nation in every respect. 
As Jesus said, 'They hated me without a cause." 

HIS TEMPTATIONS SUBTLE 

Turn these things over in your mind! Consider him! 
This kind of suffering is necessary; for the Father would not 
be wise in exalting to such a high position any one who was 
not thoroughly loyal. B>e could not give even his own son 
the divine nature without a thorough testing. Our Lord, as 
a new creature, was tempted in all points like as we are, yet 
without sin. He was not tempted as a fallen man or as a 
father; he was not tempted with liquor, etc. The temptations 
coming to the new creature are different from those which 
come to the sinner. 

Jesus was tempted to grow weary and faint in his mind. 
This was one of the ways through which special temptations 
from Satan were placed before him. Satan told our Lord 
that he would get rid of these difficulties if he would cooperate 
with him and would avoid those things which would necessarily 
and surely come to him if he should continue in the way 
marked out by Jehovah. Our Lord's answer was, "Get thee 
behind me, Satan!" Another temptation was to show the 
great power which he had received as a spirit-begotten Son, 
to use this power either to gratify his own natural appetite 
or to make a display before the people. So it is with those 
of us who may wish to do things in a showy way instead of 
in the humble way marked out for us. We may expect to have 
the same temptations that our Lord had. Therefore we should 
be on guard that we may prove loyal to fhe Father. 

CHRIST CALLED TO SACRIFICE-—'* THE BODY" ALSO TO 
SACRIFICE 

"If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him." The 
reason why the Father is so careful in making the selection of 
the church class, is that they are to reign. He could not take 
hypocrites or any disloyal ones or even careless ones to be 
rulers and teachers of the people in the coming kingdom. 
He would not select those .who had first learned humility before
 he could use them to teach humility to others. 
God desires such a company of priests and judges to 
be associated with his Son for a thousand years in ruling 
and blessing the world as will prove faithful under all circumstanced
 — those in whom he can place absolute confidence, 
who have been tested and found faithful. This is the reason 
that he tests and proves during this Gospel age every one 
whom he will receive for that future work. 

The call of the Gospel age is, therefore, one to sacrifice. 
God does not hide this fact from us. He does not call us 
to simply stand up and say that we wish to be followers of 
Jesus. No! Our Lord says, "If any man will be my disciple, 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me." 
There is no deception about the matter. If we have been deceived
, it is our own fault. The Old Testament says the same 
thing: "Gather my saints together unto me; those who have 
made a covenant with me by sacrifice." There is nothing hidden
. Whoever would follow Jesus must prove his faithfulness 
by his willingness to sacrifice. 

In the past, false doctrines confused us; but now "we 
see Jesus" — we see what he accomplished, and how he endured 
without growing weary or giving up. It makes our course 
plain when we consider him. We sometimes say that we have 
not been careful enough in this' or that matter, and have 
consequently made some mistakes. We can often find some 
fault in ourselves, thus demonstrating that we are partly to 
blame for our sufferings. But in our Lord's case it was different
. He received the slanders, the misrepresentation, and 
everything else that came against him, without having any 
fault in him at all. "He was holy, harmless, undefiled and 
separate from sinners," still he endured. We, though following
 in his footsteps, have not as much to endure as had the 
Master. 

THE OUTCOME OF OUR FAITHFUL ENDURANCE 

We are also to consider the outcome. While the Father 
let Jesus die on the cross as a malefactor, yet he did not let 


our Lord go permanently, but kept his promise to raise hittn 
from the dead. We have the promise that, as the Father 
raised Jesus from the dead, so also will he raise those up who 
are found worthy by being faithful unto death. In raising up 
Jesus the Father has given us a, testimony to his faithfulness. 
In the case of Jesus, no one had set him an example. It 
was all by faith with him ; none had gone before. With us it 
is different. Besides, we have not so much to lose as had our 
Lord. However, if we trust God, he is faithful to keep us 
and to do what he has promised — to raise us up with our 
Head. Consider what great things God has done for his 
Son. Consider also ,that he has promised us a share in our 
Lord's glory if we be found faithful. It is amazing — almost 
beyond conception! Unless God had made it plain, I fear that 
I would not be able to receive it. If he had said it but once, 

1 might have doubted it; but since he has stated it over and 
over again in so many ways as to remove all grounds for 
doubt, I must believe it. How wonderful it seems! 

Consider him! Consider that God has highly exalted him! 
Consider what a great privilege has been afforded us of walking
 in his footsteps, especially as our lives are so imperfect, so 
unsatisfactory even to ourselves, and as life is all that we have 
to give. What a thought that God will count our little sacrifice
 as a part of that which Jesus gave! We are to be heirs of 
God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, "to an inheritance incorruptible
 and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved 
in heaven for you who are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed at the last time." 
Then to think that we are in the last time now! We are right 
at the close of the age. The new dispensation is opening all 
around us, and the great majority of the people are so bewildered
 that they do not know what to make of the wonderful
 things of our day. "None of the wicked shall understand; 
but the wise shall understand." (Daniel 12:10) The Lord's 
true people are the only ones who have a correct understanding 
of these things. 

How carefully the people of God, therefore, should weigh 
their thoughts and deeds! "Seeing that these [present] 
things are to be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to 
be in all holy living and godliness, looking for and earnestly 
desiring the coming of the day of God! . . . According to 
his promise we look for a new heavens and a new earth, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness. Wherefore, beloved, seeing 
that ye look for these things, give diligence that ye may be 
found of him in peace, without spot and blameless" in his 
sight. ie Ye therefore, beloved, knowing these things beforehand
, beware lest, being carried away with the error of the 
wicked, ye fall from your own steadfastness. But grow in 
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. To him be the glory both now and forever. Amen." — 

2 Peter 3:13-18. 

CLOSING EXHORTATION 

In view of what we see ahead of us as sharers with Jesus 
of his glory, honor and immortality, we should be leading 
holy lives. We should be living in the future rather than 
in the past. Do not think too much of the past. Let us not 
live in the past and dwell upon our mistakes and shortcomings
, and thus be cast down; but let us believe that "if we 
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." (1 John 
1:9) And we should have such an appreciation of these 
mercies and blessings of forgiveness as to show it forth in our 
conduct. 

Let us give heed more and more to the suggestion of 
our text, and consider him whom the Father has so greatly 
exalted — so highly exalted. Let us remember that he has 
called us with the same high and heavenly calling and has 
promised to help us all the way through! If we remember 
this, we shall cease to be weary and faint and shall become 
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; we shall 
go on from grace to grace, from glory to glory; we shall he 
transformed by the renewing of our minds, more and more 
proving what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of 
God. Then, finally, we shall attain unto the glorious things 
which he has in reservation for those who love him more 
than parents, or children, or self, or any other person or 
thing. 

"Hold on thy way with hope unchilled, 

By -faith and not by sight ; 
And thou shalt own his Word fulfilled — 

At eve it shall be light." 


[6065] 


FOREIGN BRANCH REPORTS 


BRITISH BRANCH REPORT 

Deab Bhetbben: — 

It is once again our privilege to send to you the Annual 
Report of the British harvest work. Included in the War 
zone, as Britain is, we are very thankful to our heavenly 
Father that we are able to send so gratifying a report. Opportunities
 for witness have been greatly affected by the war, and 
the operation of the Military Service Act has taken from us 
many of our valued workers. Other features, such as the 
cost of living, the darkened streets, making travel by night a 
risky matter, and for some time past the lessened supply of 
tracts, have all interfered to some extent with active propaganda
. Conditions might have been much worse, and we are 
therefore very thankful for the work's sake and for the 
brethren's sake that in the Lord's providence we have had so 
favorable a time under adverse conditions. The general condition
 of the country is not altered in outward appearance, 
and despite the difficulties the good work continues to go forward
. 

The Colporteur Department has suffered considerably 
through the altered conditions, but there has been much 
activity during the year. War work has brought prosperity
 to some and employment to many. The rate of unemployed
 in 1916 was the lowest on record, and as fairly 
good wages have been paid, there has been plenty of money 
about. We have now on the list a total of 45 colporteurs, 
nearly all of whom find their work self-sustaining, while not 
a few report an increased percentage during the year. We 
would urge upon all who have the necessary talent and time 
at their disposal the importance of this branch of service. 
The opportunity is still great, but signs are not wanting 
that soon "the night cometh, wherein no man can work." 

The output of Studies for the year is no leas than 71,776, 
most of which has been handled by the colporteurs. 

In the volunteer work the dear brethren have labored to 
make up for the depletion in their numbers. The number of 
B. S. M. delivered as volunteer matter is 5,926,000 copies, while 
the total distribution of free literature amounts to 7,198,145 
copies. We are very pleased to be able to report this, and we 
are sure the brethren have been greatly blessed in their labors. 
We were for a short time limited through lack of funds, and 
then of paper. The B. S. M. cost almost twice as much as in 
pre-war days, even though we use a cheaper paper. 

The class extension work has revived and is on the increase
. The exhibition of the Photo-Drama of Creation, although
 closed down for several months, has commenced again, 
with considerable success. 

Three general conventions have been held and have proved a 
means of messing to the dear friends in these difficult times. 
The pilgrim service is much appreciated by the classes, more 
especially at the present time, when so many have had their 
elders removed by the Conscription Act. At no time have the 
brethren needed comfort, encouragement and counsel so much as 
now. 

Since the introduction of compulsory service in this 
Country— in March, 1&16 — there have been 153 of the brethren 
imprisoned as Conscientious Objectors to Militarism, and all 
of these continue under Government control — separated from 
their homes. This has meant considerable suffering in the 
cases of some of the married brethren, whose families of 
five and six children have been left without any visible means 
of support. Those brethren more favorably situated have joyfully
 assisted to the best of their ability and, as a result, we 
do not think there has been any real distress so far. 

The dear friends have kept the office alive with their letters
, and we have to report the goodly number of 23,383 received
 and 25,484 sent out. 

The death of our beloved Pastor i& the outstanding feature 
of the British Harvest Work, as it U with you, and all. The 
news camae with staggering suddenness; the expected happened 
unexpectedly. But with the assurance in the hearts of the 
brethren that the work is the Lord's, there has been no faltering
 nor hesitancy, and the brethren are prepared to carry on 
the work of the Lord as it has been manifested through the life 
and writings or our dear brother and Pastor. 

We are indeed grateful to the Society for the assistance 
and comfort sent us in various ways since the death of our 
beloved Brother Russell. These have served as a great stimulus
 to the brethren. We are looking forward to increased 
activity for a time through the pastoral work, and are endeavoring
 to set ourselves in order for the increase which we 
believe the Lord will send. 

W r e enclose a summary of the circulation of the Studies. 
Briefly the figures are: 


Studies in the Scbiftures 71,776 

Books, Mannas, Scenarios 20.257 

Booklets ..." 16,400 

Tracts of all kinds 7,198,146 

Letters sent out 

Letters received 


Becrease 

18,924 

19,540 

8,108 

3,586,625 

25,484 
23,383 


48,867 
The summary of the year'B Finance is as follows : 

CASH SUMMARY 

Nov. 1, 1915— Oct. 31, 1916. 

£ ft. d. 

Nov. 1, Cash on hand 952 : 10 : 1 % 

Receipts 13,269: 9 : 2 

£14,221: 19: W> 


£ s. d. 

Expenditures 13,019 : 17 : oy 2 

Balance on hand 1,202: 12: IV2 


£14,221: 19: 'iY 2 
Appreciating all your loving cooperation in giving us supplies
 of material with which to help carry on our work, and 
your loving sympathy, we are, 
Yours in His grace and service, 

W. Crawford, 
H. J. Shearn, 
J. Hemeby, 
British Brcunch Managers. 
REPORT OF THE AUSTRALIAN BRANCH 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

It is with a full and tender heart that this letter is hegun
. Had it not been for the pressure of work it would probably
 have been sent last mail and addressed as usual to our 
dearly beloved Pastpr, our Brother Russell. For over a 
quarter of a century I have loved him, not only for his work's 
sake, but also for his beautiful character, have rejoiced in 
the truths he has sent out as "meat in due season/' and in 
his counsel, admiring the sympathetic, kind, loving • nature 
so grandly blended with fortitude and strong determination to 
do and dare anything in order to accomplish what he believed
 to be the divine will or the unfolding of his Word. 

While there is a sense of loneliness as one realizes that 
this strong stay is removed in person, yet one cannot but rejoice
 that he has finished his course, fought a good fight 
and gained the great reward, "Well done, good and faithful
 servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." "Praise ye 
the Lord!" It was praise as soon as his lips could frame 
the song to his Creator, I do believe ; and it haa been praise 
and sweet incense from the golden altar all his life. We can 
but reecho the same now that we know that the abundant entrance
 into the kingdom has been administered. "Praise ye the 
Lord!" His life has been an inspiration to me, and his death 
seems to impress one the more with desire to prove also 
faithful and loyal to the Lord, following him even as he followed
 Christ. It is good to think that his intensest sufferings 
did not extend over a long period. No doubt Jehovah saw that 
he had borne sufficient of the cross throughout his course. No 
doubt many of us would like also to take our tickets, enter 
the train and go home; yet "Thy will be done," while we wait 
patiently upon him. 

The work of another year has been such that w^e may rejoice
 in that "our labor has not been in vain in the Lord." 
While our records show a diminution in the output of Volumes 
of Studies, as also of free literature, the reasons are apparent
. On the other hand, there has ,been a good increase of 
interested readers, and, what is still better, we are sure that 
there it is deeper sense of responsibility in regard to the, holding
 of the truth, and the necessity of sending out the light 
of the glorious Gospel of the divine plan, which alone can 
offer the comfort and consolation which the desolated homes 
and wounded hearts require in this day of trouble. The events 
of our day are to us developments of the great Architect's 
plan; and the various features of the changing dispensation become
 clearer as we progress and as our faith grows stronger. 
The removal of our beloved Pastor is only another evidence of 
the closing of the harvest work in the near future. 

As you are aware, it was the shortage of paper which curtailed
 the work of sending out the free literature. The 
friends everywhere have been just as zealous as ever; and if 
materia'] last*, we may depend upon there being a good work 
in this direction; for never was there a time when the Truth 
was mpre acceptable to the people. The fact that Christian 
ministers of all churches have been energetically aiding the 


(102-103) 


[6066] 


April 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(103-104) 


military in the matter of recruiting and preaching conscription
 in their pulpits has made a great many people disgusted 
with their professions; and many have left the churches on 
this account and just need the satisfying portion of truth. 

The pilgrim work here is difficult to operate in a regular 
way on account of the great distances. Nevertheless all the 
States of the Commonwealth have been visited with the exception
 of West Australia; and we are hoping that our Brother 
Brewster will be along there shortly. Besides this, there has 
been the follow-up work in connection with the Photo-Drama 
of Cbeation. 

The Drama has been shown at fifteen different places — 
164 exhibitions with attendances of about 65,050. Great interest
 has been evidenced. Good attendances have been at the 
follow-up meetings; and 928 names have been received as 
having been helped by the Drama and desirous of having some 
literature. A great' number of volumes have been supplied 
to these, when our workers have called upon them; and there 
are many now rejoicing in the fulness of the truth through 
this means. 

Brother Michehnore is operating, and Brother Brewster 
giving the Finale talks and follow-ups. While it is expensive
 through long distances, and few friends around who 
are able to accommodate the brethren, yet they have done remarkably
 well. 

The colporteur work continues to go fairly well. The war 
conditions, while favorable from the standpoint that people 
are more easily interested in these matters, yet have on the 
whole probably interfered somewhat with the work. One or 
two of our colporteurs have through sickness or other cause 
not been able to continue. There is still a happy band of 
faithful workers — about 14 or 16 — and then others that can 
do a little now and again. 

Brother Nelson has taken the Finale, follow-up work and 
a little extension work in New Zealand. The friends there 
are zealously entering upon a work with the Eureka Drama, 
and good reports are being heard of their efforts. 

The Brisbane, Perth and Tasmanian brethren have also 
been zealous with the Eureka Drama. We had hoped to have 
reports of results of their efforts to include with this, but 
have received particulars from only one in Tasmania, He 
has had 44 shows, with attendances of 1,560, for which he 
traveled 500 miles. Probably the largest Eureka Show was 
at Broken Hill, where the attendance was about 1,500 at one 
meeting. 

It is a great privilege to serve the Lord's cause and his 
dear flock. We realize that without- ;hjs grace to helj> and 
the strength and comjfort from the lore - of the ddar friends, 
together with their loving assistance vn every way possible, our 
efforts would be of no avail. Wftiat is done is the Lord's doing
. His Spirit is working through his people in zeal and 
sacrifice; and so we swing into another year relyingoa the 
promised grace to help in every time of need; for **When I 
look at *elf I tremble, when I look to thee Vm strong." 

With Christian love to all, and praying for you the wisdom
 from above that such arrangements may. be made for the 
carrying on of the work of the Lord as shall best serve his 
cause, 

Yours in the Service of Christ, R. E. B. Nicholson. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK— OCT. 31, 1915-NOV. 1, 1016. 

Studies its the Scriptures, Bound 

Vols 21,040 

Studies in this Scriptures, Paper 

Edition 2,136 


23,176 
Booklets 3,350 


811 
693 


Photo-Drama of Creation Soen* 

ARIOS, Cloth 

Photo-Dra.m a of Creation 
Scenario Booklets 

free literature 
B. £. M., Everybody's Paper, and 

and P. P *. 843,620 

The Watch Tower "4,118 

Hell Towers •. 1,341 

Debates 170 

Free Copies Photo-Drama lectures. 25,030 

Letters received 4,371 

Letters sent out , 6,132 


26,526 


1,504 


874,278 


expenditures 

Owing to Brooklyn Office, 

1915 £1,959:14: 3 

Pilgrim Work 80:12: 8 

Photo-Drama Work 239: 6: — 

Printing, Posting, etc., 

People'b Pulpxt 374: — :10 

Stereos, travel, etc., in 
connection with Publication
 of sermons 128: 3 : 6 


Freight, postage, etc. . . . 

48: 

9: 5 


Gas, rent (house and office
), and Personal Expenses
 

103: 

1: — 


Draft to Brooklyn on a/c 




Print Paper 

100: 

. 


Exchange on Same 

1: 

5: — 

£3,034:12:8 




receipts 



Donations received £ 

906: 

7:10 


" to Photo-Drama 




fund 

115: 

8:10 


Subscriptions to Peoples 


Pulpit 

126: 

14: 4 


Subscriptions to Newspapers
 with Sermons 

35: 

17:— 


Now Owing to Brooklyn 




Office 

1,852 

!: 4:8 

£3,034:12:8 


Beside the above amounts contributed to the Tract Fund 
and the Photo- Drama Fund there have been other expenditures
, by friends in various parts in paying the local expenses 
of Drama operations. This we know to have amounted to 
£255. Also a considerable amount has been spent by classes 
operating the Eureka Drama; for instance, Brisbane, Perth, 
Broken Hill, Hobart, Wynyard (Tasmania), and New Zealand. 
We had hoped to have particulars of the number of these 
meetings and their attendance ; these have not come to hand as 
yet. EEPOET FROM FEENCH BRANCH 

Beloved Bbethben: 

Looking back over the past year we perceive the innumerable
 blessings which the Lord has shed upon us in permitting 
the translation of Vol. 5, Studies in the Scriptures, the 
Journal pour Toua, containing our dear Brother Russell's sermons
, four new Tracts, the Great Pyramid pamphlet and the 
Photo-Dbama pamphlet, of which 2,000 copies have been 
printed on two different occasions during the year — in all, 
4,000 copies. Here, are assets given us by the Lord as talents 
to invest and to make the most of, in order that the house of 
God may be abundantly tuppUed with spiritual food. Let us 
show our gratitude towards God by serving him acceptably 
with reverence and godly fear (Hebrews 12:28) ; and let us 
value highly all the privileges given us, and remain faithful 
during his harvest. 

In spite of our weaknesses and our poverty the Lord has 
nevertheless been willing to shower his blessings upon his dear 
work. In all departments there has been a great increase of 
business. 

Despite many struggles and difficulties we have continually 
placed the work before the Lord ; and he has heard our prayerB. 
Since the work is his, it cannot fail. On the contrary, while 
our balance sheet closed last year with a deficit of 2208.53 
Fr., this year it closed with a surplus of 729,65 Fr. We are 
living in a perturbed period of the world's history; and the 
adversary tries hard to strike us down with his poisoned 
arrows or with bis noisome pestilence. (Psalm 91:5-7) Therefore
 we watch and pray, that we may have the disposition of 
our Lord and may banish from our hearts all that is not 
love. 

Our report from Nov. 1 1915, to Oct. 31, 1916, follows: 

Letters and cards received 3,740 

Letters and cards sent out 1,884 

Packages and parcels sent out 746 

Tracts, pamphlets sent out 58,610 

Papers distributed . . . . * 115*000 

Puolic lectures and presentations of the 

Peoto-Dbama 235 

Attendance at lectures arid Photo-Dbama 
(about) 51,277 

RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITtrfilQe 

Assets — from "Good Hoped,*' and other 
sources 22,498.74 Fr. 

Liabilities — money spent for general expenses
 21,769,09 " 


Balance on hand. 


729.65 


[&067-] 


(104-110) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


The Lord haa done great things for ua and we owe Him 
our deep gratitude. As we see the diminution of "Good 
Hopes," partly due to the present hard times, we think that 
some of our blessings have not been understood by all. ^ Is it 
not indeed a marvelous privilege to have the opportunity of 
continuing the Lord's harvest work, no matter the conditions? 
The Lord, seeing our faith, has supplied our needs. Thanks 
to important sales, we have been able to balance our accounts 
in a satisfactory manner. These sales, by judicious management
, have supplied the deficit in the "Good Hopes" for the 
year. 

With much Christian love and with our best wishes and 
greetings for you all from us all, I am, 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, A. Fbeytao. 
KBPOBT FROM FINLAND BBAKCH 
Dear Brethren: — 

My most affectionate regard to you. Here is my report 
from Dec. 15, 1915, to October 15, 1916: 
literature 

Studies in the Scriptures 400 

First Volume (special) 1,609 

2,009 

Booklets 1,772 

Bibles 23 

Subscriptions to Finnish Watch Toweb 539 

" Swedish " " 33 

572 

Watch Towers given out free 6,211 

Kilometers traveled by Pilgrims 19,938 

Meetings held 249 

Convention 1 

Letters and cards received 596 

Total number pieces of mail sent out 5,751 


expenditures 

Headquarters 6,067 : 51 Fin. Mks. 

Convention and meeting expenses 2,151:33 " " 
Watch Tower (Finnish and 

Swedish 1,933:20 " 

Postage and freight 460 : 38 " " 

Other expenses at Headquarters... 147:65 " " 

Help to Colporteurs 128:05 " 

Pastor Russell's sermon in the 

press 32:35 " " 

Cash on hand 878:37 " 

Total 11,798:84 " 

receipts 

Voluntary contributions 6,991:55 Fin. Mks. 

From Headquarters in Brooklyn .. . 1,961:98 <( (t 

Books sold 1,789:14 « 

Other donations 99:55 ** " 

Subscriptions to Watch Toweb... 956.62 " " 

11,798:84 " 

Four Colporteurs have been in the Held part of the time, 
but we have been out of books for some time. Now, however, 
we are beginning to receive some, and more are offering their 
services for the Colporteur work. 

Another Pilgrim and myself have been out the last few 
months holding meetings. The number of kilometers traveled 
by the other pilgrim is included in my report. 

I hardly know what else to write in regard to last year's 
work. However, I am thankful to God that I have been 
privileged to have some part in the harvest field, and that the 
work has gotten a fresh start, after having ceased altogether 
in August, 1915. 

Yours in Him, and by His grace, Marti Liesi. 


JESUS RAISES LAZARUS FROM THE DEAD 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "I Go That I May Awake Him," published in issue of April 1, 1908, which please see.] 


JESUS THE GOOD SHEPHERD 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "The Shepherd, the Door, the Flocks/' published in issue of March 15, 1908, which 

please see.] 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


WHX SUPPOET AND STRENGTHS* THE HANDS 

Deab Friends: — 

We have already, with the class at Loveland, expressed 
our heart-felt sympathy and love to the dear brethren at the 
Bible House for their loss, as well as ours, of "that faithful 
servant." But we desire to assure you again of our determination
 to bear up, support and strengthen the hands of those 
left in care of the work, by prayer for their guidance, and by 
any other means within our power, that they may be faithful
 in pointing the Lord's dear sheep to the green pastures 
and still waters. And haven't we six of these pastures, and 
are they not kept green by the water of the Word, the Spirit 
of truth that runs through them ? 

In Luke 12:43, out dear Lord said, "Blessed is that servant
 who, when he (Christ) cotmeth, shall find watching . . . 
He will gird himself and make them to sit down to meat 
and will come forth and serve them." Our dear Lord came in 
1874, girded to serve the whole church; but he appointed one 
visible servant as a steward through whom he gave his church 
"meat in due season." — Verse 42. 

There is no question but our dear Brother Russell was 
that steward; and now he is gone. He finished the work 
given him to do this side the veil. And now that the steward 
is gone, what shall we do? Must we starve* The Lord says 
he will spread a table in the presence of our enemies. And 
have we not just such a table, groaning under its load of 
"meat in due season ?" 

Let us look at some of the dishes. What are they? — the 
six Volumes of Scbhtote Studies, Towers and Tracts. What 
is in them? Let us lift tne covers and see. First, creation, 
then condemnation, law, ranBom, resurrection, justification, 
sanctification, glorification, restitution, second death. Then 
we have faith, hope, love, and all the fruits and graces of the 
Spirit. And we asked ourselves, "Have we perfected all these 
fruits?" and we answered, "No." Then we went to the table 
and began feasting upon the food to strengthen these fruits 
and graces ; and oh ! how sweet and strengthening those viands 


were to our souls! And we remembered the words of 2 
Peter 1:4-8, 10, 11, that through a knowledge of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus, grace and peace are multiplied unto us, and 
thereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises
, that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature
. But there is something more; for we must, besides this, 
give all diligence (all our time and strength), adding to our 
faith (how? by feasting on these precious truths now on our 
table) virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, god-likeness, 
brotherly kindness, love. If these-thinga be in us, and abound 
they make us that we will neither be barren nor unfruitful in 
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

So our determination is to more diligently feast at the 
table, that we may be filled, may abound to overflowing; for 
the Apostle says, "If ye do these things ye shall never fall; 
for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting kingdom." This is our determination to 
attain this kingdom honor, and is our prayer for all spiritual 
Israel. 

Your brother and sister by His grace, 

Mb. and Mrs. G. N. Chamberlain. — Colo. 
BESOLUTION TO STAND CLOSES TOOBTHBE 
Dear Brethren: — 

It has been our cuBtom in past years at our Annual Business
 Meetings to elect our dear Brother Russell as Pastor of 
the church here, but now that he is not with us in the flesh, 
but has entered into his reward, we can no longer do so. 
We have been glad to look to him for the precious "meat 
in due season" and for pastoral counsel through The Watch 
Toweb, Scripture Studies, etc. We believe him to have 
been God's faithful steward in supplying us with food from 
the store-house of God's Word. 

When we think of the confusion in which we were before 
reading the Studies in the Scriptures, and of the effect 
of these upon our hearts and lives, we testify that through the 
noble sacrifice of our late Pastor on our behalf, we have been 
led to a deeper reverence and love for God and an ever-lncreas* 


[6068] 


Aran, 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


OH-98) 


ing faith in and love for the Bible, aa God's inspired Word; 
to a stronger desire to be more God-like in thought and word 
and deed; to a fuller consecration of our lives to do the will 
of God and to be used in His service; to a greater* love 
for the brethren in Christ and for the world of mankind; and 
to an intelligent appreciation of God's plan as revealed in his 
Word. 

We desire to express our confidence in the wisdom of our 
late Pastor in selecting an Editorial Committee to carry on 
the good work, and rejoice in the great privilege which is 
yours in serving the household of faith. We convey to you 
our sincere Christian love and confidence, trusting that the 
Lord may continue to use you as faithful stewards in the 
interests of his people. We have full confidence in the Lord, 
and know that he who has led us thus far will lead us to 
the end; and with faces Zionward, we resolve to stand closer 
together in love, unity, humility and faith, under the Captain 
of our salvation. 

Yours in the glorious hope of the High Calling of God 
in Christ Jesus, Melbourne Ecclesia. — Australia. 

WBITTBN PARTLY BEFORE AND PARTLY AFTER BROTHER 
RUSSELL'S DEATH 

Dear Bbothee Russell: — 

Christian love and greeting in our Lord and Redeemer! 
My desire in writing is to thank the Lord for your ministrations
 in spiritual things. How gloriously beautiful the truth 
is, in letter and spirit, as you portray it both by word and 
example! We thank God for you, and feel our own shortcomings
, weaknesses, imperfections, and oh, such inability to 
perform the desires of the new mind! 

Every test and trial is a special one along the line of patient
 endurance and love, and we fear and abhor the thought 
of allowing anything like a Judas spirit to lodge in our minds. 
We feel it so difficult to endure patiently, uncomplaining, 
what God sees fit to permit. The blessedness of our Advocate
 is very precious. "He knows, and loves, and cares. How 
true it is that the flesh wishes to rise from its condition of 
reckoned deadness! 


My heart is too full — I can write no more, having heard 
of the glorification of our beloved Pastor! Oh, we bless 
the Lord for his marvelous life, and earnestly crave of the 
Lord a greater measure of his spirit of Christ-likeness! My 
prayer to God is to "prefer to be where the Lord prefers me 
to be!" May our gracious God and Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ our Advocate bless and keep God's children in 
the faith to the end! I am 

Your sister by His grace, Margaret Borden. — Scotland. 

"A MAN AFTER GOD'S OWH HEART" 

Bear Brethren: — 

We greet you, dear brethren in the Anointed, assuring 
you that we are not one whit behind the various classes and 


brethren over the known world with regard to the departure 
of so noble a man after God's own heart. Brother Russeirs 
character and influence knew no bounds — "the man of God," 
the under-shepherd of God's sheep, and our loving Pastor. 
Truly our hearts, like others, were disposed to shed tear 
drops, and though sighs of sorrow throb our hearts, yet we 
are confident that he has done his part and now has received 
his glad "Well done" from the Master's own lips. 

How he and Brother Paul must be shining lights of our 
God! Believing that those to whom the work is now entrusted 
will continue under the guidance of the holy Spirit to the 
completion of the harvest, we will endeavor to continue our 
earnest prayers for you, and all the ecclesias of God in Christ, 
until the fruition of our hopes is reached. 

Gatun Ecclesia. — Canal Zone. 

* 'LITTLE FLOCK" WILL NOT BR MISLED 

Dear Brethren: — 

We realize with you that there is work still to be done in 
the "harvest" field, and we rejoice in the preparation which 
"that faithful servant" left for the continuance of The Watch 
Tower for our spiritual nourishment. (Isaiah 21:6) 

Seeing with what carefulness Brother Russell handled 
the Lord's work, we cannot do otherwise than remain loval 
supporters of this work, until the waters are fully divided 
and we have done all the Lord has for us to do. 

We rest assured that the "little flock" will not be misled, 
but will receive the meat in due season; for it is written 
(Isaiah 62:12), "A city not forsaken"; again (Matt. 28:20), 
"Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the age." 
Therefore it behooves us to heed the Master's admonition 
(Rev. 2:10), "Be thou faithful unto death"— faithful to our 
covenant vows, and to do all we can both spiritually and 
temporally for the furtherance of the cause, in righteousness 
and love. 

So be assured, dear Brethren, you have our prayers, our 
sympathy, and our love as never before, and we shall esteem it 
a privilege to cooperate with you as we may be able. Pray 
for us. With mucn Christian love, 

Your brethren in the one hope of our calling in Christ 
Jesus. Everett Ecclesia. — Wash. 

WILL ASSIST THOSE LEADIHG IN THE VAN OJ TRUTH 

Dear Beethren: — 

The class here has passed a resolution to be forwarded 
to you to this effect. Assuring the Society of our sincere 
determination of loyalty to the truth to the best of our 
ability, and that we will assist in every way possible those 
responsible for and leading in the van of truth, m the harvest 
work and the smiting of the waters of Jordan, we cease not 
to pray for the oolaborers and that the divine blessing may 
be with you. 

In the name of our Lord and Master, 

The Class at Toogoolawah. — Australia. 


A WORD OF EXPLANATION 


Some time before his death Brother Russell arranged to 
have a set of fifty phonograph records made of the choicest 
old fireside tunes, many from the Millennial Dawn Hymnal, 
and on the reverse side a short talk by himself explaining 
the doctrinal points of the hymn. It was his thought that 
a large number of these should be prepared and sold to the 
five and ten-cent storeB, expecting that they would have a 
wide sale and awaken in the minds of the righteously 
disposed a desire for spiritual things. Brother Russell was 
always alive to use every channel possible to send out the 
light and truth and each of these talks is a gem itself. 

Friends who knew of his plan urged him to have the Bible 
Talks recorded in his own voice, This he did; but owing to. 
his rapidly declining strength, it was later found that his 
voice was not strong enough to make a good record. 

Brother Russell then thought to have them re-recorded by 
the gentleman who made the Creation Drama records so 
great a success. Our Pastor's death, however, upset these plans. 


The brethren interested in the Angelophone Company, believing
 that Brother Russell's friends would be very glad to 
have even so weak a record of his voice, continued to carry 
out his instructions so far as possible. Some of the friends 
who purchased the records, not understanding why Brother 
Russell's voice was so weak and low, and thinking the manufacturer
 at fault, complained. Others who purchased the 
records write that they are so well pleased that they would 
not be without them for a thousand dollars, if they could not 
secure another set. We believe that many more will take this 
same view when they understand all the circumstances. 

In the March 1st Tower we mentioned the fact that t^he 
Angelophone Co. is now going out of business. However, as 
they still have about five hundred incomplete sets of these 
records, and about two thousand machines, they are prepared
 to fill orders as long as the stock lasts. The machines 
have given general satisfaction, and play records of any make. 


ANGELOPHONE HYMN BOOKS 


The Angelophone Co. had prepared an attractive booklet 
containing the above mentioned fifty hymns with music, and 
an appropriate talk by Brother Russell on the reverse side of 
each page. These have been turned over to ua. Some of the 


friends have found them specially appropriate for public services
, occasionally presenting a copy to one who might show 
special interest. Two styles: Limp cover, 5c each; stiff cover, 
10c each, postpaid. 

[6069] 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., APRIL 15, 1917 


No. 8 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


Corroborative Evidence that 
" TIMES OF THE GENTILES" HAVE ENDED 
The Watch Tower, from time to time, has set forth the 
proof that the "Times of the Gentiles" have ended; that the 
monarchs of earth have had their day, and that Messiah's 
kingdom i3 at hand! We submit herewith some corroborative 
proof. 

From a legal viewpoint, the period of the Gentile dominion 
ended with October, 1914. Speaking in plain phrase, the 
world there came to an end! True to the words of the great 
Master, "The nations were angry, and thy wrath is come:" 
(Revelation 11:18) At the very end of the Gentile times 
the nations became angry and began to war with each other, 
and the great storm cf destruction has increased in its fury 
even beyond the imaginations of men. The loss of human 
life and earthly treasure lias staggered the world. The war 
still spreads, and without doubt will involve all the nations 
to a greater or less extent. 

Looking down to this very day, the Prophet of the Lord 
said, "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven 
set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and the 
kingdom shall not be left to other people; but it shall break 
in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand 
for ever." (Daniel 2:44) .Gradually, but surely, the present 
kingdoms of earth are being broken into pieces. Each day 
some explosion further weakens the walls of the present order 
of things, and soon the entire structure will fall with a great 
crash; and upon the ruins thereof will be erected the kingdom 
of righteousness, under the supervision of the great Messiah, 
and this kingdom will stand forever. 

REVOLUTION IN BUSSIA 
The Russian monarchy has fallen, no doubt never to rise 
again t With startling * and dramatic rapidity the change 
came — almost in one day. However, we do not understand 
that the revolution in Russia i= a fulfilment of the prophetic 
statement made by our Lord concerning the great revolution 
that is to follow the world war; but it shows , the tendency 
of the people* and their determination no longer to be dominated
 by autocrats, aristocrats or tyrants. When the rulers 
discover that they are losing their power, there will in all 
probability be an effort made to bring about peace, and there 
will probably be some make-shift proposition brought forward 
and adopted. But when all shall say, "Peace and safety, 
then sudden destruction coraeth upon them, and they shall 
not escape." — 1 Thessakmians 5:3. 

Even the worldly-wise see that this must be the inevitableresult
. An editorial writer in one of the leading New York 
dallies says: 

"The revolutions are not going to be confined to Russia. 
Hollweg sees and says that there is a new freedom coming 
for Germany as well as for Russia. 

"France has long had her freedom, but will undoubtedly 
progress further in the direction of Socialism. 

"The revolution :n England will be as complete as 
elsewhere, hut probably not spectacular or violent. The 
English people accomplish their revolutions, as they do 
everything else they undertake, in a stolid, undemonstrative
 way, but they accomplish them just the same. 

"If Russia was an autocracy, England was an aristocracy
. Everything in England has been for the benefit 
of the ruling or aristocratic classes. These aristocratic 
classes had a trust — a control in politics, in land-ownership
, in tax-exemption, in social recognition, in all kinds 
of benefits and privileges, 

"The mass of the people were reduced to the point 
of penury, and were leaving the British Isles in droves 
in order to find elsewhere the opportunity which they 
could not secure at home. 

"This Aristocratic Trust operated according to the 
accepted methods of the trust and absorbed into the 
trust any man who showed exceptional ability or ac* 
cumulated formidable wealth, ennobling him, making him 
a knight or a baron, and so aligning him and his influence 
and power with the aristocracy, instead of with the people
, from whom he came and with whom he should nave 
naturally been in sympathy. 

"Thug the Aristocratic Trust perpetuated its privileges 
and fortified its position. It rode the tna»sfc& ahnost a» 
cruelly as did the French aristocrats in the years that 
preceded the French Revolution. 

"No doubt that situation will be destroyed, and probably
 has been destroyed. The people of England will 
never be content to go back to the conditions that prevailed
 before the war. 


Messiah's Kingtk>m ib at Hand 

"How much further the revolution will go is a question
. If the war continues long enough, and the people 
of the various countries become sufficiently resentful at 
their rulers, we will have revolutions of riot and revolutions
 of repudiation — revolutions which will set up new 
governments and refuse to be bound by the obligations 
which the old governments incurred. 

* There ought to be a revolution in Germany as well 
as in Russia and in England, and there probably will be." 
SEASONS FOB GENEEAL REVOLUTION 
The time will come, and that ere long, when the peoples 
of the warring nations will awaken to the fearful condition 
brought upon them by the war. Soon they must realize that 
the able-bodied, wealth-producing men have been either killed 
or else rendered practically useless by the long and dreadful 
conflict; and the cost of living has greatly increased and is 
likely to go still higher j tnat their opportunities for earning 
money have greatly decreased; and that added to this will 
be the great bur Jen of taxation created by the war. Revolution
, repudiation and destruction are certain to follow. 
TOO LAEQE FOE HUMAN MIND TO GRASP 
The Chicago American recently published, editorially, the 
following figures concerning the debt now upon the nations 
of Europe as a result of the war; viz: — 

"Tlie total debt of the war in Europe is now one 
hundred twenty thousand million dollars ($120,000,000- 
000 ) . This means that in the years to come, barring revolution
 and repudiation of debts, the people of Europe 
already harassed, half starved, killed and wounded in 
millions, must oarry on their backs an appalling debt of 
$120,000,000,000. 

"The interest on this amount, at only o% — and most 
of it was borrowed at a higher rate— ^amounts to six 
thousand millions of dollars every year. 

"The people of the warring nations must pay this six 
thousand millions every year— six times the total national
 debt of the United States at present; and after 
they have paid the six thousand millions of dollars a year 
in interest, they will still owe the one hundred and twenty 
thousand millions." 
These figures represent a condition too enormous for the 
human mind to fully grasp. But by way of aiding the mind 
in this respect* we call attention to the fact that — according 
to the best information obtainable — twenty thousand million 
persons have lived on the earth during the six thousand years 
from Adam's day until now; thus a war debt of $120,000,000,- 
000 is equivalent to $6 per head for every man, woman and 
child that has ever lived. It is hardly necessary to suggest 
that revolution and repudiation of this great debt will naturally
 follow. 

WHO ABE RESPONSIBLE?— KINGS OB CLERGY 7 
The common people have not of their own choice madt? 
this enormous debt. It was not the common people who sought 
the war. Of the millions that have died upon the battle-fields, 
and the millions of widows and orphans that have wept at 
home, not one of them has had a voice in determining whether 
or not the people should go to war. The kings and rulers 
have prepared for war, and have sent their subjects forth to 
war without; even asking their consent. The king3 from time 
immemorial have claimed to rule by divine right, and that 
therefore whatever action they would take, whether for war 
or for peace, would be right. It has long been a part of the 
unwritten laws of these nations that "The king can do no 
wrong." 

But hack of the kings there is another clasB of men who 
are even more responsible, and therefore more reprehensible; 
namely, the clergy class! For more than fifteen centuries 
these, as the spiritual advisers of the kings of Europe, have 
told them that they— the kings — rule by divine right. These 
clergy have supported their kings and rulers without regard 
to whether they were right or wrong. The clergy have shielded 
themselves behind their pious garbs and encouraged, advised 
and abetted the kings in their unrighteous and murderous 
work. The day of retribution is at hand, and God's wrath 
will fall upon 'both kings and clergy. 

THB KINGS VERSUS THE PEOPLE 
Charles Edward Russell, a writer of national fame, through 
the public press, recently said: 

"The kings of the earth conspire to keep monarchy 
still throned. The people of the earth arise and kick 
all. these devices into forgotten fragments. 

"One of the most colossal of these astute plotting* 


(H5-U6) 


[60701 


April 15. 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(116 117) 


went to pieces when the Russian people got tired of the 
fantastic yoke of the king business and cast the thing 
far from them. 

"Ever since that day in July, 1789, when the Bastille 
fell in Paris, there has been a royal trade union to keep 
the kings on their jobs. 

"Whatever their countries might be forced to do, or 
seem to do, after that, all the kings of Europe have been 
bound together by a secret alliance and the ritual of 
their trade union. 

"One way to promote trade interests and keep the 
jobs was to link up the various thrones by carefully made 
marriages. 

"Hence the German rulers, having an over-supply of 
princelings on hand, started in early upon a deliberate, 
fixed policy to Germanize Europe. 

"After a century of that policy the result is seen in 
the fact that every king of Europe is either a German 
or has much German blood in his veins. 

"Wherever an heir to a throne has been sighted as approaching
 the marriageable age a German has been picked 
out for a consort. 

"To mention only a few of the achievements, the 
king of England is a German. For generations German 
has been the household language of the British royal 
family. Queen Victoria^ spoke English with a marked 
German accent; German* was her native tongue. Even 
Edward VII. was not perfectly at home in the language 
of the country he ruled. 

"Three members of the British royal family are now 
bearing arms against Gxeat Britain, because they are 
German princes as well as British, and their German 
allegiance naturally seems first to them. 

"The queen of Belgium is a German. The queen of 
Holland is of German descent and is married to a German. 

"The poor little man just taken by the scruff and lifted 
from the throne of Russia is seven-eighths German. His 
empress, who had to be hidden from the indignant Russian
 populace, was one of the vast army of German 
princesses that have been distributed about fiurope. 

"The king of Italy is largely German. The king of 
Spain is also one of the Hapsburgs. 

"The queen of Greece is the Kaiser's sister. It was 
the German Queen of Greece that ruined that country 
in the interest of Germany. 

"She kept Greece from observing its treaty with Serbia
; kept it from its obvious policy, which was to join 
the allies; and finally drove its king to plunge it into its 
present state of pitiable wreckage. 

'It was the German empress of Russia that led and 
inspired the pro-German party there through the most 
astounding drama of intrigue, treachery and betrayals 
that was ever known among men. 

"All the time that the government of Russia was 
pledging faith to the allies and the soldiers of Russia 
were ostensibly fighting on that side, the real and unseen 
power behind all this was working for Germany. 

"It was the pro^German party that armed the Russian 
troops with sticks and crowbars for guns, provided their 
cannon with ammunition that fitted German artillery, 
but not their own, sent them to destruction or defeat, 
surrendered them by the thousands, and soaked the soil 
of Poland with their blood, needlessly sacrificed. 

"The extent of this colossal treason staggers the 
imagination and makes all the fiction in the world look 
tame. It has greatly prolonged the war, cost hundreds 
of thousands of lives, wasted millions of treasure and 
laid upon the patient people a burden under which they 
will stagger for generations. 

"All for the sake of the Hohenzollerns and the supremacy
 of the kings, 

"Russia has awakened from its monarchial trance. 
A democracy at last, she has now tak«h he* true place 
with the other democracies, fighting the mad dog of 
monarchism, now in its lair. 

"They sang 'The Marseillaise' in the streets of Petrograd
, and at the news all democrats around the world 
sang with them. 

"They had reason to sing. These democrats have left 
Germany and Austria the only autocrats in Europe. 
They have made the issue of this war so clear that no 
longer can either a liar or a coward side-step it. 

"It is to be democracy against autocracy, or the people 
against the thrones. 

"The last great struggle, clean-cut, sure, unmistakable 
— the world for the kings or the world for its people." 


BUND TO MASTER'S PRINCIPLES 

The clergy have a great opportunity at this time (were 
they awake to their privileges) of comforting the people and 
telling them what this trouble means, and of admonishing 
them, in the language of the Lord, to "seek meekness, seek 
righteousness!'^ They have a groat opportunity to point the 
people to Messiah's kingdom and to teach the principles of 
love which he taught. But alas, they are unfaithful to the 
high office which they occupy! 

We quote below the words of some of these to show that 
while they claim to be followers of the Prince of Peace, and 
pose before the people as the teachers of the message of the 
Lord Jesus, their words show that they are blinded to the 
great principles for which he stood. 

The Rev. Dr. Newell Dwight Hillis, Pastor of Plymouth 
Ohurch, Brooklyn, in an address before the Union Branch of 
the Y. M. C. A. in the Bronx, N. Y. City, on March 25. 
according to the public press, said: 

"I am willing to forgive the Germans for their atrocities
 just as soon as they are all shot. If you would give 
me happiness, just give me the sight of the Kaiser, Von 
Hindenberg and Von Tirpitz hanging by a rope. If we 
forgive Germany after the war, I shall* think the whole 
universe has gone wrong." 
The Rev. Dr. Frederick W. Adams, speaking at the 23d 
Street Branch of the Y. M. C. A., N. Y. City, said: 

"If we enter the war we will be fighting for the ideals 
of the Declaration of Independence. It is the Christian 
duty of America to declare war upon Germany." 
EULERS THREATENED BY SOCIALISTS 
The Socialist-democratic party of Russia, in its official 
organ, The, Pravda, published on March 25th a resolution by 
its Central Committee* inciting the soldiers to leave the 
trenches and go over to the enemy. This, they assert, will 
immediately evoke a fraternal response on the part of the 
Germans, and the war among the nations will promptly 
collapse, enabling the army and the people to devote themselves 
to the overthrow of the ruling classes. 

FAMINES AND PESTILENCES TO FOLLOW 
When our Lord Jesus was asked by his disciples what would 
be the proof of the end of the age, and the setting up of his 
kingdom, among other things he said: "Nation shall ri^e 
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall 
be famines and pestilences and earthquakes in divers places." 
We see now a partial fulfillment of this prophetic statement, 
in that practically all the nations of earth are engaged in 
deadly conflict. The available food supply is everywhere decreasing
 and the cost of living increasing, so much so that 
today there are thousands of persons suffering from hunger, 
even in America. For a number of years Germany had been 
able to produce about 35 bushels of wheat per acre. After 
the war began she was unable to bring fertilizers from South 
America, with the result that in the first year of the war the 
land produced less that 25 bushels per acre, and in the second 
year, the average production was only about 14 bushels per 
acre. 

In 1915 Canada produced 270 million bushels of wheat, 
whereas in 1916 only 155 million bushels were produced. 
Food supplies along all other lines, such as potatoes, onions, 
and other necessities are likewise much less than they were 
a few years ago. 

HOW TO KEEP DOWN HIGH COST OP LTyTNG 

This suggests that everywhere the people will be forced to 
practise economy. The day of luxury has passed, so far as 
the present order of things is concerned. Dr. Harvey W. 
Wiley, the well-known food expert, for many years in the 
employ of the U. S. Government, says: 

Whether we remain at peace or adventure on war, 
the Government should take over our food supplies. 

"Every family in the country must be able to buy 
staple foods at fixed prices. 

"Already one-tetitfr of the people of the United States 
are starving. Such starvation is largely due to stupidity, 
"Even today one dollar Bpent on" Indian corn will 
keep a working man well nourished for one month. Five 
dollars will supply four weeks' satisfying food for an 
average family. 

"Plain living? Of course! But you may take it from 
me 7 the war hp<* killM luxury for this generation. 

"Humanity is entering upon such a period of enforced 
economy as the world has never seen. Europe feels this 
today. We may realize it tomorrow. 

THE BALANCED RATION 
"When one dollar can purchase only 50 cents Worth 
of fpod the man who earns and the woman who spends 


£6071] 


(117-122) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


must learn what foods furnish most nourishment before
 they buy. 

"Corn bread, corn mush, any one of a hundred corn 
meal dishes with a baked potato and an apple supply a 
perfectly balanced diet. 

"For children miik is also necessary — one pint of 
milk per child per day. 

HEALTH FOE FOT7B CENTS 

"I will guarantee to keep any child in perfect health, 
growth and enjoyment on a daily ration of one-half pound 
corn meal and one pint of milk a day— cost four cents. 

"That plan steals the threat from food wars or railway
 strikes, and puts the quietus on the question of the 
high cost of living. 

HUNGRY CAN'T WOBK 

"A hungry child cannot be good; neither can it work 
or study properly. 

"My household of four makes four dinners from a 
five-pound roast, changing to a chicken on Sunday. The 
rest of our diet is fruit, potatoes and cereals. We work 
hard and are never ill. 

"My farmer, who earns one- twentieth of my wages, 
spends not less that five times as much per person on food 
for his household. 

PREJUDICE A FACTOR 

"My corn meal mush costs six cents a pound; his 
breakfast cereal sells for 25c a pound. 

"I offered to supply his corn and wheat free. 

,f( Nb thank you/ said he, 'my wife wouldn't stand 
for it. If we ate as you do, all the neighbors would 
make remarks/ 

"There lies the chief reason for the high cost of living
 — prejudice and fashion." 


A WORD TO THE WISE 

In view of the present conditions, we suggest to the friends 
of the truth that it would be well to begin the practise of 
economy along the lines suggested by the above food expert, 
and to lay in a supply of plain foods, such as corn meal. 

The facts coming from every source present a very dark 
picture, if you view it only from the standpoint of the world; 
but when we take the Lord's standpoint, it rejoices our hearts, 
because we see that the present unrighteous institutions of the 
earth are going down in the worst time of trouble the world 
has ever known, and that this marks the hour of deliverance 
for the last members of the body of Christ and the early establishment
 of Messiah's kingdom, which will bring peace and 
comfort, happiness and plenty, health and joy to every one 
who loves righteousness and will do righteously. 

MESSIAH'S KINGDOM IS HERE 

Let us, therefore, who are "children of the day," while we 
yet have opportunity, tell the people the glad tidings of the 
blessings which are 30 near at hand! This is the time for 
God's people to declare the day of his vengeance; that is to say, 
to point out to the world that this great trouble upon mankind
 is God's vengeance upon the selfish and wicked institutions
, and that the fall of "Babylon" and all systems of 
unrighteousness, which soon must take place, will make way 
for the deliverance of the people from the thraldom in which 
they have been held for centuries. This is the time above 
al) times for Christian people to comfort those who mourn 
and who desire to be taught the meaning of present events. 

We urge the dear brethren everywhere, therefore, to be 
zealous and active in the promulgation of the glad tidings 
of great joy. 'Then look up and lift up your heads, for 
your deliverance draweth nigh!" 


JESUS ANOINTED AT BETHANY 

[This article, excepting the first paragraph, was a reprint of that entitled "A Bottle of Spikenard, Very Costly," published in 

issue of April 1, 1899. The first paragraph was a reprint from article entitled "Perfume Very 

Precious," published in issue of April 1, 1905. Please see the articles named.] 


SOMETIME, SOMEWHERE, EACH FINDS GETHSEMANE 


"In golden youth, when seems the earth 
A summer land of songs and mirth, 
And not a shadow lurks in sight, 
We do not know it, but there lies, 
Somewhere, veiled under evening skies, 
A Garden all must sometime see, 

Gethsemane, Gethsemane ! 

Somewhere his own Gethsemane! 

"With joyous steps we go our ways, 
Love lends a halo to the days, 
Light sorrows sail like clouds afar, 
We laugh and say, *How strong we are!' 
We hurry on, and hurrying go 
Close to the border land of woe, 
That waits for you and waits for me ; 

Gethsemane, Gethsemane ! 

Forever waits Gethsemane! 


"Down shadowy lanes, across strange streams, 
Bridged over by our broken dreams, 
Behind the misty cape of years, 
Close to the great salt-font of tears, 
The Garden lies; strive as you may, 
You cannot miss it in your way. 
All paths that have been or shall be 
Pass somewhere through Gethsemane. 

"All those who journey, soon or late, 
Must pass within the Garden's gate, 
Must kneel alone in darkness there 
And battle with some fierce despair. 
God pity those who cannot say, 
'Not mine, but thine,' who only pray, 
'Let this cup pass!' and cannot see 
The purpose in Gethsemane. 

Gethsemane, Gethsemane ! 

God help us through Gethsemane ! " 


JESUS WELCOMED AS KING 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Hosanna in the Highest," published in issue of March 15, 1905, which please see.] 


JESUS THE SERVANT OF ALL 

[This article, with the exception of the paragraphs printed below, was a reprint from article entitled 

Example," published in issue of April 1, 1899, which please see.] 


"I Have Given You An 


The scene of today's lesson was the "Upper Room," and the 
occasion the anniversary celebration of the Jewish Passover 
supper, on the beginning of the 14th day of Niaan — which 
day ended at 6 P. M. on Friday. The preparations had been 
completed during the day for observance of the type, instituted
 the night before Israel's departure from Egypt; and as 
the Master sat down with the twelve to eat the supper, he 
spake, saying, "I have greatly desired to eat this Passover 
with you before I Buffer." — Luke 22:15. 

The Passover lamb typified "the Lamb of God," our Lord 
Jesus, and the eating of it pointed to the fact that the followers
 of our Lord throughout the Gospel age would feed in 
their hearts upon the Lamb of God, thus hy faith appropriating 
to themselves the blessings secured to them through his death ; 
"For even Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us; therefore 
let us keep the feast." 

But inasmuch as Jesus was the antitypical Lamb, it was 
appropriate that the type should after this cease to be observed
. Hence it was that Jesus, following this last typical 
supper, established the Memorial supper of unleavened bread 
and fruit of the vine, which symbolized his broken body and 
shed blood. 


[6072] 


April 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(122-124) 


LACK Or HUMILITY CAUSED LOSS OF GREAT BLESSIVCt 

The apostles, doubtless still filled with enthusiasm from the 
remarkable events of the week, were at a loss to understand 
the sadness of our Lord. Had they not witnessed the feast 
in the home of Lazarus, Martha and Mary, and the breaking 
of the alabaster box of costly ointment upon our Lord? Had 
they not witnessed his triumphal entry into Jerusalem amid 
the plaudits of the people, who exclaimed, "Blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest"? 
They had heard the Pharisees ask Jesus to put a stop to the 
demonstration, and the Master's reply that if the people should 
hold their peace the very -stones would cry out. (Luke 19:40) 
To fulfil the prophecy (Zechariah 9:9) there must be a shout, 
and there was a great shout. 

Moreover, had not the whole city been in commotion 7 And 
had they not accompanied the Master into the Temple and 
witnessed his driving of the money-changers therefrom? And 
when the Pharisees, Sadducees and others tried to confuse 
Jesus, they had observed how wisely he had turned all their 
arguments upon themselves, so that they dared not ask him 
any more questions, fearing lest their position would appear 
all the more untenable. 

These thoughts, added to the one that the kingdom was 
approaching and that places would be apportioned, were uppermost
 in their minds and were no doubt partly responsible 
for the rivalry which sprang up among them, as a result of 
which, when they came to the upper room, they had not the 
humility of mind to take thought of serving either the Master 
or one another. It was the custom of the well-to-do Jews to 
have a servant to minister to the comfort of the guests; but 
there was no servant present on this occasion, and none of the 
apostles had the humility of mind to offer to be the servant. 
How great a blessing was thus missed by these disciples! 
And what a remarkable opportunity was thus afforded the 
Master to teach a lesson in humility! 

"HAV1HG LOVED HIS OWK, HI! LOVED THEM TJNTO THE 
END" 

Apparently our Lord let the situation progress to the full. 
He waited until supper was being served (not ended, as in 
our Common Version) ; then, arising from the table, he laid 
aside his mantle and secured a basin and a towel. Girding up 
his garments so as not to interfere with his movements, he 
began to wash their feet. 

We can well imagine the surprise of the apostles as they 
watched the procedure, noting the Master go from the feet 
of one to the feet of another, as they extended from the 
couches upon which the apostles reclined. 

The account of today's Study opens up by declaring, "Having
 loved his own which were in the world, he loved them 
unto the end." Truly, as Jesus himself said, "Greater love 
hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for 
his friends"! Again, he said, 'I am the Good Shepherd; the 
Good Shepherd giveth his life for the sheep." The tender care 
he had for his sheep, and the untiring zeal which he manifested
 in their preparation for future service, was fast consuming
 his vitality. On the cross the pouring out of his 
life was fully completed. "He poured out his soul unto 
death"! 


The washing of the disciples' feet by our Lord was a sharp 
reproof for their neglect to wash his feet and the feet of one 
another. Doubtless they were very silent for a time while 
the service proceeded. The lesson was having the designed 
effect; but the Lord's words to Peter, "What I do thou knowest 
not now, but thou shalt know hereafter," clearly show that 
the depth of the lesson could not be fully appreciated at 
that time. 

Nevertheless Peter protested, saying, "Thou shalt never 
wash my feet!" The noble Peter had too much reverence to 
wish the Lord to be his servant. But when Jesus said, "If 
I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me," this thoroughgoing
, whole-hearted disciple urged, "Lord, not my feet only, 
but also my hands and my head!" But the Master explained 
that "He who hath been bathed hath no need except to wash 
his feet."— V. 10. Diaglott. 

The intimation was that as St. Peter had bathed, which 
wa3 in accordance with the Jewish requirement of the putting 
away of all filth at the beginning of the Passover season, 
he now merely needed the rinsing of his feet, the cleansing of 
the members that came into close contact with the dusty 
highways of that time. 

THE HEINOUS SIN OF JUDAS 

The last six words of Verse 10, "Ye are clean, hut not 
all," referring to the foul conspirator Judas, clearly show 
that our Lord also had in mind another cleansing, a much 
higher one, of which thi3 washing of their feet and their 
previous .bath were but the figures — "the washing of water by 
the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, 
not having spot or wrinkle or any sueh thing." — Ephesians 
5:26, 27. 

Although our Lord Jesus "knew who should betray him" 
(V, 11), and that Judas had already bargained with the 
chief priests, and was merely waiting for the opportune 
moment to carry out his malevolent design, yet Jesus did 
not pass him by, but washed his feet with the others. 

Ivone but Judas understood the reference to himself, or 
the subsequent words recorded in Verses 18, 26-28 — these, 
however, not being a part of today's Study. Although our 
Lord went so far as to quote the very prophecy which marked 
Judas and his disloyalty — "He that eateth bread with me hath 
lifted up his heel against me" (Psalm 41:9) — none of these 
things moved the arch-betrayer, none appealed to him in such 
a manner as to change his wicked course. 

Thus Jesus explained that it would be one of his own chosen 
twelve who would betray him — one of those who would later 
dip with him in the dish, partaking of the same supper, the 
same bread, the same roasted lamb. All this signified a very 
heinous breach of friendship. It was most sad to contemplate 
that the traitor should be one who had been a bosom friend 
and disciple. 

"'Unto the end!' Thine own? 
dear and blessed Master ! Can it be 

That, nevermore alone, 
Our weary hearts may dwell in peace with thee, 

Knowing that to the end 
Thou wilt be with us, walking by our side, 

Our Guardian, Guide and Friend, 
Until in heaven we shall with thee abide!" 


THE CHRISTIAN'S DUTY IN TIME OF WAR 


Factories and business houses throughout the United 
States are circulating amongst their employees a petition, 
usually in the following form: 

"As an American* faithful to American ideals of 
justice, liberty and humanity, and confident that the 
Government has exerted its most earnest efforts to keep 
us at peace with the world, I hereby declare my absolute 
and unconditional loyalty to the Government of the United 
States and pledge my support to it in protecting American 
rights against unlawful violence upon land and sea, in 
guarding the Nation against hostile attacks, and in upholding
 international rights." 
Numerous Watch Toweb readers are asking advice as to 
the signing of this paper. Our answer is that every resident 
of America should be faithful to the ideals of justice, liberty 
and humanity, and should exert his most earnest efforts to 
keep the peace; and as between the United States and any 
other government on earth, his loyalty should be to the United 
States Government; but when it comes to a Christian pledging 
his unconditional support to the protection of American rights 
on land and sea, that would mean pledging himself to take 
up arms and actively engage in war. The question then arises, 
What is one's duty under such circumstances? 

We answer, There is a difference between the duty that devolves
 upon one who is not a Christian and one who is a 
Christian. In both Catholic and Protestant churches are 
found some Christians. But the mere fact that one belongs 
to some church denomination is not evidence that he is a 
Christian. Many nations claim to be Christian, but there ia 
no Christian nation on earth, for the reason that there is no 
nation in which every person claims to follow Christ. Many 
of those who claim to be Christians disregard the teachings 
of Christ. This applies equally to the clergy and laymen. 
The clergymen throughout the country are urging their parishioners
 to join the army, many of them saying, "It is the 
Christian duty of America to declare war upon Germany.** 

A true Christian is one who believes that Jesus Christ is 
the great Redeemer of mankind, and who then makes a full 
consecration to do God's will; who is accepted by the Lord 
and begotten of the holy Spirit, and thereby becomes a follower
 of Christ Jesus. All such are ambassadors of Messiah, 
the King of Glory (2 Cor. 5:20), to whom the Lord has delivered
 his message of reconciliation for the world. The Lord 
has commissioned, or authorized, all such in the following 
words: "The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath 
anointed me to preach the glad tidings unto the meek ; he hath 
sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to 
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are 


[6073] 


(124-125) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord and the 
day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn." 
(Isa. 61:1-3) This applies to every true follower of Jesus 
who faithfully walks in his footsteps. — 1 Peter 2:21. 

No Christian could engage in war and remain a Christian; 
for the reason that Jesus did not engage in war. Jesus declared
 that he came not to destroy man's lives, but to save 
them. 

If men of the world desire to engage in war, that is a 
question for them to determine. The Christian well knows 
that God has permitted this great war to come upon the nations
 to develop amongst them conditions that will lead to 
revolution and anarchy, and that every nation that engages 
in this war will ultimately be involved in the greater trouble. 
The only advice that we have to give those who are not 
Christians is that given by the Lord through his prophet 
saying, "Before the day of the Lord's anger come upon you, 
seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth ; seek righteousness
, seek meekness; ifc may be ye shall be hid in the day of the 
Lord's anger." — Zeph. 2; 2, 3. 

Whatever question there might be about the duty of a 
man of the world who does not claim to be a Christian, there 
is no middle ground for the Christian. He can be true to the 
Lord and faithful to his consecration vow only by taking one 
course, viz., a refusal to engage in war. As reasons therefor 
he should, in kindness and in the spirit of love, yet with boldness
, tell those who will hear the meaning of the great trouble 
now upon the earth, and point out to them the nearness of 
Messiah's kingdom and the blessings that will follow its establishment
. Since he is the ambassador of the heavenly 
kingdom he should see to it that his time and strength and 
energy are devoted to peaceful pursuits, and to the declaring 
of the message of the kingdom of Christ. All this is his 
vocation. 

No Christian should resist the Government with force of 
arms. If the laws of the land provide for exemption for 
those who cannot conscientiously engage in war, then the 
Christian should take advantage of that. If it should come 
to the question as to whether or not a Christian would shoot 
his fellowman or be shot, it would be better for him to choose 
the latter rather than the former. He has made a covenant 
with the Lord to be faithful unto death, and no one can take 
his life until God's due time, so long as he is faithful to the 
Lord. It it bring suffering upon him to take this stand, then 
he should remember that the Lord promised that His followers
 must expect to suffer, and that the reward of life 
everlasting on the divine plane is promised to those who suffer 
faithfully with Christ unto the end. — Romans 8:16, 17. 


IN BE MXLITABT SERVICE 

Numerous letters are coining to us, asking advice as to 
what should be done with reference to complying with the 
statutes of the various States which provide for the registration
 of male citizens from 16 to 45 years of age. The statutes 
that are being passed by the various States are similar in many 
respects, and yet it will be necessary for us to have a copy 
of each one of these military Acts in order to give specific 
advice. Where the Act provides that all persons are required 
to give this information, there would be no good reason for 
declining to give the same. Where the Act further provides 
that certain persons are exempt from military service, but 
must file their affidavit within a certain time and with certain 
officers in order to be entitled to exemption, we advise that the 
brethren take advantage of this exemption by preparing and 
filing the affidavit required .by law. It is difficult for us here 
to give a form that will apply to all States, but if the Act is 
read carefully the form beiow can be used in most States, 
changing according to the terms of the law. We therefore 
suggest the following form: 

State of 

County of 


(name of person claiming exemption) being 
duly sworn, on oath says that he is entitled to exemption 
from military service, for the reason that he is a duly 

ordained minister; that since the day of he 

has been fully consecrated to the Lord and His service; 
that he cannot conscientiously engage in war in any form, 
and claims his exemption for the reason stated in this 
affidavit. 


Subscribed and sworn to before 
me this day of 


All persons who are duly elected elders by a vote of the 
eeclesia have received a church ordination, and all persons 
who are fully consecrated to the Lord (Luke 9:23; Rom. 12:1) 
have received the divine ordination as a minister of the Gospel
. — Isa. 61:1-3. 

The duty of a Christian is clearly set forth in the Scriptures
. There is no middle ground. For him to engage in 
war would be to disregard the commission the Lord has given 
him. To refuse military service would perhaps bring persecution
; but to engage in military service would be a violation 
of his covenant with the Lord, and this being true, no one 
would desire to engage in war, and hence should decline to 
enlist in the service of the army. 


PUBLIC INTEREST IN THE TRUTH INCREASING 


That the public is anxious to listen to discourses pertinent 
to the strange times through which the world is now passing 
is evidenced by the increasing attendance at the public meetings 
reported by the pilgrim brethren in the field. And at our 
larger public gatherings there is also a noticeable awakening. 
Recently at Boston four thousand people tried to crowd into 
the leading theater to hear, "Why Do the Nations W 7 ar?" and 
at a public meeting at the New York City Temple on the afternoon
 of Sunday, April 1, about fifteen nundred listened with 
intense interest to a discussion of the following topic: "Universal
 Peace — How Can it be Obtained?" It is reported that 
over eleven hundred were turned away. 

We are now conducting a series of lectures in various 
cities throughout the country. These are opened by a largely 
advertised public meeting by our President, or some other 
brother especially suited to public discourse, and followed by 
other Pilgrim brethren of ability. The results have been very 
gratifying, and the urgent invitations for fresh series are 
coming in so rapidly as to necessitate the extending of Brother 
Rutherford's appointments several months in advance. 


We rejoice that the Lord's blessing is resting upon the 
proclamation of the truth, and to know that there are still 
many hungering and thirsting after righteousness. How glad 
we are to be ambassadors of the One who is able to supply 
that which satisfleth the hungry and thirsty! 

More and more does the truthfulness of the prophetic utterances
 of the words of the Lord impress itself upon our 
hearts as we "behold a famine in the land — not a famine of 
bread nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the 
Lord." (Amos. 8:11) No doubt many more hungry hearts 
will accept the blessed message of the kingdom as we advance
 closer to the time when w no man can work." In view 
of the perilous times before us and the wonderful opportunities
 brought about by the approach of the great cataclysm, it 
behooves all the ambassadors of Christ, the heralds of the fast 
approaching kingdom, to be zealous, to be fully awake and 
doing with their might what their hands find to do, before 
the night fully settles down, remembering that "he that reapeth
, receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal." 


A TIMELY WARNING 


In a recent issue of The Watch Tower we called attention
 to the danger that might result to the brethren by' having 
the names of the Secretaries of the various ecclesias published. 
The following letter, which is a sample of many we are receiving
, proves the wisdom of the warning: 

Washington, D. C, March 30. 
"Dear Brother Rutherford : — Your recent warning 
in The Watch Tower against the publication of the 
of Class Secretaries was well-timed and necessary, Some 
publication erroneously gave my name as such for the 
eeclesia here, and I have been kept busy of late with letters 
from unknown friends who desire me to serve them in 
various ways, but do not even enclose stamps for reply, 


or seem to appreciate the reliability of information or assistance
 furnished by me. I enclose herewith pernicious 
literature received from a pernicious person who must 
have obtained my address in the way mentioned. 

"Your brother in Christ, E. H. T." 

The friends from numerous classes are sending us samples 
of literature which have come to them recently, softie addressed
, "Esteemed Friends," or, "Dear Friends," or "Dear 
Friend in Christ." This literature begins as though it were 
written -by a Bible Student, and winds up by soliciting money 
and urging that contributions be sent to the person named 
on the literature. 

Through the columns of The Watch Tower warnings 


[6074] 


Aran. 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(125-126) 


have been frequently given against various frauds that have 
been attempted upon our readers, and we shall continue to 
give this warning. We suggest to the brethren that when 
they have any doubt about literature that is sent them, they 
write and send it to us. We will be glad to render any assistance
 we can. At the same time be assured, dear brethren, 
that any literature that solicits money, either directly or indirectly
, is not sent by the Society, nor approved by the 
Society, 

Truly the warning that Brother Russell gave in The 


Toweb of November 1st, 1916, under the caption, "The Houb 
of Temptation," was very timely. 

A3 the following words of St. Paul applied to the church of 
Ephesus, so they apply with equal force to the church now: 
"After my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among 
you, not sparing the flock; also of your own selves shall men 
arise speaking perverse things to draw away followers after 
them." We suggest to the friends, therefore, that all literature 
coming to them which speaks unkindly of IJrother Russell 
be consigned to the waste-basket. 


SOME LETTERS 

PEAYEBS AND COOPERATION TO EXTENT OP ABILITY 

Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

Permit me to express my love for and my confidence in 
you. I have a hearty sympathy and love for the harvest 
work, and you shall have my earnest prayer and co-operation 
to the best "of my ability in finishing what dear Brother Russell
 prosecuted so faithfully for so many years. 

There is a little matter I believe I should mention to you. 
T have in the past given away to a few of the friends, and 
in a few instances recommended, eome books of Murray's and 
Fosdick's. As I see it now, T believe I did wrong in doing 
so. I have always acted on the Bible statement, "Despise not 
prophesyings ; prove all things, hold fast that which is good." 
While this is still true, yet our Lord said that in the end 
of the age, he would make his wise and faithful servant 
steward over all his goods, to give his household meat in due 
season; and I believe if we give heed to the Bible itself, and 
to the helps God has provided through that servant, and 
depend upon God to use his holy Spirit to guide ua into all 
truth, as he promised, we shall not want for spiritual instruction
. We will not need anything else, for other teachings 
are always more or less mixed with error. In the future I 
will confine myself to the pure message, and recommend the 
same to others. 

With continued prayer for your success in guiding the work 
of God, and for your own blessing, I am 

Your fellow servant in Him, Daniel Toole. 

Our Reply 
Dear Brothkr Toole: — 

Your letter of the 22d is before us. We thank you very 
much for it. We rejoice with you that you now see that 
such distribution of the books mentioned by you could hardly 
be in harmony with the Lord's will as we understand it, and 
that you appreciate the fact that the Lord has made provision
 for the household of faith in giving "meat in due season
" through his selected "wise and faithful .servant." The 
basis for our faith in the glorious prize set before us is a 
knowledge of the Lord's W T ord, and a clear understanding 
and appreciation of the same and a reliance thereupon. W 7 e 
never understood the plan of God until he was pleased to 
give it to us through the interpretations of his servant — our 
dear Brother Russell. If we would maintain our faith and 
increase it, it would seem absolutely essential that we abide 
by the food the Lord has supplied, and we are certain that 
we can be a greater help to the dear brethren everywhere if 
we confine ourselves to the spiritual food provided of the 
Lord through this channel. To search for spiritual food 
elsewhere is equivalent to saying that the Lord did not provide
 that which is sufficient through his chosen servant, and 
upon careful consideration we know that none of the fully 
consecrated would want to say this. 

We are glad to hear you say, "In the future I will 
confine myself to the pure message, and recommend the same 
to others." Abiding in the Lord, and his message abiding in 
us, we are sure we, can be of greater help to his sheep as we 
strive to minister upon them ae his willing bond-servants. 

We are in a time of great peril, and we all do well to take 
heed to the warning our dear Pastor left us in his last message
 to the church. We may expect, as he stated there, that 
some .will arise seeking to draw followers after them, and 
our duty to His people as representatives of the Lord and of 
the Socibttx, is to encourage them as much- as possible to stay 
close to the Lord's message. In ourselves we can do nothing, 
but we can do all things through Christ Jesus, who strengthened
 us. But to have his strength we must be in harmony 
with His way of doing things. 

We appreciate your words of encouragement and your 
prayers, and assure you that you have ours. May the Lord 
continue to bless you and all of his dear people, and to give 
us all the needed strength in ' this hour, to hold fast that 
which we have gained, ftie blessings of the Lord be with you. 

ANOELOPHONE BLESSINGS— "DEAD, YET SPEAKETH1" 
Dear Friends: — 

I wish to assure you of my continued loyalty to the Lord 


OF INTEREST 

and the Truth, and 1 shall endeavor to co-operate with the 
Society in every way possible in the further smiting of the 
waters of Jordan. My recent experiences since the death of 
our Pastor seem to have been very similar to those of the 
dear friends everywhere, as 1 note from The Watch Tower. 

I was shocked beyond measure at our Pastor's death. I 
went immediately to *my room, and dropping upon my knees, 
told the Lord how sad and bewildered I felt, and that" I could 
hardly understand why our Pastor should be taken so quickly 
and unexpectedly, but assuring the heavenly Father, however
, that I was perfectly resigned to hi 3 will in the matter, 
knowing that he knew best. I told the Lord that I had no 
desire to turn away, but that I would endeavor to go forward 
resolutely and give greater diligence, if possible, to make my 
calling and election sure. I further thanked him for the 
many blessings that I had received through the instrumentality
 of this noble servant, and that while we shall see his 
face no more in the flesh, we still have the precious truths 
from his pen that we may continue to feast upon. 

We read, "By the sadness of the countenance the heart 
is made better," and as we sorrow — "not as others," however — 
may we be drawn closer to the Lord. 

1 wish to relate, further, a recent experience that has been 
such a joy and blessing to us. About the time of our Pastor'3 
death I ordered a cabinet style Angelophone and 50 hymn 
records and some of the song books. 

These reached us in perfect condition only 3 or 4 days 
ago, and oh, what a feast we have already had! I just can't 
express the joy we have experienced in listening to hymns and 
the hymn-talks — especially the latter. 

W^hy, dear friends, we, so to speak, have Pastor Russell 
now in our parlor. Any time we want to have a little sermon, 
we have only to go and put on a record and start the machine, 
and it is just like hearing him in an auditorium, only we 
can't behold his face. I just couldn't help but think of the 
Scripture, "He, being dead, yet speaketh." When we reflect 
that this was one of the last of our Pastor's labors, how glad 
and thankful we are that God has added this blessing also ! 

Please accept our heart-felt sympathy as we realize that 
those of the Society who were so closely associated with our 
dear Brother Russell will doubtless feel the parting more 
keenly than we who are more distant. Asking an interest in 
your prayers, and assuring you that we remember you at 
the Throne of Grace, I remain, 

Yours in the Faith once delivered to the Baints. 

W. H. Burch.— III. 

CLASS EXTENSION WORK ENCOTTBAGED 
Dear Brethren : — 

Remarks in a recent number of The Watch Toweb concerning
 certain brethren offering their services to other 
classes, upon payment of expenses by the classes served, has 
suggested that it might be well to get your opinion concerning
 a certain practise here. 

For a number of years our class has been sending elders 
to nearby classes. This we are doing at the invitation of the 
classes referred to, so that it seems to me that the case here 
is different from the one mentioned in The Tower. However
, we would like to get your opinion as to whether you 
think this a wise practise. Some of the places we serve every 
Sunday, others three times a month and others once a month. 

Yours in Christ, A. L. Seeley.—JU. 

Our Reply 

It is not the purpose of the article in The Watch Tower 
to curtail in the slightest the opportunities of the brethren to 
serve other classes, when the classes invite the brethren to 
come. As we understand it, the .brethren of your Ecclesia 
serve the nearby classes at the request of those classes. 

There has for some time been a growing habit among certain
 brethren deeiring to make a trip through the country to 
write the classes along the way advising them that they would 
serve on certain dates, provided the classes pay their expenses
; in other words, this is a polite way of inviting the 
friends to defray the expenses of a trip, thus indirectly solicit- 


[6075] 


(126-127) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ing money from the brethren. This is contrary to the policy 
of the Society, and the purpose of putting the notice in The 
Toweb was to advise the friends that the Society does not 
encourage or approve such action. 

The Society has always encouraged the Class Extension 
Work, and will continue to do so, and when a class in any 
community invites a brother to come and serve, it is entirely 
proper that the brother accept. The Society is pleased to see 
all the dear brethren actively engaged in the service. 

PASSED V. D. If. QTTESTTONa OY SECOND TBJJLL 
DEAB BbETHREN: — 

I must write and tell you how my heart is rejoicing over 
the V. D. M. Questions. I have no words to express my appreciation
 that are strong enough to bring out the glory and 
beauty that the V. D. M. Questions have brought to my hungering
 souL God's wonderful plan has never been so bright 
and sublime to me as it is now. I am so thankful to my 
heavenly Father that through the V. D. M. Examination Department
, I failed no my first questions. Truly it was God's 
leading, to wake me up to learn a lesson not to deal with 
God's Holy Word in a haphazard way! 

When the news came to me that I had failed, it grieved 
my heart sorely, in spite of the fact that I was saying all 
the while, "The Lord's will be done, not mine." Then I took 
the whole matter to the Lord in prayer. Truly I can say, 

"All the way my Savior leads me, 
What have I to ask beside? 
Can I doubt his tender mercy, 
Who through life has been my guide?" 

And truly he did guide me. Then I prayed in earnest that 
I might be allowed another trial ; for I felt in my heart it was 
necessary for me to answer those questions if I still stayed 
in the Pastoral Work. After praying and studying and comparing
 those questions, then I realized, more than ever before 
the deep wisdom our dear Pastor had regarding God's holy 
plan, in preparing and sending out those questions for us. 
I surely have derived much benefit from them, and I want to 
thank the heavenly Father and the Committee for giving me 
another chance on the V, D. M. Questions! It certainly did 
cheer my heart; for now I feel worthy to go into the Pastoral
 Work. 

My heart is filled with gratitude and praise and is overflowing
 with love for all of God's little ones, and especially 
those at the Bethel home. 

Dear brethren, forgive me for intruding on your valuable 
and precious time, but my heart was so full of love for the 
whole world, and because of my passing the examination, that 
I had to write you. 

If my testimony is worth using, use it in any way you see 
fit, and my name also. I am not ashamed of failing, for the 
Lord knew it all. May God's blessing rest upon each brother 
and sister wherever they may be, is my prayer. 

'Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my 
heart; for thy loving kindness is before mine eyes. And I 
have walked in thy truth." — Psalm 26:2, 3. 

Your sister in His grace, Maitie Coopeb. — Tex. 

WE THANK GOD FOB HIS MEMORY 
Deab Bethel Co-laborers : — 

We desire to take this opportunity of expressing to the 
dear ones of the Bethel family and Brooklyn Tabernacle our 
love and heart- felt sympathy in the loss of our dear Pastor 
from fellowship and from the field of service. 

We realize that we have lost from our midst one whom we 
recognize as "that servant" (Matt. 24:45), a brother whose 
earnestness and faithfulness will ever be an incentive to us 
who are in the race for the prize of the high calling. In 
him we were given a most noble example of a Christian in 
this our day. By his life he attested a purity of character, 
ever standing firm for that which is right and just in God's 
sight. Daily did he manifest to us the spirit of unselfishness 
and self-sacrifice. His love and zeal, not only toward the 
brethren, but also toward the world, were exemplified in his 
untiring efforts in propounding the Scriptures in their simplicity
 and beauty. 

But, brethren, we would not mourn, for "we sorrow not 
as do others who have no hope." We believe he has gone to 
his reward, there to be associated with our dear Redeemer, 
and in due time to ehare in the uplifting of the world of 
mankind to perfection and righteousness. Precious promises 
God hath given! 'If we suffer with him, we shall reign 
with him, ,, and if faithful, "we shall be like him, and see him 
as he is." 

We rejoice with you and with our dear Pastor, knowing 
that he fought a good fight, and finished his course. We rejoice
 that we have had the privilege of having such a living 
epistle — his labors have ceased, but his works remain with 
us. He has left with us a sweet memory ! how this will stimulate
 our interest, .enliven our hope, and enkindle our zeal to 
so run that we may obtain! We thank God for this memory, 
and for this hope. 

May we each be so strengthened, ever keeping our feet 

upon the sure Rock, Christ Jesus, that we may eventually win 

the prize of the high calling, and hear the "Well done, good 

and faithful servant; enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

Schenectady Ecclesia. — N, Y. 

VOICE WAVES BACK JX TONES MORE MELODIOUS THAJT 
EVER 
Deab Bbethben: — 

We were very thankful for the letter from you, our faithful
 co-workers, telling us that the work of the Watch Toweb 
Bible and Tbact Society would go on, for we had questioned, 
"What now will be done?" We praise the Lord for his continued
 mercies and for the abundant helpers and also for the 
dear pilgrim brethren; and while we 'bow submissively to 
whatever the Lord permits, we pray his rich blessings to 
rest upon every one of you and keep you strong in faith and 
as valiant soldiers as now. 

Our dear "changed" Pastor still speaks, and that voice that 
delighted us so much all these years has reached the other 
shore, and its reverberations, as a holy echo, wave back to 
us, as it were, in tones more melodious than ever, with high 
and higher swelling notes — "I love to tell the story of Jesus 
and his love!" dear brethren, may it be your theme, and 
our theme, in glory, to tell this old story of Jesus' love! 
We are assured that if we live devotedly, we shall die triumphantly
. 

We have so often wanted to tell you of the wonderful 
help the dear pilgrims give us every time they come. We had 
been thinking all along that we were fully awake, but when 
the last one came we found that we were not. You know 
how children try to do things when they are in a kind of somnambulistic
 condition. Well, we are exceeding thankful that 
the dear Brother came and aroused us, and, as it were, opened 
the doors and windows of our humble hearts and let in so 
much more of the precious light and heavenly air than we 
were used to — all because of drowsiness. But when we got 
a good draught of this glory air and present light, we, of 
course, were more awake. And then how we partook of the 
grand, well-prepared food that he served to us! we cannot
 tell you how it did help us, then and ever since! 

So we are praising the Lord with renewed vigor, and 
never want to allow ourselves to do without God's pure air 
and light, now so radiant, even though it is "early in the 
Morning." It is the very hour in which our Master said he 
would "help her" — his church. And oh, so wonderful is the 
help! . We are very grateful for all the good which the Lord 
sends us by any of you dear messengers. Praise his name! 

We are eager to distribute any and all literature you may 
see proper to send to us for distribution. We note all the 
admonitions and warnings in The Toweb, especially the one 
for Nov. 1, 1916. May the Lord guide and keep us all. With 
much appreciation, love and sympathy, we remain, 

Yours to help all we can in this glorious cause of giving 
out the glad tidings of great joy to all people. 

A Wee Band at Mountain Grove. — Mo. 

"THE EABTH TREMBLED — AND FEIX" 

"LIGHTNING FLASHES PBOM THE THBOXE" 
Deab Ones of Bethel: — 

On receiving my Toweb of November 15, how strange it 
looked, to see on the front cover — "Death of Charles T. Russell
," and right under that line — "The Earth Trembled — and 
Fell"; and next, "Lightning Flashes from the Throne!" O 
how marvelously the prophecies are being fulfilled ! 

On hearing of our dearly beloved Pastor's death I was 
filled both with grief and joy; grief in the thought of what 
his sufferings must have been, and joy untold in the full 
realization that he had been ushered with exceeding joy into 
the presence of his glory and had seen his Master, for whom 
he had given his whole life, and had heard his sweet, "Well 
done"! 

Oh, the wonderful spiritual illumination and light that have 
come down to me increasingly from the throne since our 
Pastor's translation is beyond words to express! I am ready 
to witness and do [although not fitted to instruct, along the 
lines of Soriptubb Stcdibs] everywhere I have an opportunity 
about "that servant," who fed the household of faith "meat 
in due season" for 42 years — "The man clothed in linen, with 
the writer's ink horn ty his side." 

Oh, the bright shining, as from the East even unto the 
West, which fills my soul 1 


[6076] 


\miL J5, J917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


027-11-1) 


The glory and splendor revealed recalls to my mind the 
June 15 th To web of 1915, in which was mentioned in an article
 on Solomon's Temple and the Antitype — that the dedication
 took place a month before it was completed. There was 
a suggestion that God's glory might be made manifest to the 
members of Christ's body— the spiritual temple — before it 
was quite completed. 

I have been a constant reader and subscriber to the precious 
Tower since October, 1893. I think you must have my name 
on Vow list, as I sent it to you twice. I could not well have 
kept alive my spiritual life without it, I believe. Enclosed 
find one dollar for 20 Memorial Towers of December 1. 

May God continue to bless and direct you, and may he 
ble^s the memory of our dear Pastor Russell. 

Yours in the Hope, awaiting the glorious kingdom, 

Kannie E. Hazlett. — Pa. 

"HOLDING THE HEAD" 

Dear Bkethrkn : — 

I am writing to you to say that I am dissatisfied with 
seeing so many beginning to compile Brother Russell's writings
, making merchandise out of his work. 

If this should go on, there is no knowing where it might 
end. I don't think that anybody should presume to compile 
Brother Russell's works but the Watch To web Bible and 
Tract Society. They really belong to the Society. Brother 
Woodworth and Sister Seibert did some of this, but they 
turned it over to the Society and it received the benefit of it. 

You will understand my view in the matter. I am in sympathy
 with Headquarters* first, under the Lord; all other 
things come second. 

Yours in Him, Joseph Clarkson.— F a. 

WOEDS Or COMFORT FROM ONE OF THE BETHEL FAMILY 

Dear Brethren : — 

It seems not amiss that a member of Bethel Family should 
write a few words regarding the passing "within the veil" 
of our dearlv beloved Brother Russell. We wish to mingle our 
voice with tne abundant testimonials pouring in to us from all 
over the world, expressing the love, sympathy and loyalty of 
the dear saints of God. 

Surely none realize more the worth of our beloved leader 
than do those of his own dear family! Surely none loved 
him more or feel more deeply his loss ! To us the shock of his 
sudden departure was very keen and severe. 

But I believe that 1 voice the sentiments of all the Bethel 
family, when I say that almost from the very first the unspeakable
 joy of realizing that our beloved one had entered 
into the very presence of our glorious King, and had gained 
his crown of glory, honor, immortality — that he was now forever
 beyond all power of his enemies to touch him or cause 
him further pain — almost made us forget our own deep loss. 

Are we surprised that one so noble, so worthy, so utterly 
unselfish and devoted to God and his service, should have 
enemies? We might be, if our dear Master himself had not 
had enemies, and of the same class which has persecuted our 
own dear Pastor. It is sometimes said that a man is loved for 


the enemies he has. And surely the wrath of our Pastor's 
enemies, and their venomous attacks upon him, which were 
so undeserved, only caused his friends who knew his worth 
to love him all the more. But we are sorry for those who 
now are unwittingly being used as instruments of the adversary
 to blind and bewilder honest souls who might see the 
truth were they not hindered bv these "blind leaders of 
the blind." 

We know that it will not be very long until all the blinded 
eyes will be opened and the deaf ears unstopped. Then how 
ashamed and humiliated these hinderers of the truth will 
be! We can afford to be very patient and pitiful and charitable
 during our brief waiting time. These leaders astray 
are storing' up trouble and sorrow for themselves in the 
near future. But we are glad to hope that many at least of 
our dear Brother Russell's enemies will yet repent and turn 
fully to the Lord. But first their cherished schemes and 
institutions must fall, in the great world-wide cataclysm now 
so near. How helpful it might be to some of this class if they 
would only realize what is coming, and would stop and ask 
themselves the question expressed by the poet in his description
 of the mighty storm so near at hand: 

"The time of trouble nears, it hasteth greatly — 
E'en now its fierce winds stir the world-wide sea; 
O when its waves shall swell to mountains stately, 
Will its resistless billows sweep o'er me?" 

There is a great comfort to the Lord's dear, tried and 
tempted ones in the prophetic words of inspiration given us 
by the Prophet of God: "Your brethren that hated you, that 
cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified
; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be 
ashamed." (Isa. 66:5) Let us" then, be of good courage — 
our deliverance draweth nigh! The rebuke of his people 
God will soon take away from off all the earth. The Lord 
hath spoken it! Nevermore can the shafts of malice and 
envy touch our beloved, glorified Pastor and friend! Is this 
not* cause for great rejoicing, even while we await our 
"change"? 

He will never suffer any more, never again be weary — he 
was often so weary here, though never a complaint or murmur
 did he express. I love to think of the ineffable glory of 
his present wonderful life! I often wonder just what he is 
doing now, what are his thoughts, what marvelous new 
glories are constantly revealing themselves to him. How loving
 of our dear Lord to thus glorify him, to give him such 
a grand and sweet surprise, when he was expecting further 
laborious experiences here, still greater pain, weariness and 
suffering in that dear, tired body — with perhaps at the end 
a death of violence! 

How we rejoice with him and for him, and how earnestly 
we pray for grace and wisdom from above, that we may walk 
faithfully in the Master's footsteps of suffering and selfsacrifice
, until we, too, shall be called home to share with 
our beloved Pastor the glory of our blessed Lord and Head! 

Your loving Bister in Christ, Alice G. Jakes. 


PHOTO-DRAMA POSTCARDS— 450.000 


Brother Russell, shortly before his death, placed an order 
with a firm in France to* supply us with 450,000 Postcards 
containing forty choice selections from the famous slides 
used in the Photo-Prama of Creation. The shipment was 
expected to arrive in Brooklyn before the holidays, but owing 
to the war conditions abroad, it was delayed and did not 
arrive until this week. 


These choice selections of Postcards are put up in packs 
of 40 which will not be broken and are to be sold at 50c per 
pack, postpaid. On the address side of each of the postcards 
to the left, is an explanation of the picture in the words of 
Brother Russell. Bach scene is in appropriate colors; there 
is nothing like them on the market. 


THE LORD'S VOLUNTEER ARMY 


[First appearance of 
Many of the friends have written that they are desirous 
of doing more in the harvest work, and have asked if they may 
not look for further opportunities of service. 

The output of the volunteer matter this year has been progressing
 very rapidly and satisfactorily. The friends have 
been zealous in the work, realizing that in all probability it 
will not be long before the night cometh in which no man can 
work. Others, unable to do much in the distribution of tracts, 
co-operated in other ways, and the Good Hopes have been 
coming in beyond our expectations. We are confident that the 
dear friends will be glad to have this information from Headquarters
, and to learn, further, that in harmony with a resolution
 passed by the shareholders of the Society at the annual 
election of officers at Pittsburgh in January (which annual 
election has been held regularly for many years) the Office 
management at the Tabernacle has been placed upon the greatest
 efficiency hasis possible and operated with less help, notwithstanding
 the fact that the volume of work done and the 


notice in this form.] 
general receipts have been larger during the present fiscal year 
than during the corresponding five months of last year. The 
Lord's blessing is still upon his people and upon his work, and 
everything therefore goes well at the Brooklyn Tabernacle and 
Bethel. 

All this has opened the way for another issue of Volunteer 
matter for this year. We now have it under way, and feel 
sure that all will be pleased with it. It has to do in an important
 sense with present conditions, and is very timely. We 
are hoping it will contribute much toward an awakening to 
an appreciation of the beauties of the truth and of the longpromised
 kingdom of peace, which will be "the desire of all 
nations." 

It is not our thought to interfere with the distribution of 
the last Volunteer literature— "The World on Fire"— but if 
those who have completed their labors will advise us how 
many copies of the new issue they can use, and if those who 
are still working on the former Volunteer matter will at once 


VII— 17 


[6077] 


(114-1M) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Bkookxyn, N. Y. 


advise us how many they can use when their present supply io 
distributed, we will be in a position to estimate the probable 
number needed. 

We believe that all will agree that this is undoubtedly the 
most opportune time in the history of the Gospel age to 
witness to the truth and to the rapid approach of the kingdom, 
and we believe that the new volunteer matter will Jit the 
situation well. 


The Lord's volunteer army is a large one, and, armed 
with the weapon of the truth, is "mighty through God to the 
pulling down of strongholds (of error) and every high thing 
that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God.'* Minute 
men and women are needed at this hour; but the first ammunition
 provided for the year needs to be fully cleared away 
before the battle begins afresh with the new. 

When ordering please mention Vol. 9, No. 5. 


IN RE EMPLOYMENT BY MENA FILM COMPANY 


Many letters are coming to us from brethren all over the 
country enclosing a letter sent to them by the Mena Film 
Company, inviting the friends to accept employment to represent
 said Company. Many of the friends inquire as to what 
they should do, while some write as though they thought the 
letter had been sent out from thi3 office. We take this course 
through The Watch Tower to inform the brethren everywhere 
that the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society had nothing 
whatever to do with sending out such a letter. Furthermore, 
the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society would not employ
 solicitors to solicit money from the friends for any purpose
, and it does not approve of soliciting money from the 
brethren for any purpose whatsoever. Several times we have 
tried to make plain through the columns of The Watch Tower 
that neither the Society nor any officer of the Society nor any 
one connected with the Society's offices has anything to do 


with the Mena Film Company. We also wish to make it plain, 
in answer to these letters received by us, that the brethren 
should not in any sense be influenced to believe that the 
Society is either directly or indirectly furthering this enterprise
. 

The Society takes this occasion also to give notice to all 
that the use of its name or the name of any of its officers 
has been wholly without its knowledge or consent. The Society
 could not advise any one to invest money in anything in 
these perilous times. Appreciating the fact that all that any 
of the consecrated possess belongs to the Lord, we would advise 
that they do with it exactly as they believe the Lord would 
be pleased to have them do. We are very sorry indeed that 
the brethren have been put to so much inconvenience about 
this matter; and we hope that with this further explanation 
the whole matter may be made clear. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MAY 1, 1917 


No. 9 


PASTOR RUSSELL 

' Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name 's sake, said : Let the Lord be glorified ; but he shall appear to 

your joy, and they shall be ashamed." — Isaiah 66:5. 
WHY LOVED BY THE COMMON PEOPLE! WHY HATED BY THE CLBRGYI 

find that the life and experiences of our Lord Jesus shed a 
great flood of light upon the matter. 

THE MASTER— "DESPISED AMD REJECTED OP MEN" 

The greatest man that ever lived upon the earth was 
Jesus of Nazareth. He was the greatest Reformer of all times. 
Above all, he was the Redeemer and Savior of the world. Yet, 
he was "despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief." Why? We give the answer here 
that we may show why those who have stood for righteousness 
have always been bitterly persecuted and maligned. 

Eighteen centuries before Jesus came in the flesh, God had 
made a covenant with the nation of Israel. He favored them 
above all other peoples of the earth. He gave them a code 
of perfect laws. He sent his prophets to teach them. He 
blessed them far above their neighbors. But he made the perpetuation
 of these blessings dependent upon their obedience to 
him. Many times their leaders became disloyal and led the 
people away from God, and for this he punished them. When 
they repented, he would again bless them, and again they would 
become unmindful of his Messing. Near the close of the long 
period of God's favor toward them he said, through his Prophet, 
"You Only have I recognized of all the families of the earth : 
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities." 

In addition to giving them the Law, God instituted amon^t 
the Jews the Levitical priesthood. It was the duty of the 
priests to instruct the people in the way of righteousness, and 
to keep them in mind of the coming Seed of Abraham, through 
which they would receive a lasting blessing. Jehovah did not 
authorize any sect or division amongst them. 

When Jesus came to earth he found a marked departure 
from the teachings that had been given to Israel through the 
holy prophets. Gradually, near the close of the age, there had 
come into existence certain religious sects, to wit: Pharisees, 
Sadducees, Essenes and Cyreneans. These sects had mixed 
with the true Word of God doctrines which they had borrowed 
from heathen philosophers. They were given over to great 
formalism. They pretended to worship God, worshiping him 
with their lips, while their hearts were removed far from htm. 
Their leaders were proud, high-minded, heady, self-willed and 
egotistical. They practised fraud and deceit upon the people. 
The Pharisees would stand in the streets and utter long prayers
. They publicly thanked God that they were better than 
other men. They loved to be called Rabbi, Master, Father, 
etc. They oppressed the widows and orphans, making their 
burdens grievous to be borne. They knew well that the Scriptures
 taught the coming of Messiah ; but they reasoned that tf 
he should come, he would select them above all others as his 
chief ones, because of their greatness of learning, and tbeir superiority
 to the common people. 


Man's greatness is properly measured by the amount of good 
he accomplishes on benalf of his fellowmen. The good accomplished
 is not to be determined in money value, but must be 
measured by the amount of true happiness brought into the 
lives of the largest number. The man who attains to this 
position of greatness must do so through adversity, and for 
this there is a reason. 

Since Adam and Eve forfeited the joys and beautieB of 
Eden, there have been two opposing forces contending in the 
universe — good and evil. God is the perfect expression of 
goodness; Satan, the very personification of evil. AH of the 
sorrows of the human race are traceable to the machinations 
of Satan and his coadjutors. 

Every human being that has lived upon the earth has 
fought either under the banner of the Lord of righteousness 
or under the leadership of the evil one — Satan, Every one in 
the world today is fighting under the one or the other standard. 
All who have fought under the Lord's banner of righteousness 
have done so willingly. The Lord coerces the will of no man. 
But the great mass of the soldiers of the adversary have fought 
under him unwillingly. They have been the bond-slaves of evil, 
enslaved by the wrongful act of the first man, and unable to 
extricate themselves from this slavery. 

REMARKABLE TEIBtTTE TO PASTOR RUSSELL'S WORTH 

It follows, therefore, that every man who achieves real 
greatness must be a brave and valiant soldier of righteousness
. An apostle of light, he is often made to appear evil 
by his adversaries; whereas the great adversary and hi3 
coadjutors often appear in the garb of angels of light, thereby 
deceiving many. Century after century history has repeated 
itself in this respect. Why? We answer, Because the same 
great forces are constantly warring against each other, the 
evil always opposing the right. 

The world has produced some great men. Some men, 
by reason of their untiring struggles, have become great; 
while some have attained greatness by reason of God's special 
favor. Not since the days of the Apostle Paul has there lived 
in the world a greater and better man; than Pastor Russell. 
We say this advisedly, because in that time no man has been 
so wonderfully used to bring lasting blessings to so large a 
number of people. He, as a servant of the Lord, brought to 
them in clear terms the glad tidings of salvation found in the 
Scriptures, which Jesus first began to speak upon this earth. 
For centuries the adversary and his coadjutors have beclouded 
the message of salvation, but during the last half century the 
Lord has caused greater light to shine upon this message, and 
he used Pastor Russell as his special instrument in directing to 
that light. If Pastor Russell was a follower of Jesus (and 
no one who knew him could doubt it), why should any one 
hate him ? Searching for the true answer to this question, we 


E6078] 


May 1, WI7 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(133-133) 


PHARISAICAL CLEEGY DOOMED TO DISAPPOINTMENT 

But these religious rulers were doomed to disappointment. 
Instead of coming with great pomp and ostentation. Messiah 
came meek and lowly of heart, giving his Father all the glory 
for what he said and did. He taught the people how they 
might attain life everlasting in a state of happiness. "He 
spake aa never man spake" before, in fulfilment of the prophetic 
statement, "Grace was upon his lips"; and his message brought 
gladness to the hearts of the sincere. "The common people 
heard him gladly." They followed him from place to place; 
they thronged about him; they rejoiced to be in his presence. 

Seeing that the people were forsaking them and following 
the lowly Nazarene, these various sects, composed largely of 
the Jewish hierarchy, or clergy, were incensed against our 
Lord and began a systematic and wicked persecution of him. 
They were blind instruments of Satan. They first sought to 
destroy him by vile epithets and slander. They publicly called 
in question the legitimacy of his birth and the chastity of his 
mother; they denounced him as a liar, as a sinner, a-s the 
chief of devils and as a blasphemer of God. Finally they paid 
their ill-gotten money to have him cruelly murdered. Thirtyseven
 years later the Jewish nation fell, to rise no more until 
their "double" of disfavor should be fulfilled. 

CLASS WHICH CAUSED JESUS' DEATH FOWEBFUL NOW 

St. Paul produced the evidence that the Jewish age finds 
it* parallel in this Gospel age. The Biblical testimony further 
shows that in the Gospel age we would find a parallel not only 
in time, but in the events that would transpire, and that the 
same class of men who were prominent and powerful then — 
the clergy class — would be prominent and powerful now. 

Today we are in the closing hours of the Gospel Age. At 
the close of the Jewish *ge we saw a class of men who separated
 themselves from the common people, fittingly spoken of 
as "the clergy." These had forsaken their God-given duty of 
teaching the Truth to the people, and the Lord Jesus denounced 
them as frauds and hypocrites. (Mark 7:6-8) At the close 
of the Gospel age, we like-wise find a distinct class, apart from 
the common people, designating themselves "the clergy," the 
majority of whom have departed from the teachings of Jesus 
and the Apostles, teaching instead either doctrines borrowed 
from the heathen philosophers, or else doctrines of Higher 
Criticism and Evolution, thereby destroying the faith of the 
people in the Bible and blinding them to God's plan of salvation
. Mark, then, the parallel of events of the two ages, observing
 always the virulent and persistent opposition of the 
evil to the good. 

NEITHER JESUS NOB THE APOSTLES EVEB CLAIMED TO BB 
CLERGYMEN 

The Gospel age opened with the introduction of the great 
Master, Christ Jesus, who declared that every man who would 
become his true follower, and would continue as such, would 
receive persecution similar to that which he received. He said, 
"If they have called the Master of the house the prince of 
devils, how nruch more will they call them of his household V 9 
(Matthew 10:25) Again he said, "Ye are not of the world; if 
ye were of the world, the world would love its own; but because
 ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of 
the world, therefore the world hateth you." — John 15:19. 

Jesus pointed out that the great objective of the Christian 
was to be the kingdom of God, and to this end he taught his 
followers to pray, "Thy kingdom come.*' He emphasized the 
fact that his second coming would mark the beginning of the 
blessings to mankind which God had promised through the 
mouth of all his holy prophets, and that these blessings could 
come in no other way or time. Neither Jesus nor the apostles 
ever laid claim to being clergymen. Such a thing does not appear
 in church history until the apostles had all disappeared 
from the stage of earthly activity. 

When the great apostate system was organized, the pope 
became its head, and around him he gathered cardinals, archbishops
, bishops and priests, thus forming "the clergy" class; 
and these alone claim to be members of the church. All others 
who follow are called "children of the church." The Protestant 
Reformers were themselves persecuted ; but now, in their names, 
their followers in turn become persecutors. 

When Luther protested against the false doctrines taught 
by the Papacy, he was excommunicated, denounced and bitterly
 persecuted — likewise every reformer, both those who preceeded
 and those who followed him. Call to mind the experiences
 of Huss, Wycliffe, Knox, Wesley, Campbell, and 
others. The spirit of intolerance has been manifested in all 
ages, and while more refined methods of persecution are employed
 at present than in the past, this spirit is fttlll as wicked 
as ever. PASTOB BUS SELL'S BOYHOOD BATS 

Let ub now return to the man whose career we are here 
to examine. It is due that we tell something of his boyhood. 


Sixty-five years ago, in the city of Pittsburgh, Charles Taze 
Russell was born. His parents were of the Calvinistic faith, 
and he was reared in that environment and influence. Naturally 
of a reverential mint!, he enrly entered religious work. His 
young mind was so impressed by the teachings of the clergy 
that he felt in duty bound to do what he could to save mankind
 from what he had been taught was a burning hell of torment
. As a youth , he was engaged throughout the day in business
 in his father's store, and after a hard day's work was 
often found going about the city with colored chalk, marking 
upon the- walls of buildings where men congregated, words of 
warning against the hell of eternal torture. Relying upon the 
high standard of the clergy in the community, he had been induced
 to believe these doctrines which they taught, and this 
led him to take this strenuous course. 

THE TEACHINGS OF THE CLERGY 

What have been the teachings of the clergy? They have 
taught, and generally still teach, that every man has an immortal
 soul; that when a man dies he is not in reality dead; 
but more alive than ever; that the very "rood, at death, go immediately
 to heaven — a state of everlasting bliss; and that all 
others go immediately at death either to purgatory, a place of 
torment, limited in duration, or to hell, a place of endless 
torture in fire and brimstone. 

The Calvinistic branch of Protestantism has taught, and 
still teaches, that God foreordained a few to be saved and all 
others to be forever damned; that every child, even before its 
birth, has its destiny eternally sealed; that nothing that any 
one could do would alter its foreordained destiny, and that 
Jehovah had made this arrangement. 

Another system of theology has taught, and yet teaches, 
that man's sins may be forgiven by pope or priest upon a 
money consideration. At least, this is the way the teaching 
works. 

Practically all the church systems, Catholic and Protestant, 
have taught, and still teach, that all who are saved go to 
heaven, that there is no other place of salvation; that at 
Christ's second coming the earth will be utterly destroyed, together
 with every one upon the earth who is unsaved. They 
claim to be followers of the Prince of Peace, yet urge rulers 
and people to engage in war. 

These have further taught, and still teach, the unauthorized 
and wholly untenable doctrine that no one is authorized to 
preach except he be first ordained by a body of clergymen, 
designated by them for that purpose. When plied with questions
, the clergy have, as a rule, waved them aside, intimating, 
"These questions are too deep for you; just have faith in what 
we tell you." 

DRIVEN TO UNBELIEF 

Young Russell believed that the Bible taught these theories, 
because the clergy taught them. Up to that time he had not 
given the Bible a careful study. As he brooded over the condition
 of the unfortunate race, he reached the conclusion that 
a just, wise and loving God could not be the author of such 
an arrangement; and while still believing in God, he discarded 
the Bible on the supposition that it taught these awful doctrines
. 

Charles Russell then turned his mind to the examination of 
heathen religions, only to find them wholly unsatisfactory. 
While wandering from one religious teaching to another searching
 for truth, until he was thoroughly dissatisfied with all, 
he yet retained a belief in God. He said, "Surely a good and 
wise God, who has made man, must have provided Borne way 
for man to gain a knowledge concerning himself. Probably the 
Bible does not teach what I have understood it teaches; I will 
search the Scriptures carefully myself and ascertain." 

As a young man still in his teens, young Russell then began
 a careful and prayerful study of the sacred pages of 
God's Word, and when he found that the Bible does not teach 
that God is a fiend who will torture his creatures eternally, 
but that its teachings are entirely consistent with the character
 of a just and loving Creator, he then resolved to devote 
all of his time, strength, energy and means to telling the people
 the true teachings of the Scriptures and to putting these 
teachings forth by every means in his power, that others might 
know; and this he did up to his last hourfon earth. 

WHY EBROB OPPOSES TRUTH "DARKNESS HATETH THE 
LIGHT" 

Darkness always opposes the light. As the light progresses 
it exposes the darkness, and causes the disciples of error to 
fight the instruments holding forth the light*. This is illustrated 
in every branch of science, aa well as in religion. To illustrate : 
A doctor has been practising according to the methods adopted 
a century ago; he Knows no other methods and makes his livTG
079] 


(133-134) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ing by those methods. ' Modern scientists bring forth new 
methods of treating diseases, and the doctor sees that the new 
methods will not only destroy his theories, but will likewise 
deprive him of a livelihood. The spirit of selfishness that is 
in every man to a greater or less degree manifests itself, and 
causes him to resent the new methods. On the other hand, the 
people who have proved the benefit of the new methods, would 
gladly receive them. 

This has been true of all professions. It is not necessary 
for us to suppose that those who oppose progress and enlightenment
 are always men who are wilful wrong- doers, but 
the charitable, and we believe the more proper, way to look 
at the matter is that self-interest blinds many to real advancement
. 

The clergy for centuries have been following the teachings
 which we have outlined. The ruts of error have been 
made deep, and it is difficult for them to get out. The majority
 of these have been content to follow this course; their 
collections come at regular intervals and their livelihood and 
prestige depend upon holding the people in subjection to their 
manner of thinking. 

WHAT PASTOR RUSSELL TAUGHT— TTONED HOSE ON HELL 
OF THE CREEDS AND PUT OUT FIRE 
When Pastor Russell ascertained the beautiful and harmonious
 teachings of Jesus and hi a apostles, and that all these 
harmonized fully with the Old Testament, he began to turn 
the great searchlight of truth upon the error; and naturally 
this exposed these erroneous theories which had been adopted 
and long followed by the clergy class. As one good preacher 
put it, "Pastor "Russell turned the hose on hell and put out 
the fire." And that knocked down the chief prop of the clergy. 
He did not attack men, but merely attacked the erroneous 
doctrines by teaching the true ; and this he had a perfect right 
to do; while his opponents attacked him personally. 

THE BIBLE TEACHINGS PASTOR RUSSELL'S TEACHINGS 
We now give the Bible teaching upon these great questions 
at issue, by the citation of Scriptural authority; and what the 
Bible teaches is what Pastor Russell believed and taught the 
people for more than forty years. 

Gcd has a wonderful plan, foreknown and prearranged by 
him before the foundation of the world, which plan he is 
working out to his own glory and for the blessing of his creatures
. From his Word we learn that God created man in his 
own image and likeness— perfect in organism, perfect in mind. 
This embraced the power to discern between right and wrong. 
God did not give man a soul; he made man a soul. (Genesis 
2:7) As the Scriptures set forth, all animal creatures are 
souls ; none possess souls. A cow is a soul ; it does not have a 
soul. (Numbers 31:28) There is quite a distinction between 
being a thing and having that thing. The union of the breath 
of life with the elements composing the body produce a third 
thing; namely, a living, moving, breathing being, which we 
call "a soul." 

Adam and his wife, Eve, were given a perfect home — Eden — 
and God gave to them his law, wherein he stated, "In the day 
that you disobey, dying you shall die." (Genesis 2 : 17) Stated 
in other phrase, God informed them that they might enjoy the 
beauty and perfection of Eden forever (gradually extending 
this Eden until it should cover the whole earth), on the condition
 that they would obey his law; but that to disobey would 
mean death. He did not say that if they disobeyed he would 
send them to eternal torture. No such statement can be found 
in the Scriptures. He did not say that their souls were immortal
 and could never die. It was Satan who said to Mother 
Eve, "Ye shall not die." (Genesis 3:1-5) Concerning this 
Jesus declared that this falsehood of Satan's was the first lie 
ever told, and that from it all other lies and false doctrines 
emanated. 

The Genesis account sets forth that Adam did violate God's 
law and, in harmony with the penalty of that law, Jehovah 
sentenced him to death — not to an eternity of torture. He 
sentenced him to hell ; but the hell of the Bible is not a place 
of eternal torment, but of oblivion. 

THE BIBLE HELL— TATOHT BY PASTOE RUSSELL 
For more than fifteen centuries the people have been in 
darkness concerning the meaning of hell, because the true teachings
 of the Bible were taken away in the third century by the 
then corrupt chnrch leaders, and the theories of men were 
substituted therefor. We have now come to the close of the 
Gospel age, to the time when greater light than ever before 
is shining upon all things, and when every hidden thing is being
 uncovered. This has been true during the past forty years, 
and as time has advanced the light has grown brighter and 
brighter. Within this comparatively brief period more light* 
has been turned upon the true teachings of the Bible than during
 ail the centuries since the days of the apostles. Briefly, 
we give the Bible teaching concerning hell: 


The only word in the Hebrew Old Testament translated 
hell is sheol. Every educated minister knows that sheol is not 
a place of eternal torture, but that the word means the tomb, 
or the condition of death. Jacob declared: "I will go down 
into hell (sheol) to my son mourning." Surely Joseph wag 
not in eternal torment! "If evil befall him (Benjamin) by 
the way, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow 
to the grave" (sheol). (Genesis 37:35; 42:38) Job, after 
losing all his earthly possessions and his children, and then 
being afflicted with a loathsome disease, prayed to God that he 
might go to hell — the grave, sheol — and there rest in 
silence. (Job 14:13) The Psalmist, speaking prophetically of 
Jesus, stated that Jesus went to hell (Psalm 16:10) ; and the 
Apostle explains this in Acts 2:29-34 to mean the tomb. 

In the New Testament the Greek word hades is translated 
hell, and has the same meaning as sheol in the Hebrew. The 
word Gehenna is also translated hell. It has not the thought 
of conscious torment, but represents the condition of complete 
annihilation, eternal death, from which there is to be resurrection
.— Matthew 10:28. 

The clergy teach that the dead are more alive after death 
than before, whereas the Scriptures teaeh exactly to the contrary
. The Psalmist says: "What man is he that liveth and 
shall not see death! Shall he deliver his soul from the tomb?" 
(Psalm 89:48) "In death none shall praise thee; in hell 
(sheol, the grave) who shall give thee thanks V (Psalm 6:5) 
"The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into 
silence." (Psalm 115:17) "His breath goeth forth; he returneth
 to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish." 
(Psalm 146:4) "The living know that they shall die, but the 
dead know not anything." "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to 
do, do it with thy might; for there is~no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave (sheol) whither thou 
goest." — Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10. 

RESURRECTION— "EARTH HOLDS SO MANT DEAD" 

Except for God's love manifested toward humankind, all 
would have perished forever, for the reason that "the wages 
of sin is death," not eternal torture (Romans 6:23) ; and dearth 
means the complete cessation of life. The fear of eternal torture
 has brought horror to millions of minds, causing them 
to shun Jehovah as a fiend and to repudiate his Word as a 
mockery. The Prophet plainly tells us that such doctrines are 
taught by the precepts of men and are not in harmony with 
the Lord*s word, the Bible. — Isaiah 29:13. 

For six thousand years there has been great sorrow in the 
earth, and that sorrow is now greatly intensified. Billions 
have gone into death after much suffering. The clergy have 
held out no message of comfort to the vast majority of these, 
before they died, or to their loving friends who remained behind
 to mourn them. Truly the poet has said : 
"The earth is, old with centuries, 
But not for this she bows her head ; 
Close to her heart the sorrow lies — 
She holds so many dead! 

But Jehovah through his prophets has held out hope of a 
resurrection (Jeremiah 31:15-17; Isaiah 26:1S); Hosea 13:14) ; 
and when Jesus was born the angels of heaven announced that 
the great Savior of men had come, and that these glad tidings 
must go to all. God sent Jesus to the earth to become a man 
and to die, that mankind might not perish, but have everlasting 
life. When Jesus came he brought "glad tidings of great joy 
to all people." He said: "All that are in their graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of God and shall come forth." — John 
3:16; 5:28, 29, R. V. 

The resurrection of all men is made possible because of 
this fact: A perfect man sinned and through him condemnation
 came upon all. Through the willing and substitutionary 
sacrifice of another perfect man — Ohrist Jesus — the opportunity
 for life comes to all. (Romans 5:12, 15-21) 1*his was 
the only means whereby man could justly be released from the 
(penalty resulting from Adam's sin. No man on earth could 
meet this requirement; and for this reason, the Scriptures 
inform us, Jesus "was made a little lower than the angels, 
for the suffering of death, that he, by the grace of God, should 
taste death for every man." — Hebrews 2:9. 

In being made lower than the angels, Jesus took upon himself
 the form and nature of man. (Philippians 2:5-10) "He 
was made flesh and tabernacled among us." (John 1:14) He 
partook of flesh and blood, in order that he might become the 
Redeemer of mankind. (Hebrews 2:14) "He gave his life a 
ransom for all, to be testified (to all) in due time." (1 
Timothy 2:3-6) He was put to death a human being and 
raised from the dead a divine being. (1 Peter 3:18, Diaglott; 
1 Corinthians 15:3, 4) The death and resurrection of Ohrist 
Jesus is a guarantee that all the dead shall in due time be 
awakened out of death, and that all shall be given a fair trial 


[6080] 


May 1, 1917 


THE W A TCH TOW E K 


(135 13ft) 


for life. (Acta 24:15; 17:31; John 5:28; 1 Corinthians 

15:12-22) But before mankind at large can experience this 

blessing 1 another part of God's plan must first be carried out. 

"THE CHURCH WHICH IS THE BODY OF CHRIST" 

Long centuries ago Jehovah gave an oath -bound promise 
to Abraham, and renewed it to Isaac and to Jacob, saying, "In 
thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." (Genesis 12:3; 26:4; 28:14} Who was to constitute
 this seed was a complete mystery to all until Pentecost
, and is still a mystery to all except those who have fully 
consecrated themselves to the Lord. (Colossians 1:26, 27) 
The seed, according to the promise, is Christ, and Christ is 
composed of Jesus Christ the Head, and the true church, his 
body.— Galatians 3:10, 20; Colossians 1:18. 

All who have been baptized into Christ — that is to say, 
all who during the present age have been immersed into Christ's 
death by a full consecration to do the Father's will — have 
put on Christ; and these, continuing faithful unto the end, 
•■.hull have part in the first, or chief resurrection, and together 
with Christ Jesus shall constitute the seed of Abraham acenrding
 to promise, and shall reign for a thousand years for 
the purpose of bestowing God's promised blessing upon mankind
. — Galatians 3:29; Revelation 20:6. 

MESSIAH'S GLORIOUS KINGDOM 

Our Lord Jesus taught his disciples to pray for the coming
 of his kingdom, and made known the fact that its establishment
 would mark the beginning of the blessings to all mankind
. The word "kingdom" is used in a two-fold sense. It 
means, first, the royal family, or reigning house; second, the 
realm, or dominion, including the subjects, over which the 
royal family reign. The word "kingdom" i3 a name applied 
in the Scriptures to the ruling seed of Abraham — Jesus Christ 
the Head, and the glorified church, his body — as well a a to 
the earthly domain over which they shall hear rule. 

The whole Gospel age has been devoted to the gathering out 
of the true followers of the Master, who are to compose the 
kingdom class; and as he was despised and rejected of men, 
by those who held to the errors of the sects, so his followers 
were to have similar experiences. 

The second advent of Christ has been the great event to 
which the Master's true disciples have long looked forward; 
tliey have hoped and prayed for its coming. We are today 
in the closing hours of the period allotted by God for the selection
 of the church, and "the kingdom of heaven is at hand"! — 
now in the full sense of its establishment in the earth. The 
institutions of "this present evil world" are passing away in 
a great time of trouble, and soon the Lord will establish his 
kingdom of righteousness, which will deal out justice to all 
humanity. 

All these Bible truths Pastor Russell taught for forty years, 
and always without money and without price. "Seats free 
and no collection!" was an eyesore to his sectarian opponents, 
and drew from thehi much bitter criticism during all these 
years in which he pointed to the nearness of Messiah's kingdom
 ; and time and again, orally and through the public press, 
he announced to the peoples of earth that the age was now 
closing and would pass away with a great time of trouble, 
due to begin, according to Bible chronology, in 1914, and that 
this trouble would eventuate in the greatest revolution and 
most destructive anarchy the earth has ever known, to be followed
 immediately by the setting up of Messiah's kingdom of 
everlasting peace, which would bring blessings to all the peoples 
of the world — living and dead. 

THE KING PRESENT— "COMB AS A THIEF" 

It can readily be seen how these great truths set forth in 
the Bible, and taught by the Lord's special servant of these 
last days, upset all the theories and doctrines that have been 
taught by the clergy for the past 1500 years. It is likewise 
easy to see that those not having the spirit of the Lord, those 
clergymen who regard their profession as one for personal 
profit, either in money or in the plaudits of men, would be 
blind to the great purposes of God, and hence would vigorously 
oppose the light of present truth. 

The Apostle Peter (2 Peter 3:3, 4) points out the->e verv 
men, at the end of the age, and denominates them scoffers, 
saying that they would scoff at those who would make known 
the great event" of the Lord's second presence. Thousands of 
Christian people have witnessed the fulfilment of the numerous
 lines of testimony brought forward during the past quarter 
of a century in regard to the Lord's parousia, presence, and the 
consequent nearness of his kingdom, and have at the same 
time witnessed the fulfilment of this prophecy of the Apostle 
with reference to the scoffing of the clergy due to the announcement
 of the presence of the long-promised King, who has come 
as a thief, as foretold. 


HE TAUGHT THE PEOPLE 

The clergy of Jesus' day not only opposed the teachings of 
Jesus, but ajso tried to prevent the people giving heed to 
these teachings. Rebuking them for their coiir«<\ the Master 
said, "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye 
shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye neither 
go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering 
to go in."— Matthew 23:13. 

When the clergymen of that day sent their officers to arrest 
Jesus and they returned and reported the wonderful words 
that fell from 'his lips, declaring that ''never man spake like 
this man," the Pharisaical clergy sarcastically said, "Are ye 
also deceived? Have any of the rulers or the Pharisees believed
 on him?"— John 7:45-48. 

Every follower of the Master who has taught the people 
the truth has received similar treatment at the hands of that 
portion of the clergy element who have not possessed the spirit 
of the Lord, but the spirit of the adversary. When certain 
of the diseiples of JesU3 were preaching the truth after Pente 
cost, and were arrested at the instance of the Clergy element, 
Nt. Luke assigned tlris reason, "being grieved that they taught 
the people and pi cached through Jesus the resurrection of the 
dead." — Acts 4:1-4. 

Pastor Russell printed hundreds of millions of tracts set 
ting forth the message of the kingdom of Messiah, and theso 
have been distributed throughout the world, free of charge. 
The clergy have constantly persecuted him for so doing. More 
than four thousand newspapers from time to time published hi* 
sermons. As an example of how this affected the clergy, one 
of their number angrily remarked, "I cannot open my morning 
paper without Pastor Russell's face staring at me." The religious
 department of one of our great publications, which iunfriendly
, contained the following: 

"Pastor Russell's writings are said to have greater 
newspaper circulation every week than those of any other 
living man; a greater, doubtless, than the combined circulation
 of the writings of all the priests and preacher* 
in North America; greater even than the work of Arthur 
Brisbane, Norman Hapgood, George Horace Lorimer, Dr. 
Frank Crane, Frederick Haskins, and a dozen other of the 
best known editors and syndicate writers put together." 
The olergy naturally were unable to answer the great hip* 
sage of the truth which Pastor Russell delivered. They hated 
him and persecuted him for the same reason that the agents 
of the adversary hated and persecuted the Lord and the 
apostles. (John 15:18-21) No one who indulges in such persecutions
 has the spirit of the Lord, but the spirit of the adversary
. *In the Scriptures we read, "Whosoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer." (1 John 3:15) "They shall reproach 
you and cast out your name as evil." (Luke 6:22) "Deceit
 ia in the heart of them that imagine evil." (Proverbs 
12:20) "An evil man out of the evil treasure (of his heart) 
bringeth forth evil things." (Matthew 12:35) "Speak not 
evil one of another, brethren." "Speak evil of no man." — 
James 4:11; Titus 3:2. 
NO PERSON EVER GAVE TESTIMONY AGAINST HIS MORAL 
CHARACTER 
Not being able to answer Pastor Russeira arguments concerning
 God's plan of salvation, the clergy of evil and cornipt 
winds indulged in slander and libelous attacks against hi* 
character. One of the best evidences of the falsity of their 
charges is the fact that no person was ever produced who 
gave testimony against the moral character of Pastor Russell, 
To his dying day he was able to say, what probably very few 
men aside from the Lord could say, that he had lived a life of 
absolute celibacy. 

Time will not permit the examination here of each of 
the charges the olergy made against him, but they all have 
been answered fully and clearly in a little pamphlet entitled, 
"A Great Battle in the Ecclesiastical Heavens," which 
the author wrote from personal observation and knowledge of 
the facts, and which can be obtained from the office of the 
Watch To web Bible and Tract Society, 17 Hicks St. Brook - 
Ivn, N". Y., by merely sending a post-card request therefor. 
DARKNESS AND DAWNING 
At this time the whole world is torn by war, pestilence, 
famine and distress, and the clergy urge the rulers on to more 
war and trouble, and have also urged the embroilment of these 
United States — now accomplished. Long has it been the desire 
of honest hearts amongst the people to have peace. Jehovah 
declares that after this great shaking and overthrow of the 
nations peace will come, and through the Prophet gives a beautiful
 picture of the reign of Christ Jesus and the blessings 
that will follow for the people, saying, "From the rising of 
the sun (the Sun of Righteousness, The Christ, which will rise 
at the beginning of the age with healing in his beams) unto 
the going down of the same (the end thereof), my name shall 


[6081] 


(136 147) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


B«ooklyh. N. Y. 


be great among the nations ; and in every place incense shall be 
offered unto my name, and a pure offering; for my name shall 
be great among the nations, saith the Lord of Hosts." — Malachi 
1:11. 

St. John the Revelator, depicting in vision the blessings 
that will come to mankind, says: 

"And I saw a new heaven and a new earth (new order 
of things) ; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed 
away, and there was no more sea (turbulent, anarchistic 
masses). And I, John, saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem 
(the church glorified), coming down from Cod out of heaven, 
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a 
great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God 
15 with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall he his 
people, and God himself shall be with them and "be their God. 
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there 
shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying; neither shall 
there be any more pain ; for the former things are passed away. 
And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all 
things new. And he said unto me, Write, for these words are 
true and faithful." — Revelation 21:1-5. 

HUMAN RACE TO BE RESTORED TO PERFECTION 

As a sample of the Scriptural message of sweetness and 
comfort which Pastor Russell taught the people, we quote 
from Volume I of his Studies ik the* Sceipttjhes, pages 191 
and 192: 

"The Apostle Peter, our Lord, and all the prophets 
since the world began, declare that the human race is to 
be restored to glorious perfection, and is again to have 
dominion over earth, as its representative, Adam, had. 

"It is this portion that God has elected to give to the 


human race. And what a glorious portion I Close your 
eyes for a moment to the scenes of misery and woe, degradation
 and sorrow that yet prevail on account of sin, and 
picture before your mental vision the glory of the perfect 
earth. Not a stain of sin mars the harmony and peace of a 
perfect society; not a bitter thought, not an unkind look 
or word; love, welling up from every heart, meets a 
kindred response in every other heart, and benevolence 
marks every act. There sickness shall be no more; not 
an ache nor pain, nor any evidence of decay — not even 
the fear of such things. Think of all the pictures of comparative
 health and beauty of human form and feature 
tli at you have ever seen, and know that perfect humanity 
will be of still surpassing loveliness. The inward purity 
of mental and moral perfection will stamp and glorify 
every radiant countenace. Such will earth's society be; 
and weeping bereaved ones will have their tears all wiped 
away, when thus they realize the resurrection work complete
. — Revelation 21:4." 
It must be evident to every fair-minded person that he 
who could bring forth from the Scriptures such words of beauty 
and sweetness as set forth in the foregoing paragraph was 
controlled by the Spirit of the Lord, fighting for rignteousness 
under the banner of Christ. Likewise it must be evident to 
all fair-minded persons that he who opposes such a message 
and the man who gave it is controlled by the spirit of the 
adversary and fighting under the banner of the adversary. 

To put it in a few words, Pastor Russell was hated by the 
clergy because he taught the people the tbtjth and disregarded 
their creeds and human traditions. He was loved by the common
 people because he brought to them the truth, a message 
of hope which has filled the hearts of many with joy. 


JESUS THE TRUE VINE 

This article was a Teprint of that entitled "The True Vine and Its Fruit," published in issue of April 15, 1905, which please 

see.] 


"Branches in Christ the Vine! 
O union blest! Nor tongue nor pen can give 
All that this wondrous thought doth comprehend; — 

How glorious in Jesus thus to live! 

"His fruit we bear; our Husbandman 
Doth prune his vine, that more and more our life 


May yield rich fruitage to our Father's praise; 
And so we bow submissive to his knife, 

"Our life, our strength, our joy, 
We find in Christ; He is our all in all; 
His pulsing life through all our being flows; 

To him we're bound in Love's overmastering thrall." 


THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF-CONTROL 

[This article was a Teprint of that entitled "The Wkie of False Doctrine/' published in issue of March 15, 1907, which please 

see.] 


IN RE MILITARY LAW 


A Bill is now pending before Congress which, if passed, 
will regulate selective conscription for Military service. Many 
of the friends are inquiring about this. In due time The 
^V T ATCH Tower will contain a statement advising the friends 
of the conditions upon which exemption may be granted by 
the Government from Military service, and what steps will be 
neoessary to obtain such exemption. 

Our statement in the April 15th issue of The Watch 


Tower related only to State laws. If a Federal law is enacted, 
application for exemption should be made according to its 
provisions. 

We have confidence that Congress will give due consideration
 to conscientious objectors. In most of the States all 
will be required to register. There is no objection to this, and 
there is no reason why any one should hesitate to register and 
answer the questions as required. Let ua be law abiding. 


Vol. XXXVUT 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MAY 15, 1917 


No. 3 f> 


THE COMMISSION OF A CHRISTIAN 

"The Spirit of the Xiord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek. 

he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 

prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance 

of our God; to comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto 

them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit 

of heaviness, that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of 

the Lord, that he might be glorified." — Isa. 61:1-3. 

Every man who is elected to an office of honor and trust in thority. All recognize the necessity thereof. The Government 


a Government receives a commission. His commission is a 
formal, written warrant, or authority, granting certain powers 
or privileges and authorizing or commanding the performance 
of certain duties. The various officers, legislative, executive 
and judicial, of the United States and of the different States, 
before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, receive
 such a commission, or warrant of authority. If a lawyer 
be elected to a judicial office, his commission, or warrant of authority
, directs that he shall perform the duties of that office. 
Should he ignore these duties or fail to perform them, and 
devote his time to something else, he would be regarded as 
an unfaithful officer. In many jurisdictions the people, by vote, 
would recall him and deprive him of his commission, or auvery
 jealously guards such officers in the performance of their 
respective duties, and by law provides that they shall be relieved
 from military duty in order that they may uninterruptedly
 perform the duties of the office to which they are 
elected and commissioned. 

A Christian is one who has received from Jehovah a very 
high commission. He has surrendered his will to the will of 
God ; he has entered into a covenant, or contract, with Jehovah 
by sacrifice. He has agreed to "renounce all earthly hopes and 
prospects to follow in the footsteps of Jesus, his Redeemer ( 1 
Peter 2:21), and faithfully to perform his duties and obligations
 as a Christian — obligations which have been placed upon 
him by hi* commission, or warrant of authority, and the perr
*082] 


May 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(147-148) 


form&nce of which is essential to Ma sharing the glorious resurrection
 of his Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus. A Christian, appreciating
 the high, position to which he has been called, is like 
St. Paul, earnestly desirous of performing the duties of hh 
office, "if by any means, he might attain unto the resurrection
 of the dead." Like St. Paul, he says, "But one thing I 
do, forgetting the things behind, and stretching towards the 
things before, I press along the line towards the prize of the 
high calling of God by Christ Jesus," (Philippians 3:13, 14, 
Diaglott) The Christian who faithfully performs the duties 
which his Christian commission enjoins upon him is promised 
participation in the chief resurrection and to be forever with 
Christ the Lord, to reign with him for the carrying out of 
God's purposes toward mankind, and to have life everlasting 
on the immortal plane. — Revelation 2:10; 20:6. 

Jesus was the first Christian — the first of the Christ company
. "He is the Head of the body, the church, who is the 
beginning, the first born from the dead — that in all things he 
might have the preeminence." (Colossians 1:18) "And (God) 
hath put all things under his feet, and ga\e him to be the 
Head over all things to the church." (Ephesians 1:22) 
"Christ is the Head of the church." — Ephesians 5:23. 

When Jesus was baptized in Jordan, he was there begotten
 of and anointed with the holy Spirit as the great High 
Priest and King who is to bless all the nations and families 
of the earth. According to the Jewish custom, which was 
typical of things to be performed in the Gospel age, those who 
were called to the office of priest or king were anointed with 
oil. The Scriptures show that such anointing typified the 
anointing of Jesus and the members of his body, of whom 
Aaron the priest was a type. (Psalm 133:1, 2) These are 
to be both priests and kings — priests upon the throne. — Hebrews
 5:6, 10; Genesis 14:18; Revelation 3:21. 

The text set forth at the beginning of this article states 
the terms of the commission, or warrant of authority, which 
Jehovah has granted and given to Jesus and all his faithful
 followers. The duty and obligation, then, is laid upon each 
one to perform that commission faithfully. Jesus expressly so 
applied this to himself. (Luke 4:18, 19) From Pentecost until 
now all who have come into Christ by being baptized into his 
death (Romans 6:3) have received this anointing of the holy 
Spirit (1 John 2:20, 27) Jehovah has provided in his Word 
clear testimony whereby one may be enabled to determine for 
himself whether or not he has received this anointing. (Romans
 8:14, 16, 17) Therefore it is the duty of all having 
received this divine warrant, or authority, or commission, to 
perform the obligations which they have assumed. — Luke 
9:62; 14:28-35. 

THE CHKISTIA2TS DUTY 

The Scriptures show that God has a great plan which he 
is working out in an orderly manner. It has pleased him to 
deal through human agencies. He dealt with the Jews for 
eighteen centuries, using that people to make types and pictures
 of the sacrifices and development of his kingdom class. 
Having called, begotten and anointed the followers of the Great 
Master, and that without regard to sect or denomination, Jehovah
 has marked out for such certain duties, a certain course, 
as follows: 

(1) "To preach the glad tidings to the meek." To preach 
means to proclaim, to teach and to instruct. To preach the 
#lad tidings, therefore, means to proclaim the Gospel of the 
kingdom of God, which glad tidings must come to all the peoples
 of the earth in God's due time. 

None can preach understanding^ and in harmony with Jehovah
's way except those who have received this anointing, 
which constitutes their divine ordination, or warrant of authority
 to preach. It devolves upon all such, then, as opportunity
 may offer, to tell mankind concerning the glorious 
kingdom of righteousness that is to be established for the blessing
 of the human race; to teach and instruct all who have the 
cars to hear. We are not instructed or authorized to attempt 
to teach the haughty, the high-minded, those who do not wish 
to be taught, but those only who are teachable — "the meek." 
Such preaching and teaching may be done by oral proclamation 
or by handing out to others the printed Gospel in the form of 
a paper, tract or book, giving them instruction upon the Bible. 
Since the day of Pentecost lentil now, the Lord nt all times 
has had some faithful ones in the world who have proclaimed 
his message and done this very work. Thus it is observed that 
the commission of the Christian is one of active service by doing
 good unto others. The Apostle Paul expressed the obligation
 thus devolving upon the Christian when he said: "For 
though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for 
necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not 
the Gospel" — in harmony with mv commission. — 1 Corinthians 
0:16. 

[60 


(2) "To proclaim the acceptable year of the .Lord." Thia 
"acceptable year" is the period of time in which our heavenly 
Father is willing to accept the sacrifices of those who become 
members of the body of Christ. It covers the entire period of 
the Gospel age from Pentecost until the last member of the 
kingdom class has been called, begotten and developed, and will 
cease at the time when Christ takes, unto himself his completed
 bride. Thereafter there will be no more opportunity to 
declare the message concerning the high calling. Hence it is 
the present duty and privilege of the Christian to call to the attention
 of others who desire to hear that this is the age during
 which Jehovah is selecting those who are called to be 
sharers in Christ's sacrifice and who will be changed in the first 
resurrection from human to spirit beings to be with their Lord. 
The message to the world will come later. 

(3) "And the day of vengeance of our God." The Scriptures
 clearly show that the day of vengeance of God is a period 
of time at the end of the gospel age, when great trouble, sorrow
 and distress shall come upon the nations of the earth; 
that it comes particularly as a result of the disregard of those 
who claim to be Christians of the teachings and admonitions 
of God's Word of truth. The Word of truth, the Word of God, 
shows that had God's message been faithfully delivered to the 
people, and heard by them, the day of vengeance upon the nations
 would have been unnecessary. But Jehovah foretold that 
this great day would be necessary and would come. It is the 
time mentioned by Jesus to St. John, saying, "The nations were 
angry and thy wrath is come." (Revelation 11:18) The Lord 
Jesus pointed out to his disciples that he would come again to 
receive his church unto himself, and that during his second 
presence God's vengeance would come upon the" nations, and 
there would be "upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity
; the sea and the waves roaring; men's hearts failing 
them for fear and for looking after those things which are 
coming upon the earth." — Luke 21:25, 26. 

That time is Scriptural ly spoken of as (r the day of God's 
vengeance" because it would mark the period of time in which 
Jehovah would remove his restraining power and permit the 
angry passions of men to lash the nations to fury and to utterly 
destroy the present order of things. Jehovah's "prophet, speaking
 as though he stood in the very day of the trouble, and as 
the mouthpieee of the Lord, said : 

"I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even 
them that rejoice in my highness. The noise of a multitude in 
the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise 
of the kingdoms of nations gathered together; the Lord of 
Hosts mustereth the host of the battle; they come from a far 
country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord, and the 
weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land." 

"Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people; 
let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world and all 
things that come forth of it, for the indignation of the Lord 
is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies." — 
Isaiah 13:3-5; 34:1, 2. 

Again, referring to the same time, our Lord Jesus said: 

"For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against 
kingdom; and there will be earthquakes (literal and symbolic 
— revolutions) in various places; there will be famines. These 
will be the beginning of the birth pangs." — Mark 13 :8. 

It is the great privilege of every Christian now living on 
the earth to see these prophetic statements in the course of fulfillment
, and they may therefore recognize that the day of 
God's vengeance is now at hand. Since his commission places 
upon him the obligation of declaring this day of vengeance, any 
Christian who sees that these great Bible prophecies are now 
in process of fulfillment and who fails or refuses to tell forth 
the meaning thereof, proves himself disloyal to the Lord and 
unfaithful to the warrant or authority which has been committed
 to him. So we see that it is the clear duty of the Christian
 to hold himself aloof from the turmoil and trouble now 
upon all mankind, and with calmness and poise of mind to tell 
those who have the hearing ear; the meaning of this distress 
upon the earth, and, having the Spirit of the Lord and the 
Message of the Lord, to direct them to the only remedy for the 
present conditions; namely, Messiah's kingdom and the blessings
 it will bring to those who are willing to accept it upon the 
terms offered. 

(4) "To bind up the broken-hearted." Mark these words 
contained in the Christian's commission! The Lord does not 
say, Go out and make trouble, break many hearts and cause 
many tears of bitterness to flow; but he does say, Your duty 
is to bind up those hearts that are broken by sin, sorrow and 
distress, and to aid such by pouring in the balm of Gilead 
from the Lord's great storehouse — the sweet message of his 
provision for salvation, which is the only thing that will bring 
the peace of mind that passeth all understanding. What a 

83] 


(148-149) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


wonderful privilege, then, the Christian has at this time! The 
earth is full of broken hearts, many of whom, doubtless, have 
ears to hear the message that will soothe and comfort them. 
The duty and privilege of the Christian is to give forth this 
message." 

(f>) "To comfort all that mourn." Is it the duty devolving
 upon the Christian to comfort all those that mourn? Even 
*o! But how is it possible for the Christian to comfort all 
that mourn at thia time, seeing that many will not listen now 
to the message of comfort? We answer: Before this part of the 
commission can be fully accomplished the entire body of Christ 
must be fully developed and united together with him. All 
who have received this anointing of the holy spirit are commissioned
 to do unto their brethren a sweet and blessed service, 
which is: 

(0) "To appoint (that is, to give the exceeding great and 
precious promises contained in the Word) unto them that 
mourn in Zion (the true saints who are yet in some branch 
of the nominal- church, distressed by worldliness, and who 
know not the remedy,) to give unto them beauty for ashes 
( to point them to the beautiful promises concerning the resurrection
 of the dead), the oil of joy for mourning (taking 
away their sadness and turning them to the joy of the Lord), 
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness" (removing 
their heaviness of heart hy showing them the falaity of the 
creeds as contrasted with" the glorious arrangements of the 
Lord for the blessing of all mankind). 

All Christians must first be comforted. God's channel for 
bringing comfort to his people is his word. But none can 
understand this save those who have his Spirit; and so the 
Prophet has declared that during the Gospel age God would 
pour out his Spirit upon his servant? and handmaids (upon 
godly men and women) ; and that after those days (during the 
Millennium) he would pour out his Spirit upon all flesh. During
 the Gospel age the Christian alone is able to understand 
a*nd appreciate the Bible as God's Word of Truth. "Whatsoever
 things were written aforetime were written for our learning
, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures 
might have hope." — Rom. 15:4. 

SOME PBECIOTJS PROMISES FOB ZION'S OOMFOET 

The Christian has many perplexing questions to decide and 
is many times unable to decide the same without aid. To 
such the Lord has said : 

"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean, not 
to thine own understanding. Jn all thy ways acknowledge 
him, and he shall direct thy paths." — Proverbs 3:5 V 6. 
As the stress upon the world grows, the trials of the Christian
 increase; but when he understands the purpose of these 
trials he rejoices. To such the Apostle says: 

"That the trial of your faith, being much more precious
 than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with 
fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the 
appearing of Jesus Christ." — 1 Peter 1:7. 
The Christian finds that to perform his duties, striving to 
fulfil the terms of his commission, or warrant of authority, 
consumes his strength and energy and bring persecution upon 
himself (for he is misunderstood) ; and for the comfort of such 
the Lord declares : 

"Ptecious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his 
saints." "Fear not them that are able to kill the body."— 
Psalm 11(5:15; Matthew 10:28. 
The Christian has many experiences that are difficult for 
him to understand, but the Lord sends us the word of cheer 
through his "chosen vessel": 

"And we know that all things work together for good 
to them that love God, to them who are the called according
 to his purpose." — Romans 8:28. 
The Christian, beholding so many dangers upon every side, 
might quail before his hosts of enemies, fearing violence or 
other injury; but for his comfort our God has said: 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear him and delivereth them. — Psalm 34:7. 
The Christian realizes that his enemies are legion; that 
he is not warring merely against flesh and blood, but against 
evil spirits, the agencies of the adversary, entrenched in high 
places. He realizes his inability to meet his enemies alone. 
For his assurance and strength, and for his comfort of mind 
and heart, the Lord has said to him : 

"The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the 
whole earth, to show his strength in behalf of them whose 
hearts are perfect toward him." — 2 Chronicles 16:!). 
Again the child of God hears the Lord saying to him: "My 
grace is sufficient for thee." — «2 Corinthians 12:9. 

The Christian suffers many afflictions. He realizes the 
truthfulness of the statement that "All who live godly in Christ 


Jesus shall suffer persecution. "' But he hears the reasurring 
words of comfort: 

"For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory." — 2 Corinthians 4:17. 
Men of the world seek the glory which is as, a fading flower; 
but the Christian has the promise of a glory and honor which 
far exceeds anything the world can give, and which no one of 
earth may know — a glory which is eternal. 

The Christian recognizes in these strenuous times that upon 
every side are strife and dissention, trouble and war. He 
keenly realizes that under such conditions a faithful and loyal 
performance of his commission, or authority, of necessity must 
bring persecution upon him; but for his consolation and reassurance
 the Master says to him: 

"Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
* sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed 
are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you and 
■shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my 
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great i3 your reward
 in heaven." — Matthew 5:10-12. 

The Iy>rd has been selecting those who are willing to undergo 
hardships, misunderstandings and persecutions for his sake. 
He foreknew the great difficulties that' the followers of the 
Master would have, and for the encouragement and comfort 
of such he keeps before the mind of the Christian the promised 
blessings and rewards that shall be granted to the faithful, 
saying : 

"For Zion's (God's chosen people) sake will I not hold 
my peace, and I will not rest until the righteousness 
thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof 
as a lamp that burneth; and the nations shall see thy 
righteousness, and all the kings thy glory ; and thou shaft 
be called by a new name which the Lord shall name! Thou 
shalt be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a 
royal diadem in the hand of thv God." — Isaiah 62:1-3. 
WHY GOD IS TRAINING THE CHRISTIAN CLASS 
It must be apparent to all who carefully look into the 
matter that Jehovah has devoted the long period of the Gospel 
age to selecting and developing Christians, followers of Jesus, 
permitting them to have hard experiences that they may be the 
better prepared for some special purpose and work to follow. 
He is himself the great God of comfort, and has made provision 
for those who come to him, that their hearts may be made glad. 
The Apostle Paul expresses God's purpose when he says : 

"Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesu^ 
Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, 
who comforteth us in all our tribulations, that we may be 
able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort
 wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God; for as 
the Bufferings of Christ abound in us so our consolation 
also aboundeth by Christ." — 2 Corinthians 1:3-5. 
(7) "That they might be called trees of righteousness, 
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified." This 
part of our text will be more particularly fulfilled during the 
thousand years' reign of Christ. The trees here referred to are 
God's chosen ones, the royal priesthood, Jesus the head and 
the church his body. They are referred to as "trees of righteousness
, Jehovah's planting," because he has planted them, 
and all the body members of Christ have been made righteous 
through the merit of the Lord Jesus. In Revelation we read : 
"Then the angel showed me a river of the water of life, as clear 
as a crystal, issuing from the throne of God and the Lamb, in 
the middle of the street of the city. On each side of the river 
was the tree of life, which bare twelve maimer of fruits, producing
 one crop each month ; the leaves of the trees served 
as a cure for the nations." — 'Revelation 22:1, 2. 20th Centur\ 
Translation. 

Thus the Lord describes The Christ complete— Jesus Christ 
in the midst of the new kingdom, and the members of his body. 
described as trees of life, the leaves of Which — their professions 
and teachings during the times of restitution — will be for the 
healing and blessing of the sin-sick and sorrowing nations of 
the world. 

During that glorious reign of Messiah, Cod's promise made 
to Abraham, saying, "In thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed," shall be in operation and fully realized by 
the peoples of earth. This 3eed is primarily The Christ, Head 
and body. Secondarily, there will .be an earthly seed of Abraham
 — the faithful of natural Israel restored. For many centuries
 the poor Jews have been persecuted and driven from one 
nation to another, but then they will come to a knowledge and 
understanding of the truth. Then will be fulfilled the words of 
[St. Paul, "So all Israel shall be saved; as it is written, There 
shall come out of Zion the Iteliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness
 from Jacob" (the Jewish people). (Romans 11:25, 


[6084] 


May 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(149-150) 


26) Then the poor dews who have suffered indescribable horrors
 in the great wai that is now devastating the world will 
say, "Lo, thu is our <Jod; we have waited for him and he will 
save ns. This \< tin* Lord ; we have waited for him; we will be 
glad and rejoice in his salvation." — Isaiah 25:9. 

The Apostle Pan J says: "For we know that the whole creation
 groaneth and travail eth in pain together until now, waiting
 for the manifestation of the sons of "God." (Romans 8:22. 
19) The people of earth are in great sorrow and distress! The 
trouble in the world must of necessity increase until all the 
nations are exhausted, until the heady and proud are brought 
low. Then, but not until then, will they be in an attitude of 
mind and Iteart to receive comfort. God's means of comforting
 them will be through the ministration of his Spirit by 
teaching them his great plan of salvation. This will be done 
during the Millennial reign of Christ, Then all that mourn 
shall be comforted, and the comforters will be Jesus and his 
bride, the church. 

The peoples have long been kept in ignorance of God's 
purposes, but during the reign of Messiah they shall know the 
truth, as the Lord has promised: "He will destroy in this kingdam
 the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil 
that is spread over all nations; he will swallow up death in 
victorv; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from all fa<jes; 
for the Lord hath spoken it." (Isaiah 25 :7, 8) "Then the 


knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall fill the whole earth 
as the waters cover the sea." — Habakkuk 2:34. 

It will be the blessed privilege of those Christians who 
faithfully perform their covenant, who faithfully carry out the 
terms of their commission in this present time, to be instruments
 of Jehovah to restore the peoples of earth — this time 
upon a basis of justice and righteousness — and to bring blessing
 to the sad and comfort to all that mourn. A Christian thus 
seeing his privileges and opportunities appreciates the necessity
 of keeping himself aloof from the entangling conditions of 
the earth and of preparing himself for the glorious work which 
shall follow. Such preparatory work of the Christian is his 
specialty at this time. 

Let us then, dear brethren, be active and energetic in the 
performance of the duties the Lord now gives us, that we may 
share in the glorious privileges he has set before those who love 
him supremely and prove their love by their loyalty, even unto 
death. Let each of us daily be more and more worthy of the 
name * ( Barn abas," given to one of the Lord's faithful ones, 
which means, "Comforter of the brethren"! Let us have the 
holy Spirit abounding in us more and more! Let us be the 
Lord's faithful representatives, channels of the holy, Spirit, to 
spread his message of truth; and, finally, when our course 
here is finished, we shall be received by him into glory to carry 
out his future purpose of blessing all mankind! 


THE THOUGHT OF CHRIST 


"Over and over it comes to me — 
The thought of Christ on the stormy sea, 
In times of trouble and loss and pain, 
When my heart's a ship on a wind-swept main. 

'•Over and over it comes to me — 
Each human life has its Galilee; 


And Christ is ever the Lord of old, 

When his 'Peace, be still!' to the wavea wa? told. 

"Over and over it comes to me — 
The message of comfort from Galilee ; 
The voice of Christ through my storms I hear, 
'Lo, it is I! there is naught to fear.'" 


CONGRESS ENACTS CONSCRIPTION LAW 

PROVISION MADE FOB EXEMPTION IN CERTAIN CASES 
"Render therefore unto Caesar the things which arc Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." — Matt. 22:21. 


Readers of The Watch Tower throughout the country have 
been inquiring about 'Military conscription in the United 
States. We have promised to publish a statement as soon as 
conscription should become a reality by law. This is our first 
opportunity to do so. 

All true Christians are law-abiding citizens, because the 
Scriptures command them so to be. (Romans 13:1-9) But 
God's laws are higher than the laws of human institutions. 
"For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways 
higher than your ways, and my thoughts (laws) higher than 
your thoughts (laws)." (Isaiah 55:9) Where the laws enacted
 by man are contrary to the laws of God, then it is for 
each one to govern himself by his own conscience as to whether 
or not he will be controlled by the law of man or by the law 
of Jehovah. Jesus, the great Master-Teacher, made clear the 
duty of a Christian under such circumstances, when he said: 
''Render therefore unto Caesar (civij governments) the things 
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." 

The law of the land commands that man shall pay taxes 
upon his property for the support of the Government; that 
no man shall do injury to the person, property or reputation 
of his neighbor ; it declares that every man is endowed with the 
inalienable rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, 
and that none shall interfere therewith. These laws of man 
should be obeyed, particularly by Christians, but the Christian 
is governed by even a higher and nobler law. 

God's law provides, "Thau shalt not kill; thou shalt not 
steal; thou shalt not bear false witness;" etc. (Romans 13:9) 
Jesus said, "All they that take the sword shall perish with 
the sword." (Matthew 26:52) "No murderer hath eternal 
life abiding in him." (1 John 3:15) "Follow peace with all 
men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." 
(Hebrews 12:14) God's law not only commands to refrain 
from doing evil, but his law governing the Christian says: "As 
we have opportunity let us do good unto all men, especially 
unto them who are of the household of faith." — Galatians 6:10. 
War is for the very purpose of taking human life. It is 
legalized amongst nations on the ground that it is necessary. 
It is not needful for us to discuss whether or not the world is 
justified in this position. Our duty is to look at it entirely 
from the Christian viewpoint as related to Christians. 
Voluntary enlistment means a voluntary agreement to take 
human life under certain conditions, those conditions being 
whenever the commanding officer shall direct the use of weapons 


against the opposing army. Involuntary enlistment, or Conscription
, means that one is required to take human life if the 
condition arises. The world of mankind in general can, with 
a clear conscience, Toluntarily engage in war. Many who claim 
to be Christians can also engage in war without doing violence 
to their consciences, while other Christians would grossly violate
 their consciences should they enter an army for the purpose
 of engaging in carnal warfare. 

St. Paul, the witness of the Lord, plainly states to the 
Christian: "For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but 
mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds." — 2 
Corinthians 10:4. 

The fundamental law of the land recognizes that every man 
may exercise liberty of conscience. In substance, it provides 
that every man may choose his own religious belief and may 
worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience. 
To worship God means to render full; obedience to his holy will. 
To obey his will means to be governed by his law. Good 
men differ as to the meaning of God's law, and herein is where 
the law of the land justly recognizes that each man shall be 
at liberty to exercise his conscientious religious convictions. 

Then we say, Let every man who can with a clear conscience
 go to war, do so. With equal force we say that every 
man whose religious convictions and beliefs are against war, or 
participation therein, should he at liberty to exercise his conscience
 and therefore to request that he* be relieved from the 
obligation to bear arms. The Congress of the United States is 
governed by the fundamental law of the land., and acting as 
the agent and servant of the people, has recognized the right 
of man to exercise his conscientious religious convictions 
against engaging in war. So what we are here saying is not 
speaking against the Government ; but, on the contrary, we are 
calling attention to the right and liberty the Government 
recognizes and guarantees. 

Thank God for the privilege of living in the United States! 
While we all recognize that it is not a perfect government, yet 
it is the best of all earthly governments. Every one who 
lives under the flag of the United States should be loyal to 
that Uovernrnent as against all earthly governments. No 
citizen of this country could be a Christian and do violence to 
the Government of the United States. To be loyal to the law 
of God he must render unto the United States Government 
everything that is not in contravention of the divine law. — 
Romans 13:1-9. 


[6085] 


(150-151) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BtOOXtYN, N. Y. 


DISPLAYING THE AMERICAN FLAG 

Suppose the city or state officials should issue an order requiring
, or even requesting, that all persons display the American
 flag. What should we do? We answer, We think it would 
be right to display the flag in obedience to such order or request
. The American flag was adopted as an emblem of liberty. 
It is the national emblem. While some have insisted that it 
now represents war, this is hardly in keeping with the facts. 
It may represent war to those who desire war, but to those 
who love liberty and peace, the flag represents liberty and 
peace. However that may be, the displaying of the American 
flag can do injury to no one. If commanded or requested to 
display the flag, it should be done, out of respect to the Government
 under which it is the privilege of Christians to live. 
If an American was the guest of the British, Government and 
was requested to display the British flag and refused to do so, 
it would be showing disrespect to the British Government, his 
host. If a Christian, who is an alien amongst all earthly 
governments, should, while journeying amongst them, be requested
 to display a flag of the country whose benefits he is 
enjoying, and refuse to do so, such refusal would be failing to 
show the proper respect to such government. Recognizing that 
the Government of the United States has been the special 
refuge of Christian people from intolerable persecution ; that it 
was founded as an asylum of religious liberty and freedom of 
speech, every one in America should take pleasure in displaying
 the American flag — especially when requested so to do. It 
does not mean that by putting a flag on your house you would 
want to go to war. 

Since the Bethel Home was established, in one end of the 
Drawing Room there has been kept a small bust of Abraham 
Lincoln with two American flags displayed about the bust. 
This is deemed entirely proper, having in mind what Mr. 
Lincoln did for the Government and for the people of the 
United States, and in this we see nothing inconsistent with a 
Christian's duty. 

The Sixty-fifth Congress, now in session at Washington, has 
passed a law providing for selective draft into military service 
of the United States of all men between certain ages. Section 
II of said Act provides: 

"Such draft shall be based upon liability to military service 
of all male citizens, or male persons not alien enemies who 
have declared their intention to become citizens, between the 
ages of 21 and 30 years, and shall take place and be maintained 
under such regulations as the President may prescribe not inconsistent
 with, the terms of this Act. Quotas for the several 
States, Territories, and the District of Columbia, or subdivisions
 thereof, shall be' determined in proportion to the population
 thereof available for military service, as shown by the 
registration provided for herein." 

This provision of the. Act means that the President of the 
United States may by selective draft call to arms all male 
citizens of the United v States, and all male persons not alien 
enemies who have declared their intention (by taking out what 
is known as "First Papers") to become citizens of the United 
States, between designated ages ; and that he has power to compel
 'all such to respond to such call. 

REGISTRATION FIRST 

For the purpose of enabling the Government to know who 
may be called into such service, the Act provides for a registration
 as follows: 

"Sec. 4. All persons liable to military service under the 
provisions of this Act shall be subject to registration in accordance
 with regulations to be prescribed by the President, and 
upon proclamation by the President or other public notice given 
by him or by his direction stating the time and place of such 
registration, it shall be the duty of every such person liable to 
military service under the provisions hereof to present himself 
for and submit to registration undeT the provisions of this Act ; 
and every such person liable to military service shall be deemed 
to have notice of the requirements of this Act upon the publication
 of said proclamation or other notice as aforesaid given by 
the President or by his direction; and any person who shall 
fail or neglect to present himself for registration or to submit 
thereto as herein provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor 
and shall, upon conviction in the proper district court of the 
United States, be punished by imprisonment for not less than 
three months or more than one year, and shall thereupon be 
duly registered." 

This Section of the Act means that the President of the 
United States, by public proclamation, will designate the time 
and place of registration, and that the publication of such 
proclamation or notice given by the President will be all the 
notice that any one will need or be given concerning such 
registration; and that all male persons embraced within the 


Act are required under the law to register and submit to examination
; that on the day provided by such proclamation it 
shall be the duty of all male persons liable to military service 
under the provisions of said Act to present themselves for registration
 before the proper officers and to give answers to such 
questions as may be propounded to them. Since this Bection is 
not in any way in conflict with the law of God, as believed and 
understood by Bible Students of the International Bible 
Students Association, then all such should cheerfully obey 
this provision of the Act and duly appear and register in accordance
 with its terms. 

EXEMPTION FROM MILITARY SERVICE 

Recognizing the right of each person to exercise an honest 
religious conviction with respect to participation in war, Congress
, in the Act herein under examination, has made provision 
for certain persons to be exempted or excused from selective 
draft for military service. Section 3 of said Act providing for 
such exemption, is as follows: 

"Sec. 3. The Vice President of the United States, the officers
, legislative, executive, and judicial of the United States 
and of the several States and Territories, and all persons in the 
military and naval service of th.e United States, shall be exempt
 from the selective draft herein prescribed; and nothing 
in this Act contained shall be construed to require or compel 
any person to serve in any of the forces herein provided for if 
foundto be a member of any well-organized religious sect or 
organization, at present organized and existing, whose creed 
forbids its members to participate in war in any form and 
whose religious convictions are against war or participation 
therein in accordance with the creed of said religious organization
 ; and the President is hereby authorized to exclude or discharge
 from said selective draft and from the draft under the 
second paragraph of section one hereof, or to draft for partial 
military service only, persons of the following classes: Customhouse
 clerks; persons employed by the United States in the 
transmission of the mails ; artificers and workmen employed in 
the armories, arsenals, and navy yards of the United States, 
and such other persons employed in the service of the United 
States as the President may designate; pilots; mariners 
actually employed in the sea service of any citizen or merchant 
within the United States; persons engaged in industries including
 agriculture, found to be necessary to the maintenance 
of^ the military establishment or the effective operation of the 
military forces or the maintenance of national interest during 
the emergency; those in a status with respect to persons dependent
 upon them for support, which renders their exclusion 
or discharge advisable; and those found to be physically and 
morally deficient. No exemption or exclusion shall continue 
when a cause therefor no longer exists." 

It follows, therefore, that any person who makes application
 for exemption because of his religious creed, or belief, 
forbidding his participation in war in any form, or whose religious
 convictions are against war or participation therein, is 
not vioIating.any law of the land, but, on the contrary, is availing
 himself of the provisions of such law. In calling the attention
 of our brethren thereto, we are merely advising what 
rights and privilege this law grants to them. 

The Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society was incor 
porated and organized according to law in the year 1884 as a 
religious organization, and still is organized and exists as such 
religious organization. The International Bible Students 
Association is the same organization incorporated and organized
 in the year 1913 under that name according to the provisions
 of the laws of Great Britain, but said organization 
had existed as an unincorporated religious organization many 
years prior thereto, and still exists as such religious organization
. The classes or congregations of Christian people throughout
 the United States organized and existing under the name 
of Associated Bible Students of the International Bible 
Students Association are so organized and directed under the 
supervision of the Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society 
and its like organization, the International Bible Students 
Association. The members of all such Bible Classes come 
clearly within the provisions of said section of the above Act 
of Congress relating to the exemption from military service. 
The Act provides that "Nothing in this Act contained shall 
be construed to require or compel any person to serve in any 
of the forces herein provided for who is a member of any wellorganized
 religious sect or organization at present organized 
and existing, whose creed forbids its members to participate in 
war in any form and whose religious convictions are against 
war or participation therein in accordance with the creed of 
said religious organization. 

The word "creed," of course, means belief. All Christians 
of the above mentioned religious organizations believe the Bible 


[6086] 


Ma* 15, 1917 


T HE WA T C H T O W li R 


(151-15^ 


as taught by Jesus and the apostles, and therefore such teachings
 of the Bible constitute their creed or belief, which Bible 
teaching, creed or statement or belief) is amplified, elaborated 
upon and explained and made more easy to be understood 
by the teachings and writings on Bible truths as set forth in 
the Scripture Studies and the Watch Tower. The Scriptures
 speak of the followers of Jesus as "strangers and pilgrims
" whose citizenship is in heaven, since all such have made 
a covenant to follow in the Master's footsteps. A stranger 
is an alien, and as such would not be subject to the military 
laws of a nation where he is sojourning. Commenting thereupon
, Studies in the Scripture say, with reference to the 
duty of a Christian in time of war: 

"Aliens must be obedient to the laws; so must we. Aliens 
must pay taxes according to the laws; so must we. Aliens may 
look for protection under the laws; so may we. But aliens 
would not feel compelled to fight against their own King, the 
allegiance which they recognize primarily ; and we would prefer 
to be in the same position, as far as possible, for are not we 
'translated out of the kingdoms of this world into the Kingdom
 of God's dear Son'? 

"Are not we subjects of the Great King? And are not all 
the kingdoms of this world more or lees identified with 'the 
prince of this world* and his law of selfishness? Are not we, 
therefore, strangers and pilgrims here, and to some extent 
aliens and foreigners? It is eminently proper that we should 
love and appreciate every good law and all the servants of 
earthly laws, and rejoice that quite the majority of the new 
creation (Christians) live under the highest forms of civil 
government to be found in the world today, and appreciate this 
as a divine favor and blessing. Hence we neither traduce our 
native country, its rulers nor its laws ; but this does not mean 
that we must fight for these with carnal weapons, nor that we 
must increase our responsibilities by voting for them." See 
also Vol. 1, Pages 166, 167. 

Further commenting on this, subject, The Watch Tower, 
September 1, 1915, says: 

"To become a member of the army and to put on the military
 uniform implies the duties and obligations of a soldier as 
recognized and accepted. A protest made to an officer would 
be insignificant — the public in general would not know of it. 
Would not the Christian be really out of his place under such 
conditions ? 

" 'But,' some one replies, if one were to refuse the uniform 
and the military service he would be shot.' 

"We reply that if the presentation were properly made there 
might be some kind of exoneration ; but if not, would it be any 
worse to be shot because of loyalty to the Prince of Peace and 
refusal to disobey his order than to be shot while under the 
banner of these earthly kings and apparently giving them support
 and, in appearance at least, compromising the teachings 
of our heavenly King? Of the two deaths we would prefer 
the former — prefer to die because of faithfulness to our 
heavenly King. Certainly the one dying for his loyalty to the 
principles of the Lord's teachings would accomplish far more by 
his death than would the one dying in the trenches. We cannot 
tell how great the influence would be for peace, for righteousness
, for God, if a few hundred of the Lord's faithful were 
to follow the course of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, and 
refuse to bow down to the god of war. Like those noble men 
they might say, 'Our God is able to deliver us, if he choose* 
bo to do; but if he does not choose to deliver us, that will not 
alter our course. We will serve him and follow his direction, 
come what may.' 

"May not the soldiers of Christ well say to themselves. 
( If the ancient worthies knew God only partially, yet were so 
faithful to him, and if earthly soldiers are so faithful to earthly 
kings, what manner of persons ought we to be who have come 
into the family of God by the Spirit of begetting, who have 
entered the school of Christ, who are being guided and led 
by the Captain of our Salvation, and who have his exceeding 
great and precious promises in respect to our eternal future! 
How should we stand for him and fox his teachings? Could 
we lay down our lives in a better way than by faithfulness to 
the King of kings and Lord of lords, our Redeemer and Head f* 

It follows, therefore, that every one who is a member of the 
above mentioned organization, who believes the Bible as taught 
by the Lord Jesus and the Apostles, and as explained and 
taught in the publications of said Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society and International Bible Students Association
, is one whose religious convictions are against war or 
the participation therein in any form in accordance with the 
creed or belief of such religious organization, and whose belief 
or creed forbids him to participate in war in any form. It 
would therefore be the privilege of any of the Bible Students 


before mentioned holding such views to avail themselves of the 
exemption provision of said Military Act and at the proper 
time to claim such exemption. 

EXEMPTION MAT BE GRANTED ON OTHER GROUNDS 
The Act of Congress in question further provides that the 
President is authorized to exclude from such selective draft 
tor military service any person engaged in any of the following 
occupations, viz: Custom House clerks, mail carriers, or those 
otherwise engaged in the transportation of mails, workmen employed
 in the Navy yards or the United States, pilots on boats, 
mariners actually employed in sea service, and persons engaged
 in agriculture or farming found to be necessary to the 
military establishment, or to the effective operation oi military 
forces, or to the maintenance of national interest durin^ tlu« 
emergency. 3 

Some of our brethren are engaged in these various vocationand
 in addition to their religious convictions and their 
privileges under the Act resulting therefrom, such may be relieved
 from military duty in the discretion of the President 
Hence it is important for each one at the time of registration 
to clearly state his occupation, or the work in which he is engaged
. 

Furthermore, some of the brethren have wives, aged parents
, or others dependent upon them for maintenance and 
support, which may entitle them to be released from Military 
duty at the discretion of the President, as will be observed 
by the latter part of Section 3 of the aforementioned Act At 
the time of registration all such facts should be called to the 
attention of the officers taking the census or registration. 
HOW TO APPLY FOR EXEMPTION 

It is understood that within a short titoe the President 
will issue a proclamation with reference to registration 
and selective draft j following this, the War Department of 
the Government will take steps immediately to register 
all male citizens and aliens provided for by the bill and 
due notice of the time and place of such registration will be 
given When appearing for registration each one will be required
 to answer certain questions. The registration will be 
had in every voting precinct in the United States the same day. 
At the time of registration it will be proper for any one who 
expects to claim exemption, in answering the question as ro 
whether or not he does claim exemption, to answer in the 
affirmative. Within a certain time thereafter, as may be prescribed
 by the Government, a formal application for exemption 
must be filed. It is understood that the Government will 
furnish the necessary blanks for such application and affidavit 
tor exemption. As these *lave not yet been issued and the rules 
have not yet been published, it is impossible for us to state 
definitely about these matters, but in all probability all necessary
 information and blanks will be obtainable at each registration
 point. We will be glad to publish them in Tub Watch 
Ioweb as soon as the Government makes known the form of 
application. 

In the April 15th issue of The Watch Toweb, this year, 
page 124, we called attention to certain State laws with reference
 to the registration of male citizens, and also set forth 
a form of affidavit that might be used under the laws of some 
of the States, which were then contemplating an early registration
. We advise that every one now disregard the form or 
blank therein eet forth, for the reason that all registration in 
all the states will now be made under the Act of Congress, 
and the United States ' Government will furnish the proper 
blanks and forms. 

We advise the dear brethren everywhere to be calm and 
undisturbed about this matter; that all avoid discussions or 
controversies, and be content with merely stating their views 
and leaving the matter there. We can accomplish no good bv 
engaging in controversial arguments, as all such rather tend 
to provoke to wrath. Let us keep in mind that all who are 
fully consecrated to the Lord are under his care and protection
, an<* that he has promised to make all things work together
 for good to those who love him supremely. Let us appreciate
 our privilege of quietly and in the spirit of the Master 
pointing out to all those who desire to be told, that this great 
trouble upon the world is but the forerunner of Messiah's kingdom
, which shall bring blessings to all who love and obey the 
principles of righteousness. Let us each strive to be an example 
of the flock of God, manifesting by our deportment, our demeanor
 and our words that we have walked with the Great 
Master and learned of him, and that we are patiently and confidently
 waiting for the full inauguration of his kingdom, 

"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; lean not to thine 
own understanding; in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he 
shall direct thy paths." — Proverbs 3:5, 6. 


[6087] 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND ITS WORK 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled * ( The Holy Spirit Promised/' published in issue of May ], 1908, which please see.] 


ANOTHER DAY WITH THEE 


"Another day before me! 
Dear Master, let it be, 
In working or in waiting, 
Another day with thee; 

''Another day of leaning 

On thy beloved breast, 
Of ever-deepening trustfulness. 
Of quiet, happy rest; 

"Another day of mercies, 
Of faithfulness and grace, 


Another day of gladness 
In the shining of thy face. 

''Another day of progress, 
Another day of praise, 
Another day of proving 
Thy love 'in all thy waj-i. 

"Another day is dawning— 
Dear Master, may it be, 
On earth, or else in heaven, 
Another day for thee!" 


JESUS BETRAYED AND DENIED 

| The last five paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article* entitled "The Great High Priest Arraigned, " published 

in issue of May 15, 1899. The remainder was a reprint of article entitled "The Lord Betrayed, M 

published in issue of May 15, 1899. Please see the articles named.] 


MEMORIAL SUPPER REPORTS 


On Thursday, April 5th, after 6 P. M., Eeclesias of the I. 
B. S. A. the world over gathered together to observe the anniversary
 of our dear Lord's death. Although it occurred on 
a week night, and rain fell in torrents in New York, and no 
doubt in other eastern cities as well, the attendance was little 
affected; so faithful are the Lord's sheep in observing the instruction
 imparted to them by the Master — "This do in remembrance
 of Me." And while doing this the solemnity of 
the occasion is always deepened by file remembrance of the 
"participation'* which the communicants enjoy both in the 
"Body" and in the "Blood" of the Anointed One — Christ Jesus 
the Head and the Church His Body. Three brethren officiated 
at the service of the New York congregation. 

The corroboration of world-events with the prophecies bearing
 upon the last days of the present order of things, and 
the ever increasing signs that the Kingdom draweth very near, 
were likewise feasted upon in the hearts of the participants. 
And the words of the Master, at the' time of the institution of 
the Memorial Supper, and the fact that the realization of 
them is very near, were forgotten: "I will not drink henceforth
 of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it 
new with you in My Father's Kingdom. — Matthew 26:29. 

Faith seems now to have almost given way to sight, and 
our hearts are rejoiced as we view the glories of our Home 
beyond the veil. Our hearts also rejoice as we look out over 
the field and see so many of like precious faith continuing in 
their purpose to be faithful unto death. 

The number participating in the Memorial Supper here in 
New York City, as shown below, does not include some suburban
 Classes which formerly met with us, but which have 
now grown so large that it is considered wise for them to have 
their own celebration. We are appending to this list all 
Classes which have thus far reported an attendance of from 
twenty up 


New York, N. Y 917 

London, Eng 770 

Chicago, 111 758 

Glasgow, Scot 538 

Los Angeles, Cal 475 

Boston, Mass 475 

Detroit, Mich. : 454 

Pittsburgh, Pa 428 

Philadelphia, Pa 425 

Chicago. 111., Polish 365 

Vancouver, B. C 326 

Toronto, Ont 319 

Cleveland, Ohio 810 

Portland, Ore 243 

Seattle, Wash 232 

St. Louis, Mo 226 

Milwaukee, Wis 216 

Manchester, Eng 195 

Dayton, Ohio 193 

Kansas City, Mo 192 

Liverpool, Eng 183 

Washington, D. 177 

Providence, R. 1 175 

San Antonio, Tex 171 

Indianapolis, Ind 161 

Victoria, B. C 161 

Minneapolis, Minn 157 

Cincinnati, Ohio (white) , . . 157 

(152-157) 


Columbus, Ohio 157 

Buffalo, N. Y 144 

Denver, Colo 143 

Toledo, Ohio 142 

Diamond Bluff, Wis 141 

Oakland. Cal 138 

Tacoma, Wash 133 

Bloomington, III 123 

Baltimore, Md 120 

Spokane, Wash 118 

Springfield, Mass 115 

Louisville, Ky 108 

San Francisco. Cal 105 

Bellinghara, Wash 100 

Oldham, Eng 94 

St. Paul, Minn 91 

Bridgetown, Barbados .... 90 

Lancaster, Pa 90 

Akron, Ohio 89 

Allentown, Pa 87 

St. Joseph, Mo 87 

Worcester, Mass. . . ♦ 87 

Detroit, Mich., Polish 82 

Oklahoma City, Okla 81 

Duquesne, Pa 79 

Everett, Wash 79 

Sheffield, Eng 77 

Pasadena, Cal 76 


Hartford, Conn 

Newark. N. J 

Balboa, C. Z 

Trinidad, B. W. I. 

Leeds, Eng 

Convers, Switz 

Grand Rapids, Mich. . 

Reading, Pa 

Schenectady, N. Y. 

Altoona, Pa 

Hamilton, Ont 

Erie, Pa 

Rockford, 111 

Wichita, Kan 

Scranton, Pa 

Youngstown, Ohio 

Jackson, Mich 

New Brighton, Pa. . . 
Jacksonville, Pla. . . 

Norfolk, Va 

Omaha, Neb 

Rochester, N. Y 

San Diego, Cal 

Montreal, Que 

Richmond, Va 

Birmingham, Ala. . . . 

Cromwell, Conn 

Dallas, Tex 

Bangor, Eng 

Tampa. Pla 

West Haven, Conn. . . 

Calgary, Alia 

Sharon, Pa 

York, Pa 

Wilmington, Del 

Cumberland, Md 

Passaic. N, J 

Flint, Mich 

London, Ont 

Santa Ana, Cal 

Atlanta, Ga 

Salt Lake City, Utah. 
Terre Haute, Ind. . . . 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa. . 
Kingston, Jamaica . . 

Leicester, Eng 

Riverside, Cal 

Strathcona, Alta 

Des Moines, Iowa. . . . 

Harris burp, Pa 

Saginaw, Mich 

Wheeling, W. Va. 

Belvidere, 111 

Dundee, Scot 

East Kirby, Eng 

Duluth, Minn 

Niagara Palls, N. Y. . 
Waterbury, Conn. . . , 

Johnstown, Pa 

Springfield, 111 

Topeka, Kan * 

Watertown, N. Y. 
Burlington, Wash. . . 

Fresno, Cal 

Johnstown, N. Y. 
Kalamazoo, Mich. . . . 
The Dalles, Wash. . . 

Lawrence, Mass 

Lincoln, Neb 

Mattoon, HI 

Tiffin, Ohio 

Boise, Ida 

Brazil, Ind 


70 Camden, N J 35 

70 Colon. Rep. of Pan 35 

69 Pall River, Mass 35 

68 Jamestown, N. Y 35 

66 Kingston, Jamaica 35 

65 Brockton, Mass 34 

65 Brownsville, Pa. (Hung.).. 34 

65 Crooksville, Ohio 34 

6.j Nashville, Tenn 34 

64 New Orleans, La 34 

63 Paisley, Scot, • 34 

63 Quincy, Mass 34 

63 Brandon, Man 33 

63 Bridgeport, Conn 33 

62 East St. Louis, 111 33 

62 Ipswich, Jamaica 32 

61 Chattanooga, Tenn. (white) 32 

61 Auburn, Ind 32 

60 Glens Palls, N. Y 32 

60 Santa Cruz, Cal 32 

60 Tulsa, Okla 32 

60 Warren, Ohio 32 

60 Knoxville, Tenn 32 

59 Champaign, 111 81 

59 Chattanooga, Tenn. (Col.).. 81 

57 Chicopee, Mass 31 

57 Evansville, Ind 31 

55 Galveston, Tex 31 

54 Long Beach, Cal 31 

54 Sacramento, Cal 31 

54 Steelton, Ont 31 

58 Abilene, Kan 30 

52 Bay City, Mich 30 

52 Colo. Springs, Colo 30 

51 East Liverpool, Ohio 30 

51 Lynchburg, Va 30 

51 Stillwater, Okla 30 

50 Syracuse, N. Y 30 

50 Beaumont. Tex 29 

50 Canton, Ohio 29 

48 Fort Smith, Ark 29 

48 Limon, C. R 29 

48 Zion City, 111 29 

47 Utica, N. Y 29 

47 Albany, N. Y 28 

47 Calmar, Alta 28 

45 Chatham, Ont 28 

45 >Glace Bay, N. S 28 

44 Hayne, N. C 28 

44 Hobart, Okla 28 

44 Kingston, N. Y 28 

48 Muncie, Ind 28 

42 Coffeyville, Kan 27 

42 Edmonton, Alta 27 

42 Iola, Kan 27 

41 Lowell, Mast 27 

41 Pueblo, Colo 27 

41 Rhonesboro, Tex 27 

40 Bhawnee, Okla 27 

40 Wilkes-Barre, Pa 27 

40 Bloomfield, N. J 26 

40 Butler, Pa 26 

39 Danbury, Ohio 26 

39 Cincinnati, Ohio (Col.) 26 

39 Halifax, N. S 26 

39 New Albany, Ind 26 

39 New Brunswick, N. J 26 

38 Tonawanda, N. Y 26 

38 Elkhart, Ind 25 

38 Gait, Ont 25 

88 JopHn, Mo 25 

85 Mansfield, Eng 25 

85 MeadviUe, Pa 25 


[6088] 


May 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(157-158) 


Newark, Ohio 25 

Oil City, Pa 25 

Piqua, Ohio 25 

PitUfield, Mass 25 

Portland, Me 25 

Rock Island, VA 25 

St. John, N. B 25 

Warren, Pa 25 

Cecil, Ga 25 

Childress, Tex 25 

Davenport, Iowa 25 

McMinnviHe, Oru 25 

Pottstown, Pa 25 

Weatherford, Tt>3 24 

Cortland, N. Y 28 

Elfin, 111 23 

Elwood, Ind 23 

Pawtucket, K J ... .23 

Preston, Ont 23 


Kejfina, Sask 28 

San Jose, Cal 23 

Webb City, Mo 23 

HoMster, Ohio (Hung.) 22 

Kewanee, 111 22 

Lynden, Wash 22 

Marion, Ohio 22 

Millville, Ohio 22 

Mitchell, S. Dak 22 

New Castle, Pa. * 22 

Osseo, Wis 22 

Philipsburg, K. J 22 

Port Huron, Mich 22 

St. Catherines, Ont 22 

Stockton, Cal 22 

Tamaqua, Pa 22 

Parien, Oonn 21 

Dubuque, Iowa 21 

Beverly, Mass 21 


Boulder, Colo 21 

Midland Park, N. J 21 

New Kensington, Pa 21 

New Liskeard, Ont 21 

Niagara Falls, Ont 21 

Norristown, Pa 21 

Parismina, Costa Rica .... 21 

Pentictou, B. C 21 

St. George, Grenada 21 

Seguin, Tex 21 

Sheboygan Falls, Wis 21 

Alva; Okla 20 

Appleton, Wis. * 20 

Augusta, Ga 20 

Cleveland, Ohio (Hung.)... 20 

Corpus ChriBti, Tex 20 

Ea&ihampton, Mass 20 

Fort Wayne, Ind 20 

Scandinavian Classes reported from 


Fort Worth, Tex 20 

Grand Junction, Colo 20 

Greenfield. Mass 20 

Hillside, Mandeville. Ja 20 

Little Rock, Ark 20 

Morgantawn, W, Va 20 

Nowata, Okla 20 

Petersburg, Va 20 

Peterborough, Eng 20 

Pittsburg, Kan 20 

Racine, Wis 20 

South Bend, Ind 20 

South Norwalk, Conn 20 

Stirling, Ont 20 

Stockport, N. Y 20 

Troy, N. Y 20 

Wellington, Ohio 20 

Swedish Branch 1,388 


SOME LETTERS 

ANOTHER BRAVE BROTHER ACROSS THE SEA 

(nineteen years of age — written in the guard boom) 
My Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings! You will be glad to know that your little 
brother in England is now privileged to share with the others 
the experiences peculiar to us over here. Truly, although the 
present surroundings are not congenial to the new creature or 
to the flesh, one realizes how cood the Lord is. Experiences 
which we would naturally shrink from are taken as among the 
"all things/' because of the trustful confidence we have in our 
great God. He has guided and blessed me richly thus far, and 
my desire is to just continue daily to abide in him, to faithfully
 seek to uphold the principles we have grown to love and 
appreciate. Under these circumstances one is able to reflect 
the light by the life lived, and to be an example of the believers
. My prayer is that my heart shall always respond 
joyfully to his loving leadings, and be submissive in all the 
way he shall lead. 

Taking such experiences as he sees fit to permit with joy 
and gratitude, one is able to count all as light afflictions, as 
surely they are. When we think of all the blessings he has 
showered upon us since we were brought into the light, why, 
our hearts bubble over with joy and the }*oy of the LoVd becomes
 our strength ! Our great hope, too, is so bright that it 
surely stimulates us to cheerful, patient endurance. 

In this peculiar position one is able to bear the reproaches 
of our Master in various ways, and it gives us great joy to be 
so permitted. Today 1 have been thinking of our dear Redeemer
's example — he endured all things unmurmuringly, without
 retaliation. It is my heart*s desire to prove worthy of his 
leadership, following the more faithfully in his footsteps daily. 
Truly the heavenly hopes and joys are the only enduring, 
eternal things! 

This morning, as 1 was marched before the Colonel, the 
words on page 238 of our Poem Book flashed into my mind : 
"He rose, and from that hour went forth 

To trial and to death, in peace — 
A calmness born of perfect confidence in God." 
That last line has many times in the past been helpful to me; 
and under the present circumstances it is more than helpful, it 
is inspiring. 

I feel it a great privilege to be permitted to bear this witness
. The Colonel told me this morning that I shall be ordered 
to don the King's uniform, and if 1 refuse, I shall be courtmartialed
. That iB the usual experience, of course. Most 
sentences are commuted now to four months hard labor, and 
after about ten weeks one is released and put somewhere on 
Work of National Importance, so-called, under the Government
's Home Office scheme. 

Truly, the Lord is very good and we rejoice in his loving 
leadings; and our desire is to be more faithful day by day, to 
do always those things pleasing in his sight! Rev. 2:10, all 
of the verse, is very forceful to ua while in the hands of the 
Military. It is indeed a happy privilege to bear his reproaches 
with meekness and pitying love for our would-be enemies. I 
am assured of an interest in your prayers, and I commend all 
the dear ones in America to our Father's tender care and 
keeping. 

Later. — I thought I would like to send just a few more 
lines before I go to prison, to let you know of our continued 
trust in our dear heavenly Father's love and providential 
care. Surely one has abundant cause for gratitude — we truly 
find what we seek! We are daily counting our blessings and 
find fresh causes to thank our loving Father. 

By Tuesday next it will be three weeks since I came into 
the hands of the Military, I have had a nice and happy time, 
because after a few days I was in the company of four other 
Conscientious Objectors to Military Service on religious 


OF INTEREST 

grounds. The difference in our religious views makes little 
ii inference — we have all been quite happy. There have been 
many opportunities for presenting the truth to my fellow 
"0. O.V and to the soldiers who are supposed to be guarding 
us prisoners. 

t One realizes the need for patient- endurance, yet we can rejoice
 that in all the various experiences which we have been 
privileged to pass through his grace has been sufficient. This 
morning the last performance was gone through — that of being
 marched before the troops and nearing the sentence read 
out: "The accused is found guilty and sentenced to suffer imprisonment
 for 112 days with hard labor," 

So I go away to prison tomorrow, dear ones. What a grand 
privilege 1 It is very sweet to suffer a little for his dear sake 
who has suffered so much for us. We rejoice in his tender 
care who loves us with such a strong love. (2 Chron. 10:9; 
Num. 6:24-20, Hymn 307.) With fondest Christian love, I am, 
Your little brother "in bonds" for his sake, 

Stanley W. Willis. — England. 

A VOICE FBOM FAR-OFF AUSTRALIA 
Beloved Brethren: — 

Greetings in the name of our blessed Alias ter! May his 
peace be multiplied unto you. Although somewhat late in forwarding
 a message to you, we nevertheless have had you continually
 in our thoughts, and rejoice in our privilege of remembering
 you daily at the throne of grace. 

Some few years ago, an ecclesia was formed in this city, 
and our Brother Russell consented to be our Pastor. We thank 
our heavenly Father for his provision in our Brother Russell, 
through whose ministrations we have been built up and enabled
 to grow in knowledge and grace. We also thank him 
for having answered the prayers of so many of his saints, in 
that our brother was kept faithful until death. 

While assembled in Convention (one day Convention), we 
desire to convey to you our Christian love, and to assure you 
that you have taken Brother Russell's place in our prayers 
and as our guides. Further, this ecclesia unanimously resolves
 to accord you our unreserved and loyal support in forwarding
 the work of the kingdom, so soon to he established. 

Our message to you, dear Brethren, is expressed in Isaiah 
41:10 and Joshua 1:8, 9, "Fear thou not, for I am with thee; 
be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee; 
yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee, with the right 
hand of my righteousness." "This book of the law shall not 
depart out of thy mouth ; but thou shalt meditate therein day 
and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that 
is written therein; for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous
, and then thou shalt have good success." Have not I 
commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not 
afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with 
thee withersoever thou goest." God is our strength. How 
strong we are in him! 

With Christian love, we remain, 

Your brethren by his grace and in his service, 

Brisbane Ecclesia. — Australia. 
fleecing the sheep 
Dear Brethren: — 

I want to congratulate the Editorial Committee for their 
forethought, wisdom and general ability. I have the March I 
Tower, and was glad to note article on fly leaf, "Warning to 
the Friends," also letter on page 78, top of 1st column, and 
the reply thereto, As the secretary of the class for eight or 
ten years, I have been up against all the propositions contained 
in those articles; and from the fact that I was a traveling 
salesman for twenty-eight years and know the ways of the 
world and human nature, I have naturally become what the 
boys term a "wise guy." I have not been duped to anv irr^t 


rfiosaj 


(15»-159) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKLYN. N. Y. 


extent, but my experiences, if I could tell you about them, 
would be quite laughable. 

1, however, know of many innocent and unsophisticated 
brethren that have been imposed on and duped ahainetully. 
And it had been in moat caj&es the new menUb, Irtish in their 
first love for the truth", that have been the victims. 

You have acted wisely in not publishing the names and addresses
 of the class secretaries. Yet mine has gotten out 
pretty generally, and 1 am a constant recipient of letters and 
callers of doubtful intentions. It is a real, genuine privilege 
and pleasure for wife and myself to extend hospitality and 
generosity to the authorized pilgrims, colporteurs, agents and 
helpers sent out by the Bible House; but when it comes to 
lazy, never -do-well, spiritually sick hangers-on, 1 never let them 
lie down on me. 1 feel that it would be encouraging them in 
a wrong. Having had much personal experience all along the 
line that both of those articles suggest, 1 think they are very 
timely indeed, and 1 am sure the friends will profit thereby. 
With much personal esteem, I am, 

Your fellow servant in the Lord, W. B. Sutton.— Va. 
MAY OUB HEARTS BEAT AS ONE 
My Beloved Brethren ; — 

We know your hearts have been touched with sadness. What 
a shock Brother Russell's death must have been to you of the 
Bethel home! The day the news reached us it seemed as though 
we were in a stuffy room, unable to get a full breath. It was 
so hard to realize it was so. But, as we remembered the 
fruition of our hopes was a participation in the first resurrection
 with our dear Redeemer, and that Brother Russell had 
gone to his reward, "to meet the Lord in the air," and that he 
was one of those "blessed in the Lord that die from henceforth
," we could not help but rejoice with our dear Brother. 
We have been personally acquainted with him for fifteen years, 
and have been greatly blessed by his life— and wonderfully 
blessed by his death — knowing that his trials are over and 
that he has gone beyond the nery darts of enemies and people 
who did not understand him; and, additionally, blessed in the 
glorious tact that he now lives forever — changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye — having closed his eyes to temporal
 things and opened them to eternal things — to see Jesus 
as he is, and be like him ! We know that all is well, and that 
he had finished his work this side the veil. 

We pray our Father's richest blessings on the dear Israel 
at Bethel, that wisdom from on high may be abundantly bestowed
 on you to carry on the great work uninterruptedly, and 
that there may be a remarkable manifestation of the sweet 
spirit of Jesus in all that is done, that every word, thought 
and deed may redound to the glory of God and his dear fc>on, 
out High Priest and Advocate, and that we all may meet each 
other soon in the realms of glory, honor and immortality. 

We are pledging ourself anew to God, his truth, and his 
called ones, that our hearts may beat as one during the stirring
 scenes which will mark the close of "Elijah's" career. 
Continuing in daily prayer for you, my brethren, I remain, 
Your brother by his rich favor, C. E. Stewart, — 111. 
EARTH NOW POORER— HEAVEN RICHER 
Deab Bbetuken : — 

We desire to express to you our love in the Lord, and our 
loyalty to you as the channel he is now using to bring to us 
the clear and refreshing waters of truth. 

We find it difficult to express in words our feelings on 
learning that our Pastor was found faithful and taken home. 
We hardly realized how much we loved him. Was ever a 
man truly loved so well since our dear Lord was on earth 
as a mant We think not, and yet he was worthy of it all, 
for it was his self-sacrifice and zeal for the truth which in 
our Father's hands and with his blessing brought us all here 
into the glorious light of present truth. 

Our hearts go out in thankfulness and praise to our loving 
heavenly Father for sparing him so long to us, as well as for 
the example he was to us of loving devotion and sweet, patient 
endurance under all circumstances. Though earth is poorer, 
heaven is richer, and we would not wish it otherwise than as 
it has pleased our Father to arrange it; but we look forward 
to meeting him again, now very soon, when we too have made 
our calling and election sure. 

We pray our Father's blessing on all the work in your 
corner of the vineyard, and that he may |uide and direct 
you in all your labors and service and multiply his love and 
peace unto you. 

Yours in the fellowship of the mystery. 

Manchester Ecclesia. — England. 
ONLY A XITTLE WHILE 
I>TAB BBETttBEN: — 

We bow in loving and humble submission to the divine 
will, confident that the seventh and last special "angel" to 


the church is now like our blessed Lord and Head, and can 
see him as he is. 

We resolve to redouble our diligence to make our calling 
and election sure; to renew our consecration vows, and to 
pledge our cooperation in all possible ways to the Society, who 
though berett of its best iriend on eartti are bravely seeking 
to complete their share in the kingdom work yet to be done 
this side the veil. 

We also desire, at this time, to extend to you our deep 
appreciation of the faithful, loving ministrations of both our 
dear, departed Pastor and of all at the Brooklyn Tabernacle 
and Bethel home, who were closely associated with him in 
the harvest activities. 

Lkwiston and Aububn Ecclesia. — Maine. 
WITNESSING AT FUNERALS 
Deab Bheturen: — 

Your letter of the 13th came to hand this P. M., and was 
much appreciated. Many thanks for the careful way in which 
you replied to our several inquiries. 

Foi some weeks we have felt that the matter of conducting
 funerals should be mentioned to you, and by you to the 
friends in some general way. Three very sad cases have recently
 come to our attention, instances in which we would 
have thought the dear friends would have known better how 
to proceed. In each of these cases some of the friends had 
the matter of funeral services placed in their hands, but they 
were unable to secure a capable brother to conduct the service
. In two of these cases a nearby brother could have been 
easily secured, but the friends did not know of this until 
too late. They seem to have done the best they knew, but they 
did not know the best to do. 

It would have been very simple and inexpensive to have 
wired you asking for someone to render this service, and a 
capable speaker could have been provided at small expense. 
The friends would have been glad to pay all the expenses, 
and a wonderful witness for the truth could have been given. 
We consider these great opportunities for witnessing. So 
does the Society, as evidenced by the fact that mention is 
made of such free service on the volunteer matter. 

Could not some* brief, pointed, yet comprehensive instructions
 be given to all through the Toweb! You will know what 
would be the best thing to do. W 7 ith fervent Christian Love 
to all, I am, 

Your brother by his grace, W. H. Spbing. — Ohio, 

[The Society has for a long time cooperated in the matter 
of furnishing capable brethren to speak at funeral services 
whenever requested so to do, whether near or far, and shall 
be glad to continue to render such assistance wherever possible
. Requests of this character should be wired to the Society
 without delay, giving place, day and time of funeral. 
We will in turn wire information.] 

MEN AFTER GOD'S OWN HEART 

1>eab Brethren: — 

The Suffolk, Va., Ecclesia celebrated the Memorial of our 
dear Saviour's death on the evening of April 5, in my house, 
in which, in an adjoining room, lay the dead body of my wife. 
There were ten present, one of our sisters being absent on account
 of sickness. It was a blessed experience to each and all 
as we again commemorated the death of our dear Lord and 
Master and once more renewed our consecrations to be dead 
with him. 

As we partook of the emblems which symbolize his death 
we thought of and prayed for all of like precious faith the 
world over. In our daily prayers, we fail not to remember 
the household of faith, and in an especial manner do we invoke
 wisdom and guidance for the dear brethren upon whom 
the Lord has now placed the duty and responsibility of directing
 the harvest work, that they may be men after God's 
own heart, as we believe them to be, so that the work may 
be conducted in a manner that will command hia approval, and 
bring the best results, to the glory of his great and holy 
Name. 

In much Christian love for all, Wac. W. Mubbay. 

EARNEST WORDS OF APPRECIATION 
DteAB BbetHREn: — 

Just a line or two to tell you how much we all appreciated 
the series of public meetings we have had here in Columbus. 
It was an inspiration to us to see and hear the hearty responses
 to the messages from the dear Brooklyn brethren 
who spoke. 

We all wish to thank the Society for arranging such a 
precious season of blessing for us and such a wonderful witness
 to the truth once more in Columbus. May God continue 
His rich blessing on you all and make you at one and complete
 in him who is the Savior of the body. 


[6090] 


May 15, 1*17 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(143-163) 


We made judicious use of the newspapers in advertising 
these meetings and feel that we had excellent results. We 
used mostly "Readers" scattered through the papers. The 
total cost of the four meetings will reach about $380, which 


was all pledged before we started the series for the public. 

We feel richly blessed and more determined than ever to 
go on to the end. With fervent Christian love to you all, 

Your brother by his grace, C. B. Shull. — Ohio. 


FOUL SCANDAL'S DANGER 


"Brakes on! Go slowl you do not know, 
You are not sure that it is so, 
A vagrant whisper overheard, 
A sneer, a shrug, a dastard word 
Are not sound evidence — you may 
Unjustly hurt a man today. 
The thoughtless things that people say. 
The vandal lumors gossip spreads, 
The 'I have heards' and ^Someone saids.' 


And like remarks, destroy and blight 
Without a chance to prove the right. 
Noblesse Oblige! Who knows when you 
May stand in need of fair play, too? 
A thousand men and women die 
At heart each day because a lie — 
Some ill-considered, vicious fling — 
Has robbed their lives of everything." 


ANGELOPHONE COMPANY REORGANIZED 


In a recent issue of the The Watch Toweb we announced 
that the Angelophone Company was going out of tiudinoss, We 
are glad now to inform our readers that this work will continue
, some brethren having taken over the Company and reorganized
 it. 

There was a legal question raised as to whether or not the 
Society had authority under its charter to sell talking machines
, together with the records. It is our desire to be strictly 
law-abiding. There could be no question about the right of 
the Society to manufacture and sell talking and singing 
records, because this is another method of preaching the Gospel. 

The records made by Brother Russell proved unsatisfactory, 
but there has been such a demand for them that the Society 
has arranged to have these records made again, which is now 


being done by the same person who made the Photo-Drama 
Records so great a success. The new records are clear and 
distinct, and easy to be understood, and will be much appreciated
 by every one, especially by those who enjoyed Brother 
Russell's discourses. Those records will be handled by the 
Angelophone Company, which still has on hand a few sets of 
records in the voice of Brother Russell. 

Because of the increased cost of rerecording and remaking, 
and the increased cost of material, the Angelophone Company is 
compelled to Bell these records at 25c each or $5 per set of 
twenty-five. Even at this they are cheaper than any other 
records on the market. 

Orders should be sent to us or to the Angelophone Company
, 184 Fulton St., Brooklyn, N. Y. 


"WHY DO THE NATIONS WAR?" 


The announcement that there would be a new issue of Volunteer
 literature has awakened many to the importance of 
ordering the first Volunteer matter— Vol. 9, No. 1— "The World 
on Fire" — and distributing it. We believe that the time H 
more propitious now than ever for the Lord's people to work, 
and "The World on Fire" is excellent to begin with. People 
are thinking now as never before. We believe, too, that the 
Lord expects us to keep on witnessing as long as it is "called 
day." It will be time to stop when the night has so far come 
upon us that no one can work. 

The leading article of the new volunteer matter will be: 
"Whv Do the Nations War?" Many orders have been received 
for it When ordering it please mention Vol. 9, No. 5. We 
had thought to make it eight pages, but after considering every 


detail, it was concluded, the Lord willing, to issue another 
volunteer number before the summer ends. 

The printers are at work now upon the new issue, and orders 
will be filled as rapidly as the printing proceeds. There should 
be no delay in putting it out when it reaches you. A combined 
effort and systematic distribution would be best! 

Whenever there are classes, orders should be sent by the 
Secretary, nnd orders should be carefullv e^timatrd on a ba*is 
of one copy for each English-speaking family. Where there are 
no classes individuals may order, based upon the same estimate. 
The literature ib furnished free; but we do not pay the transportation
 charges. 

"Finally, brethren, be strong in the Lord and in the power 
of His might!" 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JUNE 1, 1917 


No. 11 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


"THE HAOTWRITOTO OS THE WALL" 

We append an editorial from the New York American of 
May 18, which we believe sets forth without exaggeration 
present conditions throughout the world. After certain parts 
we have inserted some paragraphs from Vol. IV, "The Battle 
or Abmageddow," of the series of "Studies ra the Scriptubes
. " 

The "Battle of Armageddon" was written twenty years 
ago, and so faithfully does it picture present events leading 
up to their climax, "The Battle of Armageddon," and the introduction
 of earth's new Government, the kingdom of God's 
dear Son, that we could wish a copy of it in every home 
throughout the whole earth. Truly there lived among us in 
these last days a prophet of the Lord; and although now he 
has passed from human sight, his works remain an enduring
 witness to his wisdom and his faithfulness! Following 
is the editorial referred to with the insertions from "The 
Battle of Armageddon": 

"BATTLE Or THE GREAT DAY OP GOD AUaOHTT" 

May 18, 1917, The A T . Y. American said: 

"The official mind seems to take it for granted that when 
the governments have made peace and have arranged the 
division of whatever spoils there may be, the peoples are 
going quietly back to work for their former masters, to live 
tinder the same institutions, to be, in short, the same nations, 
guided and controlled by the same financial, aristocratic and 
diplomatic castes that have ruled them for many centuries." 

Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said : 

"It it becoming more and more manifest to the masses 


of men that in the present order of things they are between 
a nether and upper millstone, whose rapid revolutions must 
eventually, and at no distant date, grind them down to a miserable
 and ignoble serfdom, unless interfered with in some 
way. Such indeed is the actual condition of things: human 
necessity is the feed-pipe which presses the masses between 
the millstones; the lower millstone is the fixed law of supply 
and demand which is crowding the rapidly increasing and 
growingly intelligent population of the world closer and 
closer to the pressure of the upper millstone of organized 
selfishness, driven by the giant power of mechanical slaves, 
assisted by the cogs and levers and pullevs of financial combinations
, trusts and monopolies." — Vol. IV, p. 372, par. 2. 
May 18, 1917, The New York American said: 
"These seem to be also the views and conceptions of the 
public journals and of most private citizens, who naturally 
have no other sources of information and of opinion than the 
public journals. 

"We can excuse the private citizen, hut it is amazing that 
men who are hailed as statesmen cannot see what is going 
on before their eyes; cannot see that the Europe of 1913 has 
vanished as completely as the Europe of the dark ages ; cannot 
see that the proletariats have at last in their hands the 
weapons and in their minds the thousrht and in their hearts the 
resolve to do away with all the old distinctions and social 
inequalities; that the institutions of government and laws 
which still seem to be solid and enduring edifices are in 
reality only hollow shells, mined and ready to be blown 
to pieces when relief from the pressure of outside war gives 


[60»X] 


(163-164) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N, Y. 


the peoples time and opportunity to overthrow and to rebuild 
the fabrics of society." 

Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said: 
"It will be impossible to reestablish the present order, (1) 
because it has evidently outlived its usefulness, and is inequitable
 under present conditions; (2)' because of the general
 diffusion of secular knowledge; (3) because the discovery
 that priestcraft has long blinded and fettered the 
masses with error and fear will lead to a general disrespect 
for all religious claims and teachings as of a piece with the 
discovered frauds; (4) because religious people in general, 
not discerning that God's time has come for a change of dispensation
, will ignore reason, logic, justice and Scripture in 
defending the present order of things." — Vol. IV, p. 551. 
May 18, 1917, The N. Y. American said: 
"This talk about autocracy still to be overthrown and 
democracy still to be saved and established is proof enough 
of the mental incapacity of so many men, esteemed wise, to 
realize what has happened in Europe. For the war has 
already achieved those two tremendous results. They are accomplished
 facts. 

"The basis of any government and of any institution is 
the state of mind of the masses and the inability of the 
masses or the ability of the masses to impose their desires 
upon government. 

"Now, any thinking mind must perceive that the masses 
in every "country in Europe have the ability to set up at any 
time any form of government or any institutions and laws 
they desire, because the masses of Europe, for the first time 
in history, are citizen soldiers, equipped with all the weapons 
and munitions of war and as able to subjugate their masters, 
to coerce their officers and to overthrow their governments 
as were the Russian citizen soldiers. 

Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said: 
"Where, then, we inquire, is there such an army, under 
present instruction and training? — an army before which 
the earth [society 1 shall quake and the heavens [ecclesiasticism
] shall tremble (Joel 2:10); which shall boldly array 
itself against the conservative forces of Christendom, both 
civil and ecclesiastical, and hope even to cope with its present 
strength? Where is the army that in the near future will 
dare deny Christendom's time-honored doctrines, its statecraft
 and priestcraft? that will sullenly ignore all its anathemas
, spurn its orders, and hurl back its thunderbolts of 
authority and organized power? that will face the roar of its 
Vesuvian artillery, defy its missiles of shot and shell, plow 
through its fleets and naval armaments, And, snatching the 
diadems from crowned heads, topple the kingdoms into the 
midst of the Bea? that will set the heavens on fire, and melt 
the earth with fervent heat, thus making one vast universal 
wreck of the old order of things as predicted by the prophets? 
"That such an army is cexming into existence and preparing
 for the desperate conflict we are none the less forcibly 
assured by the signs of the times than by 'the sure word of 
prophecy. 5 And it is the recognition of this fact (without 
any reference or knowledge of the word of prophecy) that 
is now filling the heart of Christendom with fearful foreboding
, and impelling statesmen everywhere to take extraordinary
 measures for protection and defense. 

"But in these very measures for self-defense devised by 
'the powers that be/ there is probably a snare which they do 
not realize. The armies upon which they depend for defense
, be it remembered, ahe the armies of the common 
people; these millions of disciplined warriors have wives and 
sons and daughters and brothers and sisters an<J cousins and 
friends in the ranks of the common people, with whose interests
 their own are linked by nature's strong ties ; and their 
service of thrones and kingdoms is only secured by imperative
 orders, and made endurable by a remuneration which 
they are fast coming to consider as no satisfactory compensation
 for the hardships and privations which they and their 
families must undergo, not to mention perils of life and limb 
and health and fortune. Year by year these armed hosts are 
less and less infatuated with the %lory' of war, more keenly 
alive to its sufferings and privations, and less and less devoted
 to the sovereign powers that command their services, 
while the armies of toilers, of the common people at home, 
are becoming more and more irritated and dissatisfied with 
their lot, and more and more apprehensive of the future. 

"All of these things are indications of at least a possibility 
that in the crisis approaching the mighty armed and disciplined
 hosts of Christendom majr turn their powers against 
the authorities that called them into being, instead of to uphold
 and preserve them. That such a possibility has not 
been entirely unthought of by the rulers is witnessed by the 
fact that in Russia, when the famine prevailed and led to 


riots among the common people, the facts concerning it were 
diligently kept from their friends and brothers in the Russian 
army, and the soldiers detailed for the suppression of the 
riots were from remote districts." — Vol. IV, pp. 545, 546. 
May 18, 1917, The N. Y. American said: 
"In 1848, when Europe rose and struck for freedom, the 
rebels could neither mobilize nor communicate quickly with 
one another, because there were neither railways nor electric 
telegraphs. So they were beaten in detail. 

"In 1848 one monarch could and did lend another thousands
 of mercenary standing troops to beat that other's subjects
 into submission. 

"In 1917 there are no mercenaries, no standing troops, no 
Pretorian Guards. They were all shot to pieces long ago on 
the battlefields — nourishing the hugest satire the world has 
ever seen, the tree of universal human liberty with the blood 
of tyrant's hirelings. 

CONDITIONS OP THIS BATTLE UNPRECEDENTED 
"The millions of men now in the camps and trenches of 
Europe are not mercenaries, not hirelings, petted and trained 
to shoot down rebellious subjects — they, are the proletariats 
themselves. And whenever they decide to quit slaying one 
inother at their master's orders* and decide to go home and 
take over the control of their own countries, to constitute 
themselves the lawmakers, to abolish the institutions of property
 in land and of private exploitation of public functions — 
that day they will accomplish these things because they have 
in their hands the weapons with which to make good their 
purposes and resolves. Every day the signs of this coming 
revolution multiply faster and faster. 

r 'The Russian Social Democracy has determined that a 
congress of Social Democrats shall be held in Sweden, there 
to formulate, xor a petition to the sovereigns and cabinets 
to end the war, but an ultimatum to the sovereigns and cabinets
 to end the war or to take the consequences of domestic 
revolutions with the armed aid of the Russian Democracy. 

"We suppose that no man familiar with history can fatf 
to perceive the exact parallel between the course the redcapped
 Russian revolutionists are pursuing and the course 
which the red-capped French revolutionists pursued a hundred
 and twenty years ago; nor can fail to remember that 
when the French revolutionists started out to aid revolution 
and republicanism in other countries of Europe, their tumultuous
 sans-culotte armies were irresistible, and drove before 
them in battle with the same fierce ardor to the same headlong
 rout the trained troops alike of Prussia and Austria, of 
Holland and of England, of Italy and of Spain. 
Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said: 
"In all those leading causes which culminated in the terrors
 of the French Revolution we see a strong resemblance 
to similar conditions today which are rapidly and surely leading
 to the foretold similar results on a world-wide scale. 
Mark the growing animosity between the privileged classes 
(royalty and aristocracy) and the working classes, the discussions
 of the rights and wrongs of the people, and the decline
 of respect for both civil and ecclesiastical authority. 
Note also the revolutionary current of popular thought and 
expression — the increasing dissatisfaction of the masses of the 
people with the ruling powers and the institutions of government
. And if the American Declaration of Independence, with 
its proclamation of human rights and of the foundation of 
government in contract and the consent of the people, inspired 
the masses of the French with a desire for liberty and independence
, it is not surprising that the successful experiment 
of this government of the people and by the people, for a 
century past, and the measure of liberty and prosperity here 
enjoyed, are having their effect upon the peoples of the old 
world. The ever-continuous tide of emigration from other 
countries to this country' is another evidence of the impression 
which this experiment has made upon the peoples of other 
nations. 

"And yet, the liberty and prosperity here enjoyed are far 
from satisfactory to the people here. They crave a still 
better condition and are seeking measures to attain it. Kowhere
 throughout Christendom does this determination assert 
itself more positively and boldly than here. Every man is on 
the qui vwe to assert his real or fancied rights. The trend of 
thought here, as elsewhere, is in the current of revolution, and 
is daily becoming more so. 

"The French Revolution was a struggle of a measure of 
light against gross darkness; of the awakening spirit of liberty
 against long established oppression; and of a measure 
of truth against old errors and superstitions, long encouraged 
and fostered by civil and ecclesiastical powers for their own 
aggrandizement and the people's oppression. And yet, it exhibited
 the danger of liberty unguided by righteousness and 


[6092] 


June I, 1917 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(164-165) 


the spirit of a sound mind. (2 Timothy 1:7) A little learning
 is indeed a dangerous thing." — Vol. IV, pp. 533, 534. 

May 18, 1U17, The N. Y. American said: 

"We should not commit the stupid blunder of looking upon 
these Russian revolutionists as a helpless, anarchic mob. 
They ake just that at present; and all their longings are for 
peace. But once let them resolve, in some tierce enthusiasm 
of new-found liberty, to carry the red flag to other countries, 
they would become an irresistible sturm, a rushing tempest 
of war and victory. 

"Nothing is easier than to underrate the weighty importance
 of this Stockholm conference, nothing more statesmanlike
 than to give it serious consideration. 

-'OUT OF THINE OWN MOUTH WILL I JUDGE THEE" 

"We hear here at home talk of war being carried on for 
another year, for two years more, for three years more. 

**We do not believe "it. 

"We do not believe that war can be carried on by any 
government on earth through another year. 

"If there were not famine to reckon with, the universal 
weariness of slaughter in Europe would end war, either by 
persuasion of by armed revolt. 

"We believe that unless the European Governments soon 
negotiate peace for Europe's suffering peoples, then Europe's 
suffering peoples will before long rise in mass and overthrow 
their governments in a common outburst of revolution and 
ruin. 

"We do not hazard this as prophecy. We simply state it 
as fact. 

"The truth is that the very situation we predicted, as you 
will remember, more than two years ago, and many times 
since, has now arisen — and Armed Socialism is marching 
steadily and rapidly to overthrow the institutions and governments
 of all Europe and to raise the red flag of internationalism
 over every capital of the Old World. 

"Because this is "so apparent, because this seems so inevitable
 and so near, we do not believe that the war in Europe 
will be prolonged over another year. 

"We believe that unless the governments of Europe soon 
make peace, the peoples of Europe will make peace by overthrowing
 all thrones, nobilities and privileged castes and 
classes; and in that case peace will come to us automatically. 

"We repeat that all calculations of prolonged warfare in 
Europe, based upon continued obedience of the masses to their 
present governments, are idle speculations, foolish calculations
 that will be blown to pieces by the storm and tempests 
of social revolutions unless the governments of Europe make 
peace before their peoples rise against war and against their 
governments. 

"The signs of these troublous and momentous times could 
not be more plain to thinking men if they were written by 
some mighty angel's moving hand, in letters of fire, across 
the sky that domes the earth." 

Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said: 

'Truly this is the predicted time of distress of nations with 


perplexity! The voice of the discontented masses is aptly 
symbolized by the roaring of the sea, and the hearts of 
thinking men are failing for fear of the dread calamity 
which all can see rapidly approaching; for the powers of 
heaven {the present ruling powers) are being terribly shaken. 
Indeed some, instructed by these signs, and calling to mind 
that Scripture, 'Behold, he cometh with clouds/ are already 
beginning to suggest the presence of the Son of Man [come 
as a thief, as foretold] although they greatly misapprehend 
the subject and God's remedy. 

"But amidst all the shaking of the earth (organized society
) and of the heavens {the ecclesiastical powers) those 
who discern in it the outworking of the divine plan of the 
ages rejoice in the assurance that this terrible shaking will 
be the last that the earth will ever have or need; for as the 
Apostle Paul assures us, it signifieth the removing of those 
tilings that are shaken — that those things which cannot be 
shaken — the kingdom of God, the kingdom of light and peace 
■ — may remain. For our God is a consuming fire. In his wrath 
he will consume every system of evil and oppression, and he 
will firmly establish truth and righteousness in the earth.'*— 
Vol. IV, pp. 149, 150. 

HUMAN RACE TO BE KESTOEED TO PEEFEOTION 

As a sample of the Scriptural .Message oi ^weetne&s and 
comfort which Pastor Russell taught the people, we quote 
from Volume I of his Studies in the Scriptures, pages 19) 
and 192, written thirty-one years ago: 

"The Apostle Peter, our Lord, and all the prophets since 
the world began, declare that the human race is to be restored 
to glorious perfection, and is again to have dominion over 
earth, as its representative, Adam, had. 

"It is this portion that God has elected to give to the 
human race. And what a glorious portion! Close your eve« 
for a moment to the scenes of misery and woe, degradation 
and sorrow that yet prevail on account of sin, and picture before
 your mental vision the glory of the perfect earth. Not a 
stain of sin mars the harmony and peace of a perfect society ; 
not a bitter thought, not an unkind look or word; love, 
welling up from every heart, meets a kindred response in 
every other heart, and benevolence marks every act. There 
sickness shall be no more; not an ache nor pain, nor any evidence
 of decay — not even the fear of such things. Think of all 
the pictures of comparative health and beauty of human form 
and feature that you have ever seen, and know that perfect 
humanity will be of still surpassing loveliness. The inward 
purity of mental and moral perfection will stamp and glorify 
every radiant countenance. Such will earth's society be; and 
weeping bereaved ones will have their tears all wiped away, 
when thus they realize the resurrection work complete. — 
Revelation 21:4." 

Arty thoughtful man can interpret prophecy after it has 
been fulfilled. Pastor Russell interpreted these prophecies 
twenty years ago, and the clergy scoffed and persecuted him 
because he told the people the truth. Truly, as was said of 
the Master, "They hated him without a cause!" Truly, 'The 
darkness hateth the light!" 


MORE ABOUT SELECTIVE DRAFT 


At the time of going to press with the last issue of The 
Watch Tower the Selective Draft Act was before the conferees
 of the House and the Senate. Some changes were made 
in the Bill, and the Act as finally passed by Congress on 
May 16th and approved by the President and relating to exemption
 is as follows: t 

"Sec. 4. That the Vice President of the United States, the 
officers, legislative, executive and judicial, of the United 
States and of the several States, Territories and the District 
of Columbia, regular or duly ordained ministers of religion, 
students, who at the time of the approval of this act are preparing
 for the ministry in recognized theological or divinity 
schools, and all persons in the military and naval service of 
the United States shall be exempt from the selective draft 
herein prescribed; and nothing in this act contained shall be 
construed to require or compel any person to serve in any 
of the forces herein provided for who is found to be a member 
of any well-recognized religious sect or organization at present 
organized and existing and whose existing creed or principles 
forbid its members to participate in war in any form and 
whose religious convictions are against war or participation 
therein in accordance with the creed or principles of said religious
 organizations, but no person so exempted shall be exempted
 from service in any capacity that the President shall 
declare to be noncombatant; and the President is hereby authorized
 to exclude or discharge from said selective draft and 
from the draft under the second paragraph of section one 
hereof, or to draft for partial military service only from those 


liable to draft as in this act provided, persons of the following 
classes: County and municipal officers; custom-house clerks; 
persons employed by the United States in the transmission of 
the mails; artificers and workmen employed in the armories, 
arsenals and navy yards of the United States ; and such other 
persons employed in the service of the United States as the 
President may designate ; pilots ; mariners actually employed 
in the sea service of any citizen or merchant within the United 
States; persons engaged in industries, including agriculture, 
found to be necessary to the maintenance of the Military Establishment
 or the effective operation of the military forces 
or the maintenance of national interest during the emergency; 
those in a status with respect to persons dependent upon 
them for support which renders their exclusion or discharge 
advisable; and those found to be physically or morally deficient
. No exemption or exclusion shall continue when a 
cause therefor no longer exists; Provided, That notwithstanding
 the exemptions enumerated herein, each State, Territory, 
and the District of Columbia shall be required to supply its 
quota in the proportion that its population bears to the total 
population of the United States. 

"The President is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to 
create and establish throughout the several States and subdivisions
 thereof and in the territories and the District of 
Columbia local boards, and where, in his discretion, practicable
 and desirable, there shall be created and established 
one such local board in each county or similar subdivision
 in each State, and one for approximately each thirty 


VII— 18 


[6093] 


(165-166) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


thousand of population in each city of thirty thousand population
 or over* according to the last census taken or estimates 
furnished hy the Bureau of Census of the Department of 
Commerce. Such boards shall he appointed by the President, 
and shall consist of three or more members, none of whom 
shall be connected with the Military Establishment, to be 
chosen from among the local authorities of such subdivisions 
or from other citizens residing in the subdivision or area in 
which the respective boards will have jurisdiction under the 
rules and regulations prescribed by the President. Such 
boards shall have power within their respective jurisdictions 
to hear and determine, subject to review as hereinafter provided
, all questions of exemption under this act, and all questions
 of or claims for including or discharging individuals 
or classes of individuals from the selective draft, which shall 
be made under rules and regulations prescribed by the President
, except, any and every question or claim for including 
or excluding or discharging persons or classes of persons 
from the selective draft under the provisions of this act authorizing
 the President to exclude or discharge from the 
selective draft 'Persons engaged in industries, including agriculture
, found to be necessary to the maintenance of the Military
 Establishment, or the effective operation of the military 
forces, or the maintenance of national interest during the 
emergency.' 

"The President is hereby authorized to establish additional 
boards, one in each Federal judicial district of the United 
States, consisting of snrh number of citizens, not connected 
with the military establishment, as the President may determine
, who shall be appointed by the President. The President
 is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to establish more 
than one such board in any Federal judicial district of the 
United States, or to establish one such board having jurisdiction
 of an area extending into more than one Federal judicial 
district, 

"Such district boards Bhall review on appeal and affirm, 
modify, or reverse any decision of any local board having 
jurisdiction" under the rules and regulations prescribed by the 
President, Such district boards shall have exclusive original 
jurisdiction within their respective areas to hear and determine
 all questions or claims for including or excluding or discharging
 persons or classes of persons from the selective draft, 
under the provisions of this act, not included within the 
original jurisdiction of such local boards. 

"The decisions of such district boards shall be final except
 that, in accordance with such rules and regulations as the 
President may prescribe, he may affirm, modify or reverse any 
such decision. 

"Any vacancy in any such local or district board shall be 
filled by the president, and -any member of any such local board 
or district board may be removed and another appointed in his 
place by the President, whenever he considers that the interest
 of the Nation demands it. 

"The President shall make rules and regulations governing 
the organization and procedure of such local boards and district
 boards, and providing for and governing appeals from 
such local boards to such district boards, arM reviews of the 
decisions of any local board by the district board having jurisdiction
, and determining and prescribing the several areas 
in which the respective local boards and district boards shall 
have jurisdiction, and all other rules and regulations necessary 
to carry out the terms and provisions of this section, and shall 
provide for the issuance of certificates of exemption, or partial 


or limited exemptions, and for a system to exclude and discharge
 individuals from selective draft." 

The Act as originally passed granted absolute exemption 
to certain persona, but as finally passed and approved* by the 
President, no person will be exempt from service in any 
capacity that the President may declare noncombatant. 
REGISTRATION FIRST-^ EXEMPTION LATER 

On June 5 every male person and every alien who has 
declared his intention to become a citizen, who is 21 years 
old and who has not yet reached his 31st birthday, will be 
required to register at the voting precinct wherein he resides
. At the same time 12 questions will be propounded to 
him, which he must answer and which are as follows: 

"1 Name in full Given name Family name 

2 Ilome address No. Street City State 

3 Date of birth Month Day Year 

4 Are you (1) a natural-born citizen, (2) a naturalized 
citizen, (3) an alien, (4) or have you declared your 
intention (specify which) ? 

5 Where were you born? Town State Nation 

5 If not a citizen, of what country are you a citizen or 
subject ? 

7 What is your present trade, occupation, or office! 

8 By whom employed? 
Where employed? 

9 Have you a father, mother, wife, child under 12, or a 
sister or brother under 12, solely dependent on you for 
support (specify which) ? 

10 Married or single (which) ? Race (specify which) T 

11 What military service have you had? Rank 
Branch Years Nation or State 

12 Do you claim exemption from draft (specify grounds) ? 
I affirm that I have verified above answers and that they 

are true. " 

These questions must be answered. Any one refusing to 
answer them will be subject to fine and imprisonment. In 
answer to Question 7, Pilgrim Brethren and regularly elected 
Elders of Classes can answer, "Ordained Minister of Religion." 
If you claim exemption because of your religious conviction, 
then you should answer Question 12 merely by saying, "Because
 I am a member of the International Bible Students 
Association." The Government has been advised from this 
office of the reasons why members of the International Bible
 Students Association come within the terms of the law 
and should be granted exemption. 

After registration the Government will draw by lot the 
names of 500,000 of those who are registered j and all of that 
number who have stated at the time of registration, in answer 
to Question 12, that they claim exemption, will then be given 
an opportunity to be heard as to the reason or ground for 
exemption. 

The rules and regulations governing this part of the 
Act are now in course of construction under the direction of 
the President, and therefore cannot be given at this time, but 
we are advised that the Government will make wide publication
 thereof as soon as formulated. If you expect to claim 
exemption you should procure a copy of these rules as soon as 
published, read and carefully follow them. They will doubtless
 provide for the filing, before the Board constituted for 
that purpose, of a petition for exemption, which will be 
heard in due time by the Board. 

We stand ready to render any and all assistance we can 
to the brethren in this behalf. 


THE PASTORAL WORK 


There seems to be a misunderstanding in the minds of 
some with reference to the Pastoral Work. It has been suggested
 that the Soctett has changed the method of work since 
Brother Russell finished his course. Such is not the case, 
however! We here desire to consider some salient points 
with the hope of making clear the whole proposition and enabling
 all to have a better understanding of this excellent 
feature of the harvest work. 

We call attention to an article in the November 1 Watch 
Toweb, 1(116, page 331, under the caption of "World-Wide 
Pastoral Work." It will be observed there that Brother Russell
 stated that about 500 classes had voluntarily elected him 
as Pastor. Therein he states, "Only of late has the Lord 
deeply impressed upon our attention a considerable work in 
which the sisters might engage with profit both to themselves 
and to the cause." He further stated that, as Pastor, he 
was calling attention to this new field of service; hut that 
before calling the attention of the outside classes to it, he had 
first made a trial in N. Y. City, adding, "the resulting success 
was so pronounced that we felt justified in calling it to the 


attention of all the classes which have notified us of our 
election as their Pastor, sending to each class copies of the 
following letters." The letters were published in said article. 

It is readily to be seen that this work, begun with the 
sisters, was directly under the supervision of Brother Russell 
as Pastor. After Brother Russell had finished his course here, 
the church had no Pastor. It was deemed wise not to elect 
another, as we have heretofore stated in The Watch Toweb. 
Since this work, begun by him, was clearly a part of the harvest
 work, it was the privilege and the duty of the Society to 
continue it. When Brother Russell was here, the reports 
were made direct to him. After his decease it seemed proper 
that this work should be under the Society's direction. 

In the January 1,1917, issue of The Watch Toweb it was 
stated that Brother Sturgeon would have the oversight of the 
Pastoral Department at the Brooklyn office. In the adjustment
 of the office work it was afterwards deemed best that 
everything should be under the direct supervision of the 
Society, so that any one might be assigned to that work as 
occasion required. While it was proper for Brother Russell 


[6^4] 


Junk 1, m7 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(166-167) 


to have the work under his direct supervision as the Pastor 
of the varioua Congregations, since his demise it seems that 
the only proper course would he to have this and all other 
branches of the work under the direct control, oversight and 
supervision of the Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society, 
and not under the oversight of any individual.' The friends 
will no doubt recognize the wisdom of this course. Acting 
upon this thought, the Board of Directors rescinded its action 
taken in December, of placing the direct oversight of the 
Pastor Department under any one. Brother Sturgeon, therefore
, is no longer in charge of that work. This does not 
mean, nor should it be interpreted to mean, that the Society is 
in anywise dissatisfied with the services of our dear Brother, 
but that its action has to do, solely and completely, with the 
matter of the best policy. Hereafter, therefore, all communications
 relating to the Pastoral Work should be addressed, 
"Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society, Pastoral Dept" 

In the March 1, 1917, issue of The Watch Toweb we 
said: "We are convinced that it is now no longer wise to 
limit this work to the sisters, but rather that the responsibility
 should rest upon all the Congregation.'* We therein suggested
 that henceforth the Lieutenant and other officers to 
conduct the Pastoral Work should he elected by the vote of 
the entire class, adding, "The Pastoral work will then be 
carried on practically as before, with the exceptions herein 
stated." 

SOME QUESTIONS ANSWERED 

Some of the questions that have arisen in the minds of a 
number since then are, Should brothers be elected to the 
office of Lieutenant, Secretary, etc.? and, Should they engage
 in the Pastoral Work? 

In answering these questions we quote Brother Russell's 
language in the November 1 Watch Tower, page 334, as follows
: "We have not invited the brethren to engage in this 
work, because we believe that there are other things which 
they can do that sisters cannot do," The Society Btill adheres
 to this policy; viz., that all officers of the Pastoral 
Work, such as Lieutenant, Secretary, etc., should be sisters, 
and that these sisters should be elected by the entire congregation
 and not by the sisters alone. The only part that 
the brothers have in this work is that of giving Chart Talks 
after the sisters have made the calls and arranged for the 
meetings* The Brother to give the Chart Talks should be 
assigned by the congregation in its usual manner of assigning 
speakers. Frequently the congregation delegates to its Board 
of Elders, or to a committee, the duty of assigning the varioua 
speakers; and where the congregation has done this it would 
be proper for the elders or the committee designated by the 
congregation to- make such assignment of some suitable brother 
to give the Chart Talks. Such assignment should be made at 
the request of the Lieutenant, she having previously arranged 
for the Chart Talks. Some of the classes have informed us 
that a brother has been elected as Lieutenant, Thia was not 
the thought of Brother Russell, and the Society has made no 
change. 

At one of the last conventions that Brother Russell attended
, this question was asked him: "Should the sisters 
start the Pastoral Work without consulting the elders and 
should they go ahead with it even though one of the elders 
is not in favor of it?" His reply was: "The elders have 
nothing to do with the Pastoral Work. The elders are elders, 
and should therefore attend to the work of the elders. The 
Pastoral Work is for the Pastor, and the Pastor should therefore
 attend to it. If any of the elders hinder or find fault 
with this work, our advice to the class would be that at the 
next election such elder he dropped from eldership. Each 
one should learn to attend to his own business, and not interfere
 with others ; and in this way the work will prosper." 

In relation to the Pastoral Work, the Society now takes 
the place of Pastor Russell, and of course some minor adjustments
 must be made to fit the conditions. The Pastoral 
Work is distinctly a work for the sisters; but the whole 
ecclesia, under the Society's direction, now has the responsibility
 of electing the officers. 

Question: Suppose there is a small class in a town, in 
which all the members of the class ai© brothers and not one 
a sister, what then should be done about the Pastoral Work? 

Answer: If it cannot be conveniently arranged for some 
sisters from another class to come and do the work, then 
rather than neglect it, our thought is that the brothers should 
do the work; but this is the exception to the rule. No rule 
can be made that will apply absolutely to every case. 

ASSIGNMENT OF TESKETOBY 

Where the Pastoral Work is in progress and there are no 
colporteurs in the town, Bhould the Pastoral Work be suspended
 until an assignment from the Society can be had for 
the Pastoral WorkT 

Certainly not! There should be no delay in or suspension 
of the work, but it should progress. In the meantime the 
Lieutenant should notify the Society of the situation; and if 
there are no colporteurs at work in that town, the Society 
will assign all the territory of that place to the Pastoral 
Workers* After receiving the assignment of territory, the 
Lieutenant will district the town or city for the work in the 
same manner pointed out in the November 1 issue of The 
Watch Toweb. 

Question: Should the work be going on in all the district
 at the same time? 

Answer: No arbitrary rule can be followed in this regard
. Where it be found' to be to the best advantage to have 
the work progressing in several districts at the same time, that 
should be done; but if it be found best to pursue some 
other method, then that method should be adopted. In some 
of the larger cities the friends have found it very advantageous
 to work one district at a time. They do it somewhat 
in the following manner: 

The various District Workers go into one district, select 
a public hall centrally located, and engage it for a certain date. 
Then the District Workers canvass or call upon everybody 
in that district in the usual manner, loaning the books, etc., 
and inviting them to a Series of Chart Talks at the hall previously
 hired. One of the most competent brothers is selected 
to give the Chart Talks. This method has met with splendid 
success in somo places, and is worthy of serious consideration
 by others, we believe. After a district is thus finished, 
the entire force moves to another district and a similar 
course is pursued there. It will not be necessary to wait until 
the Series of Chart Talks have been completed in one district 
before the work begins in another. It should be kept in 
mind, however, that no fast or fixed rule can be laid down to 
be followed in every instance. The Lieutenant and her assistants
 must exercise some judgment in the matter and pursue
 the course that seems to be the best. In smaller cities 
and towns it would seem best to follow the method of having 
the Chart Talk in homes where a suitable room or rooms 
can be had for that purpose. Conditions differ in different 
places, and each place should govern itself accordingly. 

Because there is some slight deviation in working out the 
details of this matter let no one think that Brother Russell^ 
method has been changed. We wish here to state emphatically 
that the Society has made no change in the method adopted 
by Brother Russell for the Pastoral Work, and it has no 
intention of doing so, unless the Lord should direct some 
change. The change in the manner of election of officers 
has nothing to do with the method of the work. 

From time to time questions of minor details will arise 
which have not been covered in anything that has been written. 
Under such circumstances the Lieutenant should use her best 
judgment, in the meantime communicating with the Society 
for suggestions or advice. 

THE LOED HAS BLESSED THE BOOK LOANING 

In a recent issue of The Watch Toweb it was stated that 
"the book- loaning feature of the Pastoral Work, instituted 
by Brother Russell, was originally intended by him to be 
merely incidental and not to be a prominent part of the* 
work; the chief part of the work being to call on those who 
already have the books and encourage them to read, etc." 

Question: Is it the thought, then, that the Book-loaning 
feature should not be pushed? 

Answer: The matter was experimental, of course, to begin
 with. As the Pastoral Work has progressed, reports indicate
 that the Lord has especially blessed the loaning of the 
books ; it gives the sisters an opportunity to reach a class of 
people who have not heretofore considered the truth. It is 
in the nature of a Circulating Library, and many have been 
influenced thereby to read "The Divine Plan of the Ages" 
who subsequently became deeply interested in the truth. 

The loaning of books at once appeals to some as an entirely
 unselfish manner of presenting the message. The Lord's 
blessing upon this part of the work has been so marked that 
we believe we should take it as an indication that he is pleased 
to have the message put out in this manner. The amount of 
books loaned will depend largely upon the quantity desired 
to be supplied by the local Ecclesia. This is another reason 
why the entire class should have the responsibility of the 
Pastoral Work; for it is the class that supplies the books 
for loaning, the work being done particularly by the sisters, 
as heretofore suggested. We desire to encourage the bookloaning
 feature. 


[6095] 


VERBI DEI MINISTER 


'Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now, saith the Lord of Hosts, 
if I will not open the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room 

enough to receive it." — Malachi 3:10, 


The V. D. M. Questions, under the Lord's guidance and 
blessing, have proven to be of such value to the church that 
they have been in the past, and continue to be in the present, 
recognized as one of the features of the harvest work which 
has a close relationship to all the other features of that 
work. They have emphasized in a particular way the third 
article of The Vow, which reads: <f I vow to still more carefully
, if possible, scrutinize my thoughts and words and doings
, to be intent that I may be better enabled to serve thee and 
thy dear flock"; and they have been used by the Lord, we 
believe, to greatly assist his people in fulfilling this part of 
their vow. 

From the great number of letters we have received from 
the friends, we have come to see that the thought has been 
gradually developing in their minds that they no longer consider
 themselves as fully qualified for the particular service 
of the present hour unless they be able to give, in a satisfactory
 manner, "a reason for the hope that is in them." This 
seems to be one of the reasons for the Lord of the vineyard's 
giving these questions at this evening time, when the harvest
 work is protracted beyond the harvest day, leading up 
and merging into "the night when no man can work." They 
seem to be his examination papers given to his people at 
the close of the day to prove which ones are fully qualified 
for the service reserved by him for thi3 momentous hour 
of the Gospel age. 

Hundreds of Ecclesias, beginning with the New York City 
Congregation, have reached the conclusion that no brother is 
properly qualified to serve them, either as elder or as deafcon, 
unless he be able to give a satisfactory answer to the V. D. M. 
Questions. Many colporteurs and pastoral workers have 
likewise reached the same conclusion with respect to qualification
 for their respective services. This is the standard 
required of all the workers at the Tabernacle and in the 
Bethel home. Brother Russell handed his paper in to the 
Committee the same as any one else; so also have Brother 
Rutherford, the members of the V. D. M. Examining Board, 
and the other brethren at Bethel and the Tabernacle. 

Surely no Bible Student would consider the V. D. M, Questions
 to be too high a standard! And yet, we doubt that 
few of the ministers occupying the pulpits of the land today 
could pass this examination (simple though it seems) on the 
fundamental teachings of the Bible. One dear sister whose 
answers to the Questions were recently approved has just 
written to us expressing her thankfulness to the Lord for 
having passed, and saying that she now feels qualified to teach 
the truth to her children in her own home! Evidently the 
passing of these examinations has something to do with the 
sealing of the saints in their foreheads and with their approval
 by the Unseen Judge as worthy a share in the Smiting
 of the River Jordan — that special feature of the harvest
 work reserved by tlje Lord to be the closing one, just preceding
 the final trial time of the little flock, which will 
culminate in their glorification. And yet we realize that in 
this, as in all other works during the Gospel age, the Lord 
accepts the spirit of those who cannot engage therein. 
THE SCOPS OF THE V. ». M. QUESTIONS 

The required amount for passing this examination is 85% ; 
and we are reserving for a subsequent article an explanation of 
the principles followed and the methods adopted by the Examining
 Board for determining as far as possible the standing
 of each student who submits his V. D. M. Question papers 
for inspection. However, we have thought it best not to give 
individual percentages, except to say that one has received 
the required 85% or over. This simply recognizes all who have 
passed as being in one class, without making any further 
and unnecessary distinctions. No one can possibly make 100% 
who does not possess an accurate knowledge of every main feature
 of the divine plan and of the necessary requirements 
of every candidate for the positions of Priests and Kings, to 
reign with Christ a thousand years for the purpose of blessing
 all the families of the earth. 

The, doctrinal part of the examination commences with 
"the first creative act of God," centers in the ransom, and 
culminates in the completed work of Christ at the end of the 
Millennium, merging into the ages beyond— a comprehensive 
sweep of all revealed doctrine. The experimental part commences
 with the initial point of conversion, or turning from 
sin, centers in consecration and spirit-begetting, and culminates
 in spirit-birth into the divine nature, to be forever with 
and like the Lord — a comprehensive survey of the whole process
 of character building. It includes the symbolization 


of one's consecration, the taking of The Vow, the careful 
reading of the Six Volumes of Studies in the Scriptures, 
the "enlightenment and benefit therefrom," and climaxes with 
the belief that one has "a substantial and permanent knowledge
 of the Bible which will render him more efficient as a 
servant of the lord throughout the remainder of his life'* — 
a period of time which is now quite short, we believe, as far 
as the little flock on this side of the - veil is concerned. 
This seems to be the Lord's way of approving "the laborers" 
for the special service, as an additional favor, now before 
the church — these laborers having been called together in all 
parts of the harvest field last summer by means of the many 
conventions held — more in number than ever held at any 
previous time in the history of the church. 

Each question, and each part of each question, should be 
concisely answered in one's own words ; and after each anBwer
, citations to the Bible and the Scripture Studies, as 
authorities, should be given. This will not only make each 
answer complete in itself, but will also make the examination
 more valuable to the one being examined. The thought 
is to get the largest possible amount of blessing out of these 
V. D. M. Questions. The foot-note on the Question blanks 
has seemed to some to leave the matter of citations optional, 
and these have inferred that their papers would be the more 
acceptable if the citations were omitted. However, this is 
not the case. Each answer should be given in one's own words, 
and citations to the Bible and #e Scripture Studies should 
be given as authority for the answer. 

EXAMIXIKa BOARD KEPT BUST 
More than four thousand of these papers have been received
, examined, answered and filed. But we believe that 
fully as many more will be received within the next few 
months, when the friends get the right focus on this matter, 
appreciate what it means, and understand its relationship to 
the service of the church yet on this side of the veil. As 
stated in a previous article, the Society is desirous of serving
 the best interests of the friends in every way it can, and 
has therefore continued the V. D. M. Department, established 
by; our dear Brother Russell, in order that it may serve the 
friends in this connection. 

Every mail brings many inquirieSj requests for blanks, and 
answers; and still the stream flows on, and will no doubt 
increase in volume until the work is done. Unavoidably, there 
have been some few losses, delays and mistakes; but this has 
afforded a good opportunity for the exercise of forbearance, 
patience and, in the case of failures, brotherly love, with the 
result that it has all worked together for good. However, 
it is surprising to know how comparatively few mistakes have 
been made. In this connection, we would like to request that 
every one who mailed his answer to us previous to the last 
Memorial supper, and who has thus far not received an answer
, will kindly drop us a postal card at once, giving full 
name and address, saying, "Please make report on my V. D. 
M. papers, sent in about ." This will enable the Examining
 Board to look up their files; and, in case the paper 
be missing, we will send another set of Questions, which will 
afford another opportunity for answering them. In case the 
answers should be on hand, we shall thus have opportunity 
for making a report without further delay. 

V. D. M. DEPABTMENT PERMANENT 
No doubt there are many friends who have delayed sending
 in their answers for one reason or another until they 
have concluded that it is now too late; or else they may have 
concluded to wait until the promised standard answers shall 
appear in The Watch Tower, thus hoping to get their share 
of the blessings at that time. For several reasons which have 
since come to our attention we think it best not to insert these 
standard answers in The Watch Tower, In the first place, 
should this be done, it would cut off- any further opportunity 
for passing the examination — a step we do not wish to take 
until it becomes necessary. It would also close this door of 
opportunity for a great blessing to many who have not previously
 given this subject the serious consideration which we 
believe it merits. 

Additionally, it would deprive the colporteurs and the 
pastoral workers of one of their best arguments to induce 
the people to read the Scripture Studies. When they tell the 
prospective reader that the Society which has inaugurated 
this Circulating Library has appointed an Examining Board 
for the purpose of examining the papers of all readers and 
passing upon them, somewhat after the manner of Universities
, it will be quite an incentive to them not only to read the 


(167-168) 


[6096] 


JuNJt 1, 1917 


T H E WA T C II TOW E R 


(163 175) 


book, but also to make n study of it for the purpose oi passing
 the examination, if possible, when they have finished 
reading, and of receiving the honorary degree referred to in 
* j ach issue of The Watch Tower, second page, second paragraph
, which has appeared there since February 1, 1906, In 
other words, it now seems clear to us that this V. D. M. Department
 should remain a permanent feature of the work 
until the harvest shall end and the labors of the little flock 
"hall cease. 

PURPOSE SERVED BT THE V. D. M. QUESTIONS 

Filially, we belie\e that the V. 1). M. Questions enable each 
nno to get a better focus upon himself, his standing before 
the Lord, his accurate knowledge of the truth, his attainments
 in character development, his relationship to the 
brethren, the church, the Society and the harvest work. On 
the other hand, we believe these Questions enable the brethren
, the church and the Society to get a better focus upon 
each one in these various connections and relationships — all 


of which would be beneficial and helpful in the way of an intelligent
 cooperation in the Lord's work. Anything like pride 
or division should be „ carefully guarded against and avoided. 
This is the main reason for not giving individual percentages. 
We would also deprecate the use of the letters V. D. M. after 
one's name in the way of distinctive title. To use this in 
advertising a public speaker in order to gain a better hearing 
for the truth would be a wise use of the letters, in our 
judgment. And now, dear Brethren, 

"What more can he say than to you he hath said? 
You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled!" 
Surely we are on the eve of a great forward mo\ement, 
in which all of the Lord's approved ones desire to have a 
share! It is evidently the most appropriate time to give heed 
to the words of our text: "Bring ye all the tithes into the 
storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and provi: 
me now herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open 
the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that 
there shall not be room enough to receive it." — Malachi 8:10. 


THE UNTRIED YEAR 

"If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. " 

'■Lord, go before and point the road, "That which 1 see not, teach thou me; 

I know not whither it may lead, And that thy wisdom still withholds, 

^or what the work thou hast decreed— Until thy patient love unfolds, 

Enough that thou wilt bear the load! In child-like trust I leave to thee 


"It is thy hand that stirs the nest, 
That sets these changeful tunes for me; 
But, Lord, there is no change with thee, 

And thou art my unfailing rest. 

"Oh, help me through the toil and heat, 
To follow closely by thy side, 
Ere yet the gracious dew has dried 

From off the treadings of thy feet. 


"Let thy sweet presence light my way, 
And hallow every cross I bear; 
Transmuting duty, conflict, care, 

Into love's service, day by day. 

"Whatever future lot be mine, 
My Savior, bless its good or ill; 
And let thy hand be with me still, 

And turn the water into wine." 


JESUS CRUCIFIED 


(This article, excepting the paragraphs below, was a reprint of 

issue of March 15, 1908, 
"A LOOK AT THE CRUCIFIED ONE" 

Comparing the details as given in the different Gospels, 
riome are inclined to think a difference exists between St. 
John's statement in 19:14 and St. Mark's in 15:25. We think 
both are correct- St. John evidently followed the Roman custom
 of reckoning from midnight to midnight. He does not 
mention the hour of the crucifixion, but the hour when Jesus 
was first presented before Pilate which, according to St. 
Matthew (27:1,2) was early in the morning, probably shortly 
after sunrise. St. John omits manv details; and, were it not 
for the other Gospels, we might infer that the crucifixion followed
 immediately. Note a similar abbreviation in Luke 24: 
50-53 as compared with St. John 21 and ActB 1:1-10. 

The examination of Christ before Pilate, thence to Herod, 
thence back to Pilate, and the trip to Calvary, would surely 


article entitled "Why Our Lord Was Crucified," published in 
which please see.] 

occupy three hours. St. Mark states particularly that Christ 
was crucified at the third hour. If this were Roman reckoning
, it would be three, o'clock in the morning, but the Jews 
frequently reckoned a twelve-hour day — sunrise to sunset. 
See Matthew 20:1-6; John 11:9. The third hour would, therefore
, be about nine o'clock in the morning. Critical students 
agree that the expression, "from the sixth hour until the 
ninth hour" (Matthew 27:45; Mark 15:33; Luke 23:44), indicates
 from noon until three in the afternoon. According to 
the Jewish Baw, the body must be removed "before sunset. This 
would, therefore, give ample time for the removal of Christ's 
body from the cross to the tomb before the closing of the 
twelfth hour, which according to the Law, would he the last 
hour of the day. 


THE RISEN LORD 


[This article was a reprint of that entitled "He That Liveth and Was Dead/' published in issue of May 15, 1908, which 

please see.] 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


FORMER PILGRIM BEARD FROM 

DiCAB Brethren: — 

Although dear Brother Russell will he greatly missed by 
us all, he is greatly the gainer, having gone beyond the veil to 
be forever with the Lord. You may be assured that whatever 
influence I can exert in the interest of the Society and the 
work it is doing, I will be very glad to exert. My humble 
prayer is that all the dear brethren at the Headquarters and 
everywhere may work together most harmoniously and successfully
. 

With much Christian love and very best wishes in which 
Sister Draper joins me, I am. 

Your brother in the Lord. Frank Drapes. — Mich. 

GOD WTXL GIVE NEEDED GRACE 
Dear Brethren: — 

We were blessed with the account of what took place at 
Brother Russell's funeral; also by one of the most beautiful
, loving tributes possible for one man to pay to the 


memory of another, given the Detroit class by our dear 
Brother Wisdom. And the best of it is, 1 know all was 
true. I can say with dear Brother Wisdom, that I have lost 
my best earthly friend amongst men. I ltnow that is also 
true of all the dear Bethel family. 

Our prayer, dear Brethren, is that the dear Lord will 
give you the needed grace and strength to carry on the work 
that remains. Much love and best wishes. 

Your brother in Christ, Forrester H. Taylor. — Mich. 
ENDEAVOR TO FINISH OUR COURSE WITH JOT 
Beloved Brethren: — 

We are praying that the Lord's blessing may rest upon 
you, giving you more of that wisdom which comes from 
Above, that as a family we may still enjoy sweet communion 
with each other until our probation closes. 

We mourn with you the taking away from our midst of 
our dear Pastor, through whom we have been richly fed for 
these many .years. Although feeling . his loss, our hearts re- 


[6097] 


(163-179) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


liROOKtYW, N. Y 


joice to see that he was faithful unto death, instantaneously 
therefore entering into his great reward as promised. (Rev. 
14:13) Let us continue to do the Lord's will so that we also 
may finish our course with joy. 

Yours in him, Cambebwell Class. — Jamaica, 

MEMORIAL TOWER PROVED GREAT BLESSING 
Deakly Beloved Brethkkn: — 

We wish to extend to you our love and best wishes, and 
to assure you that you may rely upon our cooperation in 


the Lord's work in this city, and in any other way in which 
we are privileged to serve. 

We have received a great blessing, from the reading of 
the Memorial Tower; and our earnest desire is to emulate 
our dearly beloved Pastor, as he so faithfully followed in 
the footsteps of our dear Master. We resolve to remember 
you daily at the throne of heavenly grace. 

Your Brethren in the dear Redeemer, 

Lowell Associated Bible Students. — Mass. 


A WORD OF WARNING! 


Sheep that browse in every pasture, measurably regardless sheep of this character prompts us to Bound a note of warn 
of the "green pastures and still waters" of truth of the Lord's ing at this time. Truly, "The hoi 


provision, are in constant danger of enemies lurking about. 
The increasing number of inquiries coming from frightened 


hour of temptation" is upon 
us, and the "strong delusions" abroad will be sure to Bift out 
all except those which Btray not from the fold of the Lord. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JUNE 15, 1917 


No. 12 


FAITH AND ITS REWARD 

'Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life."— Revelations 2:10. 


At this momentous hour the truly consecrated this side the 
\eil await the completion of the church, looking eagerly for 
evidence as to the consummation of their hopes. All these 
faithful ones fully realize that the church is now in a time 
of crucial trial and testing. And many such are asking, "How 
long will it be until the trials are ended, and we may see our 
Lord face to face?" Some having a greater degree of imagination
 than others state with positiveness that the completion 
of the church in glory will be at a certain date, which they 
proceed to set forth; and their opinion thus expressed is accepted
 by some as absolute truth. Others, however, require 
a greater degree of evidence, and confidently wait upon the 
Lord to give the desired information in his own "due time." 
What is the cause of this difference in the attitude of Christian
 brethren seeing that all such are consecrated unto the 
Lord? We answer that some of the dear friends have a 
greater degree of faith or something like unto it than others, 
and that we are now in a time of special trial of faith. In 
this connection we are reminded of two texts; viz., "That the 
trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold 
that perisheth, though it be tried by fire, might be found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ"; and "according to your faith be it unto you." — 1 
Peter 1:7; Matthew 9:29. 

These texts suggest a testing of the faith of all Christians, 
and imply that according to faith exercised will be the degrees
 of reward. In order to appreciate the importance of this 
test upon the church, it is necessary to mark the distinction 
between credulity and faith. Some Christians have much 
credulity and little faith, while others have little credulity and 
much faith. From the foregoing texts and many others it is 
evident that the faith of all must be tried, and that the trial 
will be severe. 

THE CHURCH NEARING THE HAVE* OF BEST 

When a mariner is nearing what he believes to be the en* 
trance of a haven and finds the fog so thick that he is unable 
to tell definitely his location, he applies the mariner's test. 
Carefully referring to his log, charts and compass, he determines
 approximately his location, and then moves cautiously 
on, keeping cool and sober, and watching with great carefulness
. 

The evidence is strong and clear that the church is now 
nearing the entrance to the haven of her eternal rest; but 
having no positive knowledge as to the exact date, we might 
properly say that the fog obscures our getting a clear view. 
It is, therefore, a time for solemn and sober consideration. 
While it' does not please the Lord to show us the exact day 
of the church's complete glorification, we can confidently wait 
upon him and joyfully sing: 

"I know not what awaits me; 
God kindly veils mine eyes; 
And o'er each step of mine onward way 
He makes new scenes to rise. 

"One step I see before me — 

'Tis all I need to Bee; 
The light of heaven more brightly shines 

When earth's illusions flee; 
And sweetly through the silence comes 

His loving ^Follow me.'" 

Having referred to the divine Word and helps which the 


Lord has provided and which constitute our log, chart and 
compass, and having determined that we are on the right 
course, then we are encouraged to move on with reasonable 
speed. Relying upon the exceeding great and precious promises
 of God's Word, the burden of the Christian beconjes 
lighter, his journey easier, and joy fills his heart. 

CREDULITY AND FAITH DISTINGUISHED 

As we have said, some have mistaken credulity for faith. 
What is the difference? Credulity is a disposition to believe 
something upon slight or no legal evidence. It i3 a conclusion 
reached oy relying upon opinion-evidence, upon supposed 
proof, which does not come from an absolutely reliable source. 

Faith is a positive or definite conclusion reached by relying
 upon competent evidence, which comes from a reliable 
and truthful source. 

A small amount of information suffices for credulity; but 
accurate knowledge is essential to faith. Credulity is usually 
based upon the mere opinion of a finite mind. Faith results
 from reliance upon the testimony of the infinite God. 
Credulity has a poor foundation; faith has a sure foundation
. The stronger our faith, the greater is our ability to 
withstand the storms which beat upon us and the fiery trials 
through which we must pass. 

PROGRESSIVE STEPS OF FAITH 

A strong faith is not acquired instantaneously, but is a 
matter of gradual growth. As a man of intelligence looks 
about him, beholding the wonders of creation, he marks the 
myriads of stars, the moon, the sun, alJ moving noiselessly 
in their orbits without jar or disturbance, .Then he reasons, 
"Surely there is a great First Cause, who created these countless
 worlds and holds them in their places!" He beholds the 
wonders of the earthly creation, apd observes man, the highest
 of earth's creatures, "fearfullv and wonderfully made." 

The reverential mind, meditating upon the beauty and order
 of nature, says: "If there is a great Creator should not 
we expect to find that he has given us some revelation concerning
 his purposes toward man?" He finds that the Bible 
claims to be just such a revelation. A careful examination 
reveals the fact that **holy men of old spake as they were 
moved by the holy Spirit" of God — that the Bible came from 
a reliable source, from Jehovah, through his spokesman — 
and sets forth a plan so wonderful and so beautiful that 
nothing short of the divine mind could have arranged it. 
Believing it to be God's Word, given to man for his instruction
 in righteousness, the reasoning mind who examines its 
contents begins to have faith. As his knowledge of the W T ord 
and his appreciation thereof increase, he finds that he has a 
sure foundation upon which to build. 

Defining faith the Apostle says: "Faith is the substance 
of things noped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews
 11:1) The word "substance" may be properly rendered, 
standing under — understanding. The word 'evidence" means 
proof. Then, analyzing the Apostle's words, we would say, 
"Faith is the* understanding of things for which we hope, and 
the proof of things which our natural eyes do not see." 

What is the desire of all sane men ? We answer, To 
live everlastingly in a state of happiness and peace. But do 
mankind generally have a hope of such a life and such conditions
! They do not, for the reason that they have nothing 
upon which to base that hope. What is the desire and hope 
of the Christian? We answer, To have life everlasting on the 
divine plane, associated forever with the King of kings, and 


[6098] 


Ju»* 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(1B0-181) 


serving to the glory of Jehovah in ruling the world for its 
blessing and uplift. How could any imperfect being dare to 
entertain such a hope? We answer. The basis of such hope 
is faith in God's Word. 

FAITH'S SORE FOUNDATION 

Every intelligent man realizes that he is imperfect. Evolutionists
 tell us that this imperfection is due to the fact that 
we have not been progressing for a sufficient length of time; 
that man was once of a much lower order, but that by processes
 of evolution he is gradually rising and will some day 
reach perfection. Whoever believes this has a vast amount 
of credulity, but absolutely no faith; for there is no real evidence
 that man has evolved from the lower creation. From 
God's Word, we learn that human imperfection is the result 
of Adam's disobedience to God's law; that mankind as descendants
 of Adam have inherited the penalty of sin, death; 
and that for this reason the whole human race is in a dying 
condition. We further learn that God graciously provided 
an atonement for this sin of Adam, through the death and 
resurrection of his beloved Son ; that "Whosoever believeth 
on him shall not perish, but have everlasting life." Believing 
thpse statements, hope begins to spring up in our minds that 
we may live, and this hope is based upon faith. 

Faith has two component elements: first, an intellectual 
understanding and appreciation of the Word of God; and 
second, a confident reliance upon that Word, Both elements 
are necessary to constitute a faith that is pleasing to God. 
One might have an intellectual understanding of the Bible 
and might appreciate it in a sense as the Word of God; but 
unless he relied upon it he would have no faith. He could 
not rely upon it, however, unless he had the knowledge. 
Hence the necessity for both intellectual understanding and 
confident reliance. 

From the Bible we learn that to share with Jesus in his 
glory one must deny himself, take up his cross and follow 
the Master. He must become a footstep follower of Jesus. 
(Matthew 16:24; 1 Peter 2:21) Having this knowledge, and 
relying upon it, we make a full consecration to do the will of 
God, before entering upon the course of following in the 
footsteps of the Master. 

NEW CREATURES NOW 

Our consecration being accepted, we are begotten of the 
holy Spirit and are now new creatures in Christ Jesus. How 
do we know that we are new creatures! We know it because
 of our faith in the exceeding great and precious promises
 of God set forth in his Word, and through his manner 
of dealing with us* "His Spirit beareth witness with our spirit 
that we are the children of God; and if children, then heirs, 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, if so be that 
we suffer with him." (Romans 8:16, 17) He assures us 
through his Word that we are begotten to a hope of life on 
the highest plane. "If any man be in Christ he is a new 
creature." — 1 Peter 1:3-5; 2 Corinthians 5:17. 

Having the witness that the Lord gives us, we may now 
hope to live with Christ. (Colossians 3:3, 4) This hope is 
not based upon works. Our justification did not come to us 
through works. Jesus did all the work for us, and our justification
 was the result of his merit imputed to us when we 
fully surrendered ourselves to God, and he counted us righteous
 by reason of this imputed merit of Jesus. 

THE WORKS OF THE HEW CREATURE 

But now, as new creatures, we must perform some works 
before we can gain the crown of life. By these works we 
must demonstrate that we have a real hope of life, that we 
appreciate the prize of immortality set before us, and that 
we are willing to give everything that we have for it. "Faith 
without works is dead." (James 2:20) By our works we 
prove our faith. 

One enters a school to be trained in physical culture. His 
teacher provides him with books of instruction, teaches him 
how to understand these books and shows him what exercises 
he must perform in order to develop physical strength. Suppose
 the pupil sits quietly by and says, "Yes; I believe &H 
that you say and all that the books say; and I approve of 
what I see you do"; but he does no work. It is manifest that 
he will not develop at all. 

As new creatures in Christ we enter the school of Christ, 
to be trained for the position of kings and priests for his 
kingdom. If we really believe that so great a prize is set 
before us, we will prove our faith by our works. God's Word 
is our book of instruction, and Christ Jesus is our great 
Teacher. If we would progress as new creatures we must 
acquire a knowledge of the Word, confidently rely upon that 
Word, and prove our reliance by doing what the Word tells 
us to do. For this reason the Lord permits to come to us 
various experiences. He is seeking for those who are willing
 and anxious to have their faith developed. !He permits 
discouragements, discomforts, trials and tribulations to come 
to his children begotten to the divine nature, in order that 
full faith may be developed and that they may grow up into 
the full stature of men in Christ. It is therefore apparent 
that the faith of such an one must be tried, and that according 
to our faith shall the trial result unto us. 

TIME OP SEVEREST TRIAL 

Written aforetime for our learning are the words: *The 
Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the 
Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul." 
(Deuteronomy 13:3) Again, the Apostle Paul enjoins, "Examine
 yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your 
own selves. Know ye not your own selves how that t/esus 
Christ is in you, except ye are without proof?" — 2 Cor. 13:5. 

Is there any reason to believe that the trial would be 
more severe at one period of the church's history than another
? We answer, Yes. It is clear that the crucial test 
will be during the time of the presence of the Lord at his 
second coming. In Daniel 12:10 the Prophet, speaking of 
the time of the end, says: "Many shall be purified and made 
white and tried." The purification comes by the washing of 
the Word. They are made white by reason of the robe of 
Christs righteousness; and then comes the trial. In Malachi 
3:2, 3, the Prophet says, "Who may abide the day of his 
coming, and who shall stand when he appeareth? For he 
is like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap; and he shall sit 
as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the 
sons of Levi and purge them as gold and silver; that they 
may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." 

In 1 Corinthians 3:13 we read, "Every man's work shall 
be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall 
be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work 
df what sort it is." As we have observed, woVks are built 
upon faith; and it is manifest, therefore, that that which is 
put to the crucial test is our faith, though the superstructure 
of many will be "burned." The Apostle Peter corroborates 
this, saying, "That the trial of your faith, being much more 
precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried by 
fire, may be found unto praise and honor and glory at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ." — 1 Peter 1:7. 
HOW FAITH IS TRIED 

There being two component elements of faith, as we have 
observed, it follows that we shall be tried respecting both of 
these; namely, our intellectual understanding and appreciation
 of the Word of God, and our confident reliance upon that 
Word. This trial fully tests our loyalty to God, and it Is reasonable
 to conclude that this trial would be more severe near 
the end of our journey than when we first believed. Even as it 
would be impossible to destroy a house by fire before the 
house was built, so it is impossible to try tne character of a 
Christian built upon faith .until after that character is developed
. If we should become negligent in the study of God'e 
Word, the knowledge thereof would gradually slip away. If 
we had that knowledge and failed to rely upon it, our faith 
would grow weaker. If our faith is strong, our hope of 
entering into the kingdom will be proportionately strong; and 
if we have this good hope within us we will strive to know 
the rules governing such entrance into the kingdom and seek 
to conform ourselves to those rules. This we will do in proportion
 as we have strength of faith. Every trial that comes 
to a Christian is a trial of his faith; and in the results of 
these trials his loyalty to the Lord is demonstrated. 
ABIDING IN THE DOCTRINE 

Jehovah, through Christ Jesus, has provided the spiritual 
food for the household of faith. Concerning such the Apostle 
Paul declares, "If any man teach otherwise and consent not 
to wholesome words, even the words of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and to the doctrine which is according to holiness, he is 
proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes 
of words whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds and destitute of 
the truth, supposing that gain is godliness; from such withdraw
 thyself." — 1 Timothy 6:3-5. 

Our Lord Jesus promised that during his second presence 
he would gird himself and make his followers to sit down 
to meat, and that he would come forth and serve them. (Luke 
12:37) Furthermore, he promised that he would provide a 
"faithful and wise servant," whom he would make ruler over 
all his household, to give them meat in due season. (Matthew
 24:45) The Scriptural proof is abundant that the Lord 
is now present in his second advent, and has been present 
for more than forty years; that he has during that time had 
one faithful and wise servant, through whom he has provided
 meat in due season for the household; that all who 


[6099] 


(181-182) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N\ Y 


have a knowledge of present truth received it through this 
channel and from no other source. 

If the food upon the table provided by the Master through 
his servant was essential to bring us to a knowledge of the 
truth and establish us in the faith, then it is manifest that to 
abide in the faith wo must adhere to that doctrine which was 
taught us through his chosen channel. Any one departing 
therefrom would prove his la-ck of faith in the Scriptural declaration
 above quoted. 

If the Berean Bible Studies have been needful for the 
household to develop strength and faith in the Lord, they 
are still necessary to maintain strength and faith in the Lord. 
A departure therefrom would show lack of faith and would 
mean a consequent loss of strength. 

FMDE THE CHRISTIAN'S ENEMY 
Pride is a great enemy of the new creature. It results 
from a failure to have a proper appreciation of one's Belf. and 
a proper appreciation of the Lord. If one who has been some 
time in the narrow way, and has made progress in the knowledge
 of the Lord's Word, should reach the point of believing 
that the Lord really needs him, that his wisdom far exceeds 
that of many others in the body, that without his aid it 
would be difficult for the class to make progress, that his 
ability to teach is such that it should have recognition — such 
an one would be developing pride. This condition would show 
that his faith was on trial, and that the trial was going against 
him. The Scriptures declare, " Pride goeth before destruction, 
and a haughty spirit before a fall"; "God resisteth the proud, 
but giveth grace to the humble." — Proverbs 16:18; 1 Peter 5:5. 
If such an one knew that these admonitions were contained 
in the Bible and did not rely upon them, this test of faith 
would manifest his weakness. If he did not know they were 
there, it would show a deficiency in the knowledge of the 
Lord's Word, and therefore a lack of faith. He must see 
tbat pride would lead to the destruction of the new creature, 
and if his hope is strong of gaining the kingdom, he will 
war against pride as a deadly enemy. How shall he do this? 
The Apostle answers, "Humble yourselves therefore under 
the mighty hand of .God, that he may exalt you in due time." 
JUDGING THE BRETHREN 
It is not an unusual thing to find some brother or sister 
judging another by calling in question his motives. Such a 
course demonstrates that the one who is judging another is 
having his faith tested, and that the trial is resulting adversely 
to his own interest; for the Scriptures advise, "Judge nothing 
before the time." (1 Corinthians 4:5) "Who shall lay anything
 to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justineth." 
(Romans 8:33) We have no authority to appear as judges 
against our brethren. There is only one Judge who has access 
to Jehovah's court — the Great Master, who appears for us 
and not against us. Appreciating this fact and relying upon 
these Scriptures, one would refrain from judging another. 
SELFISHNESS VS. LOVE 
The natural tendency of man is selfish; he is inclined to 
do many things from a motive of self-interest. When he becomes
 a new creature in Christ he finds this natural tendency 
warring against the new mind. If we find ourselves inclined 
to yield to selfish desires and to have our own way, unmindful
 of the rights and privileges of others ,we may know that 
our faith is being severely tested; and according as we govern 
ourselves shall we come forth from the fiery test. The antithesis
 of selfishness is love, which is an unselfish desire to do 
good to others. Selfishness is the fruit of the mind of the 
flesh, while love is the fruit of the Spirit. 

If we are not developing in love, then our faith is not increasing
. W 7 e base this conclusion upon the Word of the 
Lord, which says: "Though I speak with the tongues of men 
and of angels, and though I have the gift of prophecy and 
unde/stand all mysteries; and though I have all knowledge, 
and have faith sufficient to remove mountains; and though I 
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and give my body to 
be burned, and have no love, it profiteth me nothing." (1 
Corinthians 13:1-4) "And besides all these things, put on 
love, which is the bond of completeness." (Coloasians 3:14, 
Diaglott) Seeing that we must both know these Scriptures 
and confidently rely upon them in order to have faith, then it 
follows that our faith is weak or strong in proportion as we 
know and confidently rely thereupon. 

WOBBT VS. PEACE 
Sometimes we are incl ined to worry, to become much 
exercised about our business affairs or about the harvest 
work or the manner in which it is being conducted by others; 
etc. Worry drives away the peace of mind; and when we 
find ourselves in this disturbed condition of mind we may 
know that our faith is being tried; and in proportion as our 
faith is strong shall we be able to overcome the disposition to 


worry and to leave all in the Lord's hands. The opposite of 
worry is peace, repose and tranquility. As proof that worn 
indicates a trial of faith, we note the following: "Be careful 
(over-anxious, unduly exercised) for nothing; but in even - 
thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your 
requests be made known unto God; and [as a result] the peacr 
of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your 
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus." — Philippians 4:6, 7. 
If, after having done all that we can do, we have full confidence
 in the promises of the Lord and rely thereupon, our 
minds should be at rest; we should have a" rest of faith an 
God. The Lord has given us many precious promises in lu< 
Word, and he invites us to rely upon them that our faith 
may be strong. For instance, he says: "Rest in the Lord 
and wait patiently for him; fret not thyself because of him 
who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth 
wicked devices to pass." (Psalm 37:7) If our enemies persecute
 us unjustly, we are not to be disturbed, but to calmly 
rest in the Lord. Again, we have the injunction, "Wait on 
the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine 
heart; wait, I say, on the Lord." (Psalm 27:14) In this 
last Scripture the word "wait" means to lay hold upon, to 
trust implicitly our heavenly Father. Again the Lord gi veils
 a remedy to drive away worry and enthrone peace in our 
hearts, saying, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose 
mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee." 

In the testing of the Christian's faith he sometimes finds 
himself in fear. An opportunity of service is presented; he 
fears he cannot do it. If his faith is strong, he will chase the 
fears away, remembering the words of the Apostle: "I can 
do all things through Christ, who strengtheneth me." (Philippians
 4:13) It is a good thing not to have too much confidence
 in ourselves, but to have full and confident reliance 
upon the Lord. Doubts in our minds increase fear; doubt > 
and fears undermine the faith of the Christian and cause hi* 
hope to grow faint. At times the thought may arise in the 
Christian's mind as to whether or not he belongs to the Lord 
and whether or not the Lord loves him. He realizes that he 
has been trying to serve the Lord, but, being displeased with 
himself, he doubts that the Lord could be pleased with him. 
INCENTIVES TO HOFBFTONESS 
Because of the seeming delay in the establishment of Messiah
's kingdom, some have feared that "the door is shut" and 
the opportunity for them to enter the kingdom forever closed. 
All of this results from weakness of fiuth. The trial of faith 
has come; the Lord is permitting us to be tested as to 
whether or not we will rely fully upon him. Nowhere in 
his Word has he told us the hour when we shall enter into 
the kingdom. He has positively told us through the words 
of the Apostle, however, "that of the times and seasons ye 
have no need that I write unto you; for yourselves know 
perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the 
night; .... but ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that 
day should overtake you as a thief." — 1 Thessalonians 5:1-4. 
All about us we see the fulfillment of prophecy in that the 
kingdoms of this earth are passing away ; and the Lord Jesu« 
says to us, "When ye see these things begin to come to pass, 
then look up, lift up your heads, for your deliverance draweth 
nigh." (Luke 21:28) He has given us numerous promises 
in his W 7 ord by which we can determine upon examination 
whether or not we are his children. If we find that we 
have the zeal which is peculiar to the house of the Lord 
(Psalm 69:9); that we understand and appreciate the mystery
 of God (Colossians 1:26, 27; 1 Corinthians 2:14, 9, 10; 
Romans 8:16, 17) ; that we love the brethren (1 John 3:14) ; 
that we have opportunities for service, which the Lord is still 
permitting us to use (John 4:36) ; and that we are keeping 
his commandments with a joyful heart — these, together with 
the clear fulfillment of prophecy daily being manifested, should 
make our faith strong, and all doubts and fears should vanish. 
TWO COMMON BESETMENTS OF THE NEW OBEATUSE 
It has been truly said that one/ of our most crucial tests 
is patient endurance of the hardships, tribulations and trials 
that daily come to the child of God. Upon examination how 
do we find that we are receiving these trying experiences — 
patiently or impatiently? If we are chafing under the trial, 
murmuring under the hardships, or complaining that our lot 
is harder than that of some one else; if we are discontented, 
it means that our faith is on trial and that we are failing 
under the test. On the other hand, if these hardships and 
trials are calmly received and are permitted to work out in 
us a sweet and submissive disposition, with the realization 
that they are all being permitted by the Lord for our good, 
then our faith is increasing and the trial is resulting beneficially
 to us. If we have in mind the precious words of the 
Master and the Apostles and are relying upon these words, 


[6100] 


Jim; 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(182-183) 


then we must have faith. It was our Lord Jed as who said, 
"Jn your patience possess ye your souK" In harmony with 
this, the Apostle Paul writes: "Cast not away your confidence
, which hath great recompense of reward; for ye have 
need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye 
might receive the promise." 

In tears some of the Lord's deaT children are fighting the 
good fight of faith, often expressing disappointments because 
of their own fleshly weaknesses; many times having failures, 
until despair overtakes them and they are inclined to say, 
"What is the use of my trying further? 1 might as well give 
up the fight.' 1 Here again" is a severe test to their faith; for 
the words of the Lord spoken to St. Paul apply to each of 
iid, "My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made 
perfect in weakness."- — 2 Corinthians 12:9. 

Again, many of the consecrated have spent practically all 
their earthly substance; their homes and lands are gone, and 
family responsibilities still devolve upon them; they had hoped 
that ere this they would need no earthly substance; they become
 fearful for the future and almost reach the point of 
despair. This is a severe test of faith; but God's Word gives 
full assurance to his children through our Lord and the 
Apostles, saying, "Be content with such things a3 ye have; 
for .... I 'will never leave thee nor forsake thee" (Hebrews 
13:5); "Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for 
you" {1 Peter 5:7); "He that endureth unto the end, the 
name shall be saved" (Matthew 24:13) ; "Let us not be weary 
in well doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint 
not" (Galatians 6:9) ; "Hold that fast which thou hast, that 
no man take thy crown." — Revelation 3:11. 

FIERY TESTS UPON GOD'S PEOPLE 

As thpse tests grow in severity we can understand why 
the Apostle said that the trial of our faith is a fiery one. The 
fires are now burning; and everyone that is being hurt by the 
fire has something of the mind of the flesh — the dross which 
the Lord desires to be burned away, that the character of the 
new creature may stand fully approved before him. This 
trial is precious in his sight; for he desires to see his children
 win the victory. 

Viewing ourselves in the light of God's Word, we see that 
it is impossible for us to live perfect lives. We cannot be perfect
, in the absolute sense, in the expression of love, perfect 
in loving actions towards others. Nor can our words or even 
our thoughts be perfect. But we can have a perfect purpose 
and a perfect faith. The true sentiment of our heart should 
find expression in the words of the Prophet Job: "Though 
lie slay me, yet will I trust in him." (Job 13:15) This is 
the kind of faith we desire; this is the faith that is pleasing 
to the Lord. 

"Oh, for a faith that will not shrink, 

Though pressed by every foe; 
That will not tremble on the brink 
Of any earthly woe!" 

We observe, then, from these examples, that all the trials that 
tome to the Christian test his knowledge and appreciation of 
God and his confident reliance upon God, and are therefore 
tests of his faith, 

PRECIOUS IN GOD'S SIGHT 

Why is this trial of faith spoken of as being more precious 
than gold? It is because gold and silver cannot purchase such 
faith. God has been developing this new creation for many 
centuries. He foreordained it long before the beginning of 
its development. These sons are precious in his sight; for 
they will be recipients of his choicest blessings. The church 
is the bride of Christ. The Bridegroom has watched her for 
nearly nineteen centuries as she has journeyed through "the 
valley of the shadow of death," undergoing many trials and 
hardships and much suffering, all. of which have been designed
 to develop a faith that is pleasing to the Father. 

The trial of this faith is very precious in his sight. It is 
precious in the sight of the intelligent hosts of heaven who 
have remained in harmony with God, These have beheld the 
development of those Christians who have had promise of 
being exalted, if faithful, to a high position with the Lord in 
glory, and they have ministered to this end. It is precious to 
those who are running for the prize and that faith if held 
firmly will result in the greatest riches that God has at 
his disposal for any of his creatures. For this cause it is a 
wonderful privilege to undergo the trial of faith. 
HOW SCAT FAITH BE INCREASED? 

How, then, shall we be able to hold on to these precious 
things with which God has provided us? Let us always keep 
t>efore our minds the foundation of our faith — God's Word. 
It was necessary to acquire a knowledge of that Word before 


we could have faith. Manifestly, then, it follows that if our 
faith is to be increased and kept strong we must constantly 
feed our minds upon the Word and confidently rely upon its 
precious promises. Nothing could give us greater strength 
than to go often to that Word, and find it reassuring us of 
the interest which the Lord manifests in our behalf. When 
depressed, when undergoing a trial, let us go to the Bible 
and the helps which have been divinely provided to understand
 that Bible, and fill our minds therewith and rely upon 
their statements and then mark the joy that will fill our heart. 
Music tends to soothe the passions and fears of earthly 
creatures. Jesus has likened the Word of God to a harp 
strung for harmonious inu*>it\ {Revelation 15:2, tf) That 
Harp of God is perfectly attuned — the Law and the Prophets, 
the Gospels and Epistles constitute its many strings, ^y 
God's grace we are able to use that harp and produce harmony
. The Spirit of the Lord is jn its strings; and when 
these are swept by the fingers of one who is devoted to the 
Lord and who searches for his truth and relies thereupon, 
it yields the sweetest music that ever fell on mortal ear. Praise 
God, then, for this wonderful melody that enables U3 to sing 
and to appreciate the "Song of Moses and the Lamb"! 

Those who have brushed away the cobwebs of the dark 
ages, who have gained the victory over the beast and it3 
image, who have destroyed credulity and established a sound 
faith, by permitting the glorious truth of God's Word to 
shine daily into their hearts, are now, amidst the great confusion
 of the nations of earth, standing, as it were, upon "a 
sea of glass," and beholding the melting of the elements; and 
they are striking their harps in unison in one grand anthem 
to the praise of the present Bridegroom, and are confidently 
and trustfully waiting until their full union with him is consummated
 in the first resurrection. 

WHEN SHALL OTJB GLORIFICATION COME7 
How long shall we continue to fight this good fight ot 
faith? When may we expect to end the journey and enter into 
the glory of the Lord? By reading the 11th chapter of Hebrews
 we draw the conclusion as to how long. St. Paul there 
set forth a long list of faithful ones whom God approved. 
Be it noted that each, of these died faithful. God's Word 
abounds with promises of reward to the faithful overcomer. 
To tho^e ancient worthies were given good promise?; but 
to the Christian arc given "Exceeding great and precious 
promises." The ancient worthies had to die in faith and 
wait for the coming of tneir reward. All faithful Christians 
now living will receive their reward at the death of their 
humanity. Therefore Jesus promised, "Be thou faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee the crown of life." Our faithfulness
 and loyalty must continue until the end in order to 
receive the glorious reward. Mark, the text says, "until death," 
which means that each one who has entered into a covenant 
with the Lord by sacrifice must be faithful and loyal to his 
part of the covenant, or contract, until his sacrifice is fully 
consumed in the complete death of the human being. It means 
constant holding fast the beginning of our confidence and rejoicing
 even unto the end. 

THE NATUKE OF THE ItEWABD 
Since Jesus has promised that all who continue faithful 
unto death shall reiceive the crown of life, this means lifton
 the very highest plane — the divine nature, like unto our 
glorious Lord and Master. But St. Paul points out that there 
will be different degrees of glory even in the kingdom — "as 
star differeth from star in glory." (1 Corinthians 15:41) 
The Master in the parable of the pounds holds forth the 
same thought. (Luke 19:17-19) The degree of faithfulness 
will mark the degree of shining forth in the kingdom. "According
 to your faith be it unto you." 

Those who have been faithful in all that has been committed
 to them — faithful in the performance of their covenant. 
faithful to God, faithful to his Word, faithful to the brethren, 
faithful in the performance of the little things — if they permit 
all the trials that come to them to properly exercise them concerning
 God's will, such will be more like the Lord and nearer 
to him in the kingdom. It is not the one who is most 
favored this side the veil with service or honors or plaudits, 
but the one who grows most in the likeness of the Master, 
who will shine the brightest in his kingdom. 

The evidence is clear, cogent and convincing that the 
kingdom of the Lord i3 near at hand. Believing this to be 
true, let us do that which will bring us the approval of the 
Lord, that we may have an abundant entrance therein. If 
there is anything we are not doing that will help us on this 
way to glory, let us do it now. If we are striving to enter in. 
putting forth our best efforts, then may we at the close of each 
day be able to say with St. Paul, 'T have fought a good 
fight, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for 


[6101] 


(185-187) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


me a. crown ox righteousness, v>luch the Lord, the righteous 
Judge, will give to me at that day, and not to me only, but 
unto all them who love his appearing." 

Surely we have not fought a losing fight' if we have been 
fighting faithfully! Ours has been a good fight, even though 
we have been ever so weak in ourselves and unable to meet 
the onslaughts of our enemies. No matter what the trials 
may he surrounding us — the mists may be thick, the storms 
raging and the billows roaring with great fierceness— now 
is the time for us to heed the words of the Apostle and to 
"gird up the loins of our mind and be sober and hope to the 


end." {1 Peter 1:13) A little while and the fight, will be 
over and our journey ended; a little while and we shall see 
our glorious Bridegroom face to face; and then, when we 
have proven our loyalty to the last and our faith has successfully
 withstood the fiery trials, the result will be to the 
praise and honor and glory of him who bought us with his 
own precious blood. 

"Beyond the river's brink we'll lay 

The cross that here is given, 
And bear the crown of life away 

And praise the King of heaven." 


THE PURPOSE OF JOHN'S GOSPEL 


[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Lovest Thou Me More Than These?' ' published in issue of June 1, 1908, which please 

see.] 


"Haste thou on from grace to glory, 
Armed by faith and winged by prayer 

Heaven's eternal day before thee, 

God's own hand shall guide thee there. 


"Soon shall close thine earthly mission, 
Soon shall pass thy pilgrim days; 
Hope shall change to' glad fruition, 
Faith to sight and prayer to praise." 


ISAIAH'S CALL TO HEROIC SERVICE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "The Prophet Isaiah's Vision, " published in issue of October 15, 189S, which please 

see.] 


*HE CARETH FOR THEE' 


"No anxious thought upon thy brow 
The watching world should see; 

No carefulness! O child of God, 
For nothing care- full be! 

But cast thou all thy care on him 
Who always cares for thee. 

"It is thy Word, it is thy will — 
That is enough for me! 
Henceforth no care shall dim my trust, 


For all is cast on thee; 
Henceforth my inmost heart shall praise 
The grace that set me free. 

"I want to praise, with life renewed, 

As I never praised before; 
With voice and pen, with song and speech, 

To praise thee more and more, 
And the gladness and the gratitude 

Rejoicingly outpour!" 


AHAZ, THE FAITHLESS KING 

jult 8. — II Chronicles 2S. 

AHAZ BEGINS HIS REIGN — HB REIGNS IN JERUSALEM FOE SIXTEEN YEARS — HE DOES EVIL IN THE LORD 'S SIGHT — THEREFORE SMITTEN 
BY SYRIA AND ISRAEL — ALSO BY EDOMITES AND PHILISTINES — JUDAH BROUGHT LOW — ALLIANCE WITH ASSYRIA — AHAZ DISTRESSED, 
INCREASES TRANSGRESSION — RUINED— BURIED IN DISGRACE — OUR LESSON — HOW TO DISPLEASE THE LORD — THE RESULT? — HOW TO 
PLEASE THE LORD— THE RESULT— GOD *S OVER-RULING PROVIDENCE — SUN-DIAL OF AHAZ AN ILLUSTRATION. 

" Without faith it is impossible to be well-pleasing unto him." — Hebrews 11: ft 

God of his father David, nor seek to do his will, as was maniSaul
, the first king over Israel, reigned 40 years in Jerusalem
. He was succeeded by David, who also reigned 
40 years, seven in Hebron and thirty-three in Jerusalem. 
Solomon succeeded in Jerusalem. Then came the division of 
Israel into two parts. Because of Rehoboam's harsh answer 
to the children of Israel the ten tribes revolted and chose 
Jeroboam for their king, who reigned at Samaria. Rehobgam, 
as king of Judah, reigned at Jerusalem. This division continued
 until both kingdoms were taken into captivity. David's 
line continued through or in Judah, the eleventh king from 
Rehoboam being Ahaz, who reigned in Jerusalem 16 years 
and was succeeded by his son, the good King Hezekiah. 

THE FAITHLESS KINO 

The name Ahaz means possessor or grasper. It is quite 
evident from our lesson today that Ahaz was a self-server. 
It was not necessary for him to do anything to become king, 
for the reason that he was of the royal line of David and 
succeeded to the throne at the death of his father Jotham. 
But while the record does not indicate any action on his part 
to achieve this object, yet the quality of covetousness was 
there, as evidenced by what he did after he came into office. 
Covetousness. is idolatry — the idolatry of self. It is the opposite
 of faith in God and his plans, which makes God and 
his will first. 

Ahaz was quite young when his father died — only twenty 
— consequently his covetous disposition had not had time to 
ripen into unlawful acts to attain his desires. However, the 
sixteen years during which he was in office were sufficient to 
manifest that his name was not a misnomer. He was a 
grasper— a possessor — and a holder of what he possessed at 
all odds. At no time did he ever display any real faith in the 


fested in the life and the work of the sweet singer of Israel. 
Read 2 Kings 16. 

AHAZ' 3 ACCESSION TO THE THRONE 

The country of the two-tribe kingdom was prosperous and 
conditions were favorable for a glorious reign. His grandfather
, the good King Uzziah, had reigned well for fifty- two 
years — ruling in the fear of God, although near the close of 
his life he made a sad blunder — that of failing to observe 
the proper limitations of his kingly office. Over-stepping for 
a moment into the priestly office, he burned incense unto the 
Lord, for which he was smitten with leprosy in the forehead, 
indicating a leprosy of the mind, resulting from a single act 
of exceeding his authority. Otherwise, however, he was a 
wise, prosperous, God-fearing ruler. He had subdued Edom 
on the south and Philistia on the west, and had done much 
for the kingdom inwardly. He had taken Elath on the northern
 shore of the gulf of Akaba— -an arm of the Red sea — and 
had populated it with Jews. 

King Uzziah was succeeded by his son Jotham, who did 
what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord. Therefore the 
land was prosperous for another sixteen years — making a period
 of about 70 years of prosperity — when Ahaz, the grasper, 
came into power. It is true, Rezin and Pekah were assuming 
a threatening attitude; nevertheless the kingdom of Judah 
was in a good and prosperous condition, so that there was 
nothing to fear, providing that the nation would walk in the 
way of David. But, alas, while Alias; had ascended to the 
throne of Judah, he had not enthroned God as the ruler of 
his heart! Trouble was therefore ahead, and a great opportunity
 for doing good was missed. How often is this the case 
among both rich and poor, high and low, saint and sinner! 


[6102] 


Juw* IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(187-188) 


CHARACTERISTICS OF HIS REIGN 

Faith is a tender plant and cannot thrive in an idolatrous, 
selfish heart. The experience of his predecessors should have 
led him to have faith in God, but the cruel king of selfishness 
strangled the promptings to trust in and obey the God of his 
fathers* Unbelief is a plant that finds congenial soil in such 
a heart, and when the dictates of unbelief are obeyed, it inevitably
 leads rapidly down tho broad way. Such was the 
case with this faithless king of Judah, Ahaz. 

"He did not that which was right in the sight of the Lord 
like David his father." (V. 1) Faith is the eye of the soul 
and enables one to walk before the Lord with the thought, 
"Thou, God, seeest me." But unbelief is blind and darkens the 
soul by saying, "God has forsaken us; he cares not for us, 
neither does he sec u 6 *." 

"He walked in the ways of the kings of Israel," (V. 2) 
The kings of Israel, beginning with Jeroboam at Samaria, 
had a rebellious spirit. Instead of walking according to the 
words of God, as spoken by the Prophet Isaiah, the seventh 
to the twelfth chapters of whose prophecy were given to 
guide and encourage King Ahaz, he walked in the ways of 
his own worldly wisdom. Thus he walked contrary to the 
Lord, as did the kings of the ten tribes. The Lord was represented
 by David and those in harmony with him. When 
therefore Ahaz failed to follow the example and advice of 
David and went the way that he chose, he thereby rebelled 
against the Lord, as did the kings of Israel. 

This led him to follow the ways of the more idolatrous 
nations surrounding Israel and Judah. There was a valley to 
the south and east of Jerusalem called "the Valley of the 
Son of Hinnom"; and this valley wa3 so given over to heathen 
practices and idolatrous worship that in time it became a 
place of abomination. It was used later on as a place of fire 
into which dead animaU, refuse from the city, and, at times 
the bodies of dead criminals, were cast. Consequently, it was 
used by New Testament writers to illustrate hell-fire (Gehenna
), the second death, "everlasting destruction," under 
the symbolic term, "the lake of fire with brimstone." This 
faithless king was therefore typically pointing out by his 
example the way into the second death, by sinning against 
light — against the holy Spirit. 

He even had molten images of Baalim made and set up 
in Judah. Baal was the supreme male deity of the Phoenicians
 and Canaanites. The name Baal means lord, in the 
sense of possessor, so that the position ascribed to this god 
by the idolators of that time, among the gods — that is, demons, 
fallen spirits — was the same spirit that Ahaz had, as supreme 
ruler in Judah. A true worshipper of Jehovah has the spirit 
of Jehovah, the same as a true Christian has the spirit of 
Christ — the spirit of love, joy, peace, long-suffering, etc., as 
contrasted with the spirit of the adversary, which prevails 
in the world — the spirit of malice, hatred, war, murder, etc. 

Even worse, King Ahaz "burnt his children in the fire, 
after the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord had 
cast out before the children of Israel/' (V. 3) So an early 
evangelist in this country used the expression, "There are 
thousands of children a span long in hell," which is the 
modern way of burning little children in the fire unto the god 
Satan. It was the king's unbelief which caused him to set 
such a terrible example before the people of Judah, and which 
caused them to do many things that were an abomination in 
the sight of the Lord. 

THE RESULT 07 HIS FAITHLESSNESS 

Because of his rebelliousness, God delivered him, (1) to 
Rezin, the king of Syria. Rezin reigned over Syria at Damascus
; and because of the unfaithfulness of King Ahaz God 
permitted the Syrians to carry a great multitude of the people
 of Judah captive to Damascus. In a similar manner, disloyalty
 to Christ leads his followers to be taken captive by 
the world, the flesh and the adversary. 

Again, because of King Ahaz's rebelliousness, God delivered
 him (2) to Pekah, king of Israel. Pekah reigned at 
Samaria, and came with Rezin against Ahaz. In one day 
their combined armies Blew 120,000 valiant men of Judah, 
because they had forsaken the Lord. Among the slain were 
the one next to the king, the governor of his house and his 
own son. Besides this, 200,000 men, women and children 
with much spoil were taken to Samaria. What terrible results
 follow the path of unbelief, faithlessness, rebelliousness, 
disloyalty! It is far better to follow the Lord. 

BEEPER TRANSGRESSION OK THE PABT OF THE KOTO 

Not having Jehovah as his friend and helper, therefore in 
his time of greatest need, he leaned on an arm of flesh, in the 
person of Tiglath-Pileser, king of Assyria, with whom he 
made an alliance, He made thr «amo mistake that manv of 


the kings and rulers of the earth are making today. In their 
hour of need, they are allying themselves one with another, 
instead of looking to God and his Son, Jesus Christ, as Lord 
and King. Ahaz, not having profited by the chastisements 
which Jehovah had sent him through Syria and Israel, was 
further punished through the Edomites and Philistines. 
Having been smitten in the north and the east, he was next 
smitten in the south and the west. Thus from every quarter 
Jehovah would teach him the foolishness and wickedness of 
rebellion and unbelief. 

But instead of growing better and profiting by these increased
 judgments, King Ahaz even took money from the 
city treasury, and also consecrated money from the Temple, 
and gave it to the Assyrian king as his paTt of this unholy 
alliance. Any highly favored country that will take both the 
people's money and the money that should be devoted to God 
in the way of Christian service, and will use it to seal an alliance
 with nations that have forsaken the Lord, must, like 
Ahaz, be plunged into a great time of trouble! Ahaz went so 
far as to close the Lord's house, and to sacrifice to the 
heathen god3 on the altar at Damascus. In fact, there was 
nothing too extreme for him to do to further his own selfish 
ends and promote his unholy purposes. 

OBEATEB CONSEQUENCES OF HIS DISLOYAL COURSE 

Since the kings of Judah were representatives of Jehovah, 
it is no wonder that our lesson tells us that the Lord was 
angered with King Ahaz. Judah was consequently brought 
low, financially, politically and religiously, so much so that 
the Scriptures say it became naked. Thus we see Ahaz 
ruined the country over which he reigned, reduced the people 
to great straits, caused many thousands to be slain, and many 
more to be taken captive. Moreover, by his course of unbelief
 and faithlessness, he ruined his own family as well as 
himself. Finally he was buried in Jerusalem in disgrace, 

LESSONS FOB OUB DAY 

The course of unbelief is ever downward, leading one 
further and further away from God and from Christ. Its influence
 is bad, not only upon ourselves, but upon our own loved 
ones in our homes, and upon our companions and friends. 
"If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established!" 

Faith in God leads upward. The first step in turning 
away from sin to faith in Christ is an upward one and leads 
towards peace. Faith in him as the ransom-3acrifice brings 
one out of the condition of condemnation to a condition of 
peace with respect to sin. Progress in the life of faith leads 
one to put away defilements of the flesh and of the spirit. 
It will further lead to a consecrated life, a justified life, a 
spirit-begotten life when one becomes a new creature in 
Christ. It will lead one to put on Christ more and more 
and to grow up in him as the Head of all things. This course 
will terminate in heavenly glory. "Be thou faithful unto 
death; and I will give thee the crown of life." 

King Ahaz was moved like the trees of the wood, through 
the blowing of the winds of the confederacy of Syria and 
Israel against him; still he refused to believe the word of 
safety spoken to him by the Lord through the Prophet Isaiah; 
nor would he ask the Lord for a sign for professedly religious
 reasons; yet the Lord overruled all this unbelief and 
self-will, and used it to give the church two important truths: 

( 1 ) The Lord gave the sign of the virgin with child in 
the form of a prophecy, which has greatly assisted the eye of 
faith to identify Jesus as the Messiah. 

(2) The inclination of King Ahaz to make friends with 
Damascus and Samaria and to ally himself with Assyria 
through unbelief in the promises of Jehovah became the 
means whereby the Prophet Isaiah lias pointed out to the 
church of the present time that it should not join the Confederacy
 of the churches in close alliance with the Governments
 of the world, but rather to remain loyal to Christ as 
the only Head of the church and the one King over all kings. 
believing his promise that "if we suffer (.with Mm] we shall 
also reign with him." The federated churches of America 
and the world are closely allied with the governments of 
earth and constitute the greatest power of the present time. 
Consequently they will win the allegiance of any and all except
 "the very elect," who refuse to bow the knee to Baal, 
and receive not "the mark of the, beast," because they will 
-worship God only and prize above all things the "sealing of 
the saint3 in their foreheads." 

SUN-DIAL OF AHAZ— AN ILLUSTRATION— ISAIAH 38:8 
The sun shining upon the face of the dial indicates the 
time of the day by means of the shadow cast. The sun now 
shines upon the pages of Holy Writ, and by means of certain 
marked-off periods, indicates to an illuminated mind the, time 
of the day — "the great day of God Almighty" — in which we 


[6103] 


(188-169) 


T HE WA T C H T O W E R 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


now live. This 13 one of the great blessings which the eye 
of faith now brings to the consecrated children of God and 
which enables them to walk in the light of the presence of 
God's dear Son. Shortly The Christ — Head and body— will 
arise as the Sun, with healing in his beams for the blessing 
of the troubled nations of earth. The times of the Gentiles 
have closed. The kings of earth have had their day; and 
soon Immanuel will take possession and bring peace and gladness
 everywhere. "The night is far spent; the day is at hand.'* 
After the war, which, according to present signs and "the 


sure word of prophecy," will be followed by revolution and 
anarchy, the Prince of Peace, now present but unseen, will 
take possession of earth's affairs, and then the prayer, "Thy 
kingdom come," shall be answered. 

"The 'Gentile times' are closing, for their kings have had 

their day; 
And with them sin and sorrow will forever pass away; 
For the tribe of Judah's Lion now comes to hold the sway; 
Our Kixg is Marching On!" 


BROOKLYN ACADEMY OF MUSIC— JUNE 3 


The first public meeting held in Brooklyn under the 
auspices of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society since 
the death of our dear Pastor, was the afternoon of Sunday, 
June 3, in the Academy of Music, in which Brother Russell 
spoke once a month prior to the completion of the Temple in 
New York City. Brother Russell always spoke to large 
audiences in the Academy, and many have been the requests 
for another series of discourses there. The meeting proved 
to be such a success that at its conclusion announcement was 
made for another discourse the following Sunday. The 
auditorium was crowded to the roof, about 2,500 being present 
Excellent attention was given throughout the discourse, and 
many favorable expressions were heard among outsiders respecting
 the beautiful tribute paid to the man who for 40 
years stood as a beacon light proclaiming a time of trouble 
at this time, preparatory to the inauguration of Messiah's 
Millennial kingdom for the blessing of all mankind. Practically
 all the Brooklyn newspapers, including The Brooklyn 
Daily Eagle^ spoke favorably of the service. Following is 
one of the published reports: 


*\J. F. Rutherford, addresbing an audience which crowded 
the Academy of Music yesterday afternoon, arraigned Billy 
Sunday with having appropriated to his own use Pastor Russell
's published views on the second coming of Christ. The 
speaker charged the evangelist with preaching questionable 
theology, declaring it wholly inconsistent. 

"'Are we at the End of the World? 1 was the subject of 
Mr. Rutherford's address This was his first public appearance
 in Brooklyn since the death of Pastor Russell. 

** 'Criticism of a man is hardly the proper course for a 
Christian,* he said, 'but criticism of a man's teachings is always
 proper. A man who addresses the heavenly Father and 
our Redeemer in familiar terms, silch as Old Pal, is irreverent 
toward God and the Lord Jesus. Such conduct and such 
word3 lead to irreverence on the part of the people.' 

"The present world- war, the threatening famine and pestilence
, the fomenting revolution in various parts of the world, 
all are evidences of the passing away of the present un 
righteous order." 


"To follow where an unseen Captain leads, 
To heed commands unheard by mortal ear, 
To battle with a known, yet unseen foe — 
Ah! This is faith. 

'To choose the right when others think you wrong, 
To stand for Truth while Error laughs in scorn, 
To tread the lonely way unto the end — ■ 
Yes! This takes faith. 


FAITH 


l *To wear a smile where you receive but frowns, 
To kiss the hand that wounds your poor heart so, 
And pray for those who fain your life would take — 
Ah! This is faith. 

"To fix your eyes on 'that within the veil/ 
Your heart's devotion set on things above, 
To wait with patience till God calls you home — 
Faith's victory won!" 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


STJFTEBING FOB RI0HTEOttSHBSS' SAKE 

Dear Bbethben: — 

You will perhaps know that the address which I give you 

is actually another name for the famous Prison. There 

are about 900 Conscientious Objectors here, mostly working 
on the land. At present there are nearly 70 of our brothers; 
and we have very helpful times together, both at work 
and in fellowship at our studies. We have elected elders 
and deacons, and have a series of meetings, just like an 
ordinary ecclesia. It is a remarkable fact that quite a large 
number of the brothers have served the Lord in their local 
classes in the capacity of elders and deacons. 

You may be sure that the Lord's blessing is with us, in 
spite of certain restrictions of onr liberty, in that we are 
mostly hundreds of miles away from our loved ones and allowed
 to visit home only twice a year, We are fed, clothed, 
and paid 4/s per week. However, we who realize the Lord's 
guiding hand in all of our affairs are quite content and glad 
to submit to these things for conscience' sake. At present 
the local and the London papers are making violent attacks 
upon us, in many instances misrepresenting our position, probably
 to further prejudice public opinion against us, which is 
already very bitter. Fellows who have ventured to enter 
nearby towns have been mobbed and attacked several times, 
and others have had narrow escapes from being "ducked" in 
a river, etc. There is no clear distinction at present between 
the truth Friends and other C. O.'s who have received service
 here for a variety of reasons, many merely socialistic 
and anarchistic. But when the Lord's due time comes for 
us to suffer especially for the truth's sake, then and not before
, the dividing line will be manifest. 

You will perhaps like to know a little about one's experience
 in prison. As this letter will be censored, I cannot tell 
you all details. It will suffice to say that having the truth 
makes all the difference in the world. By the inspiration, by 
the 'spirit of power" which the truth gives, one is enabled 
to bear patiently and unmurmuringly things which are much 
harder for others to bear, and which often have the effect of 
making them bitter and anarchistic. We, however, who have 


learned to trust in the precious promises, we who cast our 
burden on the Lord, can rejoice in our privilege of suffering 
a little for his dear name's sake, and can indeed be content. 
We seek contentment, and have it, by his favor. The prison 
diet weakens one physically, of course; but an outdoor openair
 life is healthful; and one can thus pull up his strength 
when he leaves prison and comes here or wherever the home 
office sends him. 

One of the greatest blessings obtained from these recent 
trials is the privilege of having a fair amount of quiet for 
prayer, meditation and study; and the London office has 
placed the volumes in the prison library now. I had such 
a delightful feast on Vol. V and VI, and continually lifted 
up my heart for all God's blessings. Truly, our dear heavenly 
Father is never limited in his ability to cause all things 10 
work together for our good, as long as we love him su 
premely, which is ever the desire of our hearts! So we can 
all say, "Bless the Lord, my soul; and all that is within me. 
bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, my sou., and forget 
not all his benefits."— Psalm 103:1, 2. 

It is such a privilege to be permitted to suffer a little for 
his dear name's sake, and to prove his faithfulness all the 
way along. Surely we can trust hhn firmly to the end, ever 
trusting, not in self, but in the Lord! As far as the brothers 
of military age are concerned, harvest work seems to be at a 
standstill, and our chief lesson seems to be to learn to love 
one another. The final polishing is the test of whether or not 
we truly love the brethren. Fellowship is very sweet ; and 
we can live above the various circumstances of life which nmj 
be unpleasant to us. 

Ever your loving brother, by his grace, 

Stanley W. Willis, — Bug. 
CLAD IK THE BLOOM OF IMMOETAL GLOEY 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings from the church at Dublin, Ireland! We desire 
to convey to the members of the Bethel Family at Brooklyn 
our sincerest Christian love. We deeply sympathize with you 
in the great loss you have sustained, as a result of our dear 
Pastor's death. 


[6104] 


Juwa 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(189 190) 


We rejoice to realize that his sufferings are all over, and 
that he is now a partaker of the divine nature — the highest 
spirit nature in the universe. He now knows in the very 
fullest sense of the word all that it meana to be "made like 
him," the dazzling brilliance of whose glory outshone the 
sun in its meridian splendor. 

How supremely happy he is now is beyond our power to 
comprehend) He has long ere this come into direct personal 
contact with the Lord Jesus and all the apostles, besides an 
innumerable company of the glorified saints. 

What a sublime experience it must have been for our 
dear Pastor when he entered the presence of our Lord clad 
in the bloom of immortal youth! What a noble example our 
dear brother left us! He was surely a pattern worthy of 
imitation! He was truly the greatest man of our day — great 
not merely mentally, but also morally and spiritually! 

May it be our great joy to soon meet him again, under 
grander and far happier conditions, at the supremely grandest 
of all gatherings — the general assembly of the church of the 
first-borns, whose names are written in heaven! 

With warmest Christian love, and assuring you of our 
loyal support, we are 

Yours in the Master's service, 

Dublin Church. — Ireland. 
FBOM OLD-TIME FRIEND OF BROTHER RUSSELX 
Dear Friends: — 

I read the newspaper story of Mr. Russell's death. I had 
known him forty years, and had followed his most remarkable 
career with esteem and affection. I had seen him but twice 
in many years, but I have a keen recollection of our cordial 
relations in the long ago. I would like to know more of his 
recent years and about his most lamentable departure. He 
seems to have died on the battle line. The newspaper accounts 
were all too brief for such a life as his. 

Perhaps you have some more complete account that you 
can give me. A memoir of him should be an inspiration to 
those, of whom there must be many, who desire anxiously to 
know the truth as to our Father's purposes toward his children
. I had been feeling my way, more or less blindly, through 
books and men and nature, when I met Mr. Russell, both of 
us young men, I the older. In coming years he helped me 
greatly. 

We had occasional business relations, I visiting Pittsburgh 
frequently, but we always talked of religion far more than of 
business. One day we met on the street and after a long talk 
I said of one or two points under discussion that I was not 
sure about them. With that wonderfully brilliant and sweet 
smile and his assured but gentle tones he said, "If you would 
study you would know." 

I made my home many years ago in an interior town in 
New York. I attended the (Dutch) Reformed church, my 
wife being a member. I did not believe in any hopeless hereafter
. The minister was from Maryland, a pupil of a famous 
Kentucky theologian, whose daughter he had married. He was 
in middle life. Some of his uncompromising "hell" sermons 
irritated me. Many years after I spent an evening with him. 
He had always been a student. His daughter said once that if 
Gabriel should call her father almost any time he would be 
found with a Hebrew Bible in one hand and a Greek Testament
 in the other. 

Well, as we talked after those many years, he surprised 
me by his Millennial views. At length I said, "Much that you 
have said reminds me of Russell's teaching in Millennial 
Dawn." "Yes," he said, "I am not quite in agreement with 
him as to the person of Christ, but otherwise I think he is 
about right." That iseemed to me as great a triumph as any 
writer or preacher could achieve. I Telt surer that he was 
right because he had convinced about the last man I wbuld 
have expected. 

Sincerely and cordially yours, J. Albert Stowe. — A T . J. 

A NOTE OF WARNING 

Dear Brethren of The Watch Tower: — 

I feel that it is my duty to the interests of the Lord's work 
to mention two matters that are being continually brought to 
my attention during my visits from place to place. The first 
is the tendency of some of the friends to speculate upon various
 matter in Revelation and Ezekiel. I have observed since 
the death of our Pastor that quite a number of the frienda 
are trying to "dig" out "new" things, and are probing the 
pilgrims along this line, and I regret to say that some of the 
pilgrims even are giving "private" interpretations of these 
prophecies. To me, dear brethren, this seems to be more confusing
 than helpful to the friends. I wish some way were 
possible to remind the pilgrims and all the dear friends that 
we are just as obligated to be loyal to the wishes of our dear 
Pastor as we were when he was with us in the flesh. Surely, 


this is a time when the Lord's people are to be tested along 
this line! If there are any things to be brought out respecting 
Revelation and Ezekiel, etc., do we not expect them from the 
proper source, the home office? I would be glad if you saw 
fit to assist the dear friends along this line. 

The second matter is in respect to other publications than 
The Watch Toweb. Wherever we go, questions are asked 
in regard to this paper and that, etc. I am mindful of the 
kindly way in which our Pastor always treated these things. 
All the pilgrims doubtless remember that in special conferences
 with us he never was much in favor of other publications
 than those from the home office. Of late in some of 
these outside papers have appeared articles that are not in 
fullest support of the truth as taught by our Pastor and, in 
one instance, advertisements were there, and when some of the 
dear friends responded they received messages derogatory to 
our Pastor. Can you recommend anything that can be done ? 
As one illustration, dear brethren, one little pamphlet published
 by a brother, seemingly in full harmony with the truth. 
was widely circulated. Perhaps subscriptions to the extent of 
over a thousand dollars were given to that pamphlet. Is it 
penurious for me to feel that the dear friends could have more 
profitably Bpent that thousand dollars in helping the Tract 
Fund? Our dear Pastor has written so much we can still read 
that it seems to us that we have quite enough with his words 
and The Watch Tower. 

We hope that nothing in this message seems to have other 
than the kindliest feeling toward those who no doubt prompted 
by zeal have been writing or publishing such articles, for we 
believe the best intentions have no doubt governed much, if 
not all, of it, but we also feel that the friends can be helped 
by some suggestion from Brooklyn especially along this line. 
Please pardon my taking so much of your time. May the dear 
Lord continue to guide and direct you is my prayer. With 
fervent love and greeting, I am, by his favor, 

Your brother, W. H. Bundy. 

"A WORD TO THE WISE" 
My Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings and much love in Christ! There are just a few 
things which I feel led to write you about: 

( 1 ) Having the privilege of attending the Scripture study 
meetings, both as chairman and otherwise, I notice that there 
is often a lack of ventilation in the rooms. The one in 
charge is sometimes very sensitive when the subject is 
broached, and so I was thinking that a bint from you would 
be a word in season. Many are misled into thinking that to 
stop up every crevice will prevent a draught, which will in 
turn prevent taking colds; but they do not consider the dangers
 of foul air and the more serious chill likely to accrue 
through passing out of a hot room into the cold atmosphere! 

(2) I should like also to tell you of the blessing realized 
from the class study of the volumes in conjunction with the 
Question Books. I must admit that once I favored Bible 
study alone; but the dear Lord has led me to see the several 
advantages of the former method, one of which is that both 
question and answer are before the student, therefore any 
new thought or question arouses the mental activity of all. 

It is wonderful to my mind how lucid and reasonable the 
answers are in the volumes! and as one and all are led to 
that same conclusion, the spirit of oneness and sweetness of 
fellowship becomes apparent which is not attainable in the 
usual denominational Bible study classes. 

(3) The elders, deacons and workers have been an inspiration
 as they have quietly and earnestly labored together 
in the various departments of service ; and I know, dear 
Brethren, that we have your prayers for a continuance of this 
blessed unity. — Psalm 133. 

Yours in that wondrous favor, 

Frederick Lardent. — Eng. 

ADVERSARY SPEEDING UP— HIS TIME SHORT! 
Dear Friends: — 

Some time ago some of our class received copies of enclosure
 marked No. 1. After careful perusal of it we thought 
a gentle criticism might be in order, so we composed and 
forwarded a reply (which we also enclose and mark No. 2). 
In reply we received enclosure marked No. 3. 

We then thought to let the matter drop; but on second 
thought I have decided to forward this correspondence to you. 
The reason why I am doing so is because there seems to bo 
a growing tendency on the part of some to put out publications
 of this kind. We know of one man near here who 
claims to have more light than Pastor Russell had. Doesn't 
it seem strange that no one else has yet discovered this, although
 he has thought so for years? 

Also, there is a great tendency on the part of friends to 
patronize these various publications, and while they get some 


[«105] 


(190-191) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BftOOKLYN, N. Y. 


truth, aa from the creeds, they are in grave danger of falling
 into the snares of the adversary. 

There seem to be many people who are conversant with 
the contents of the Studies, but who never have affiliated with 
the classes, and who now advance the Pastor's doctrines, 
claiming them as their own. I heard such an one a few davs 
ago and asked him where he learned it all. He stated that he 
had been a very earnest "Bible student from childhood and the 
Lord, had shown him these things. But after some quizzing 
he finally admitted that he had read Pastor Russell's books. 

The adversary seems to be speeding up a little in these 
perilous times! The great personal pronoun "I" is getting 
large and is one of his chief weapons. 

Let me suggest that if the money spent on these various 
publications were to be sent to the Society it would do much 
more good. 

Yours in the Master's service, Edward Barker. — Pa. 

BEDEEMEB MADE HIM OP SO MUCH SERVICE 

Dear Bbethben: — 

My heart was made solemn and filled with the sadness 
that comes with the knowledge of the loss of a blessed association
, by the death of our beloved Brother Russell. 

How thankful we ought to be to our heavenly Father 
for the knowledge that it has been the unseen presence and 
supervision of our dear Redeemer himself that made his 
servant such a source of comfort, help and instruction to us 
all, and so we need not be disturbed at his taking him away 
as it hath seemed to him good. 

How fitting it was that our dear Lord should at this time 
remove every earthly prop supporting ua and compel us to 
lean wholly upon himself and his Word, so that we might 
become strong in him "and in the power of his might" in 
order to be able to endure in his strength, steadfast and 
faithful unto the end! 

Please extend my loving Christian greetings to the dear 
ones at the Bethel Home, for whom it has been my daily 
privilege to pray nearly eighteen years, commending them 
to our heavenly Fathers care in the words of our beloved 
Brother Paul: "Unto him that is able to keep you from 
falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of 
his glory, with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our 
Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power both now 
and ever, Amen!" 

Sincerely your brother in Christ, Chas. Owens. — Tenn. 
CONFIDENCE AND TEUST 
Dear Bbethben in Chbist: — 

We assure you, dear brethren, that the passing of our beloved
 Brother Russell beyond the veil has not had a tendency 
to slacken our zeal for the truth and its service, but has, 
on the other hand, increased it, and we are more determined 
than ever before to be faithful, that we too may have some 
part and lot in the kingdom so soon to be set up. 

We assure you of our confidence and trust in whatever arrangements
 Brother Russell has made for furthering the 
harvest work, realizing that he was "that servant/* especially 
chosen of the Lord, and that the "meat in due season" which 
he has been putting forth for about forty years will continue 
to go forth through the same channel, 'The Watch .Tower. 
Assuring you of our unreserved co-operation in the work, and 
of our desire to continue to do with our might what our 
hands may find to do, we remain, 

Yours in the Master's service, 
Union Meeting of Associated Bible Students. — Joplin, Mo. 

A BEAUTIFUL LIFE — A MARVELOUS EXAMPLE 
Dear Bbethben: — 

I returned to my home from Winsted, Conn., and learned 
of Brother Russell's death. I am deeply grieved at his passing
 away. We have lost a dear, helpful and most valuable 
minister of the Gospel. It seems as though we do need him 
so much. But God knoweth best, and doeth all things well. 

I am so thankful that the dear Lord permitted me to receive
 Brother Russell's written words. They have taught me 
concerning the Scriptures what God has in store for those 
who love and obey him. I feel in my mind and heart that 
I should never have known otherwise that it was my privilege
 to strive for the bride class, and that I must live the 
Christ life in order to be a member of the church of the 
living God, a member of Christ's body (the opportunity is 
so great and good!), had I not received Brother Russell's 
sermons, Towek, Dawns, and his other writings. 

I thank and praise the dear Lord and Brother Russell for 
all these. How could I live without them? I have prayed 
that the Lord would raise up some one to carry on the work 
he has laid down. What a great reward he will receive for 
his untiring efforts in the Lord's work for humanity — and so 
a My performed! It seems to me that he stands above all men 


or persons, next to Christ — so much like his Savior. What a 
beautiful Yifel What a marvelous example to Christiana and 
the world I No wonder we all loved him, and love him still! 

While in Winsted, Conn., I received the package of Watch 
Towebs you so kindly sent me. Thank you a thousand times! 
I appreciate and love them. The Bible Students Monthly 
was left at my door this week, and I am very thankful for it 
(I am going to order it soon). In it I notice that to any 
one wishing a copy of "Facts Foil the Assassination of Pastor
 Russell's Character," it will be sent on request. Who 
could doubt his purity?. I should like one, because I cannot 
understand how any one can say a word against the pure, 
Christ-like person that he was. Yet they did the same to 
Jesus, and crucified him. 

Please send me a copy and accept many thanks. I do not 
doubt his splendid life. His enemies were jealous of him. 
Truly these are trying times for the saints; but God's promises
 are great and true — "Great peace have they that love 
thy l&w, and nothing shall offend them." Brother Russell's 
God is our God, and his Bible our Bible, 

Dear people, you who have known Brother Russell so 
intimately, you have my sympathy in this hour of separation 
and loneliness. May the* dear Lord bless and comfort, sustain
 and keep you all through this present life, and give you 
an abundant entrance into his kingdom, is my prayer. 

Hoping and praying that I may he an "over comer/'* and 
may sit with Jesus on his throne with his redeemed ones, 
I remain, 

Truly your sincere sister in Christ, 

Mbs. J. E. Morris. — Conn. 
PBAYEBS FOB INCREASED TJNDEBSTANDING OF GOD'S WILL 
Dear Bbethben: — 

We desire to assure you of our willingness to co-operate 
with you as may be, and to have you know that we have 
had constantly in mind those who have been so intimately associated
 with" our dear Pastor and who now, by his physical 
absence, are required to walk more steadfastly by faith rather 
than by sight. 

We have remembered you in our prayers at the throne of 
grace, asking for fou increased perception and understanding
 of the Father's will in the conduct of the many interests 
of the harvest work! We pray the continued manifestations
 of God's love and care for all who are striving to carry 
forward the work begun by God's special servant. 

Humbly in his service, Bloomfield Fcclesia. — N. J. 

HIS MEMOBY WILL ASSIST IN THE TIGHT 07 FAITH 
Deab Bbethben in Chbist : — 

We take this time and means to convey to you our sincerest
 sympathy in our mutual bereavement, and also to rejoice
 with you for him who, we believe, has already heard 
that sublime welcome, "Well done, good and faithful servant
 ! " Furthermore, we testify that the remembrance of 
his faith, zeal, loyalty and love will be a great help to us to 
keep up the "good fight" and to continue to show forth the 
praises of our dear Redeemer and Lord, to the end that our 
heavenly Father's name may be glorified. 

Yours in the fellowship of the One "altogether lovely," 

Auboba Ecclesia, — Hi. 
CANADIAN'S VIEW OF VOW AND BE SOLVE 
Deab Bbethben: — 

It seems expedient that I should write you a few words 
regarding the Resolve and the Vow. 

The more I examine the principles of thought contained 
in these helps, the more do they appear to be meat indeed for 
the household. 

There is one thing that appeals to me very much. It is the 
concise form in which these principles are stated. While 
concise and brief, the language is comprehensive and sufficient. 
For example, take the first thought of the Resolve, "My 
earliest thought." This gives us a good start. Likewise with 
all the other features. 

I have often thought of the paragraph on trust as taking 
out a life insurance policy with Jehovah, without any premium 
to pay, except the exercise of the faculty of trust. 

The Vow also contains pearls of great price, special treasures
 to the kingdom class. First, I note that it is a vow 
unto Jehovah our Father, the Maker and Sustainer of the 
boundless universe. Coming unto him in the name of his 
Son our Lord, with reverence, one desires his law to rule 
in his heart, believing in his faithfulness to perform that 
which he has promised. 

The mutual tie of Christian fellowship and oneness of the 
church is displayed in the second paragraph, and recalls to 
my mind instances in the history of the early church when 
the prayers of some ascended to the heavenly Father for the 
blessing of the fellow servants. 


[6106] 


June 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(178-195) 


The more I aerutinize paragraph 3, the more- am I convinced
 that divine wisdom guided in the insertion of that 
clause. There is an unfathomed mine of truth and wisdom 
in those words. Some day in the Lord's providence I hope to 
tome up to the standard there set forth. A retrospective 
view convinces me of the need of scrutinizing carefully one's 
thoughts, words and acts. 

All these helps are beneficial to the new creature in his 
efforts to be conformed to the image of God's dear Son, by 
the renewing of the mind. 

Praying Jehovah's blessing on the Bethel Family, and in 
the fellowship of his So,i and the saints, I remain 

Your brother in Christ, Eenest H. Walker. — Ont. 

HEAVENLY FATHER'S WISDOM MANIFESTED 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Our heavenly Father has, in his infinite wisdom, seen 
fit to call our beloved Pastor to his long-needed rest. Most 
naturally we now turn our attention, our sympathies and our 
prayers toward The Watch Tower and the dear brethren 
upon whose shoulders has fallen the responsibility of carrying
 on the work from which our Brother Russell has been 
taken, and that of the I. B. S. A. in general. 

We have felt that we could see significance and wisdom 
in the expressed wish of our Pastor, several years ago; 
namely, that The Tower be regarded as the Lord's servant, 
rather than himself. The earnest, heartfelt prayers of our 
class, dear Brethren, are being offered up to the God of all 


grace on your behalf and on that of the tender interests of 
the Lord's "little flock," scattered throughout the world. "The 
Kternal God is our refuge; and underneath are the Everlasting 
Arms." Shall we not "speak to the children of Israel, that 
they go forward?" May we not prove henceforth that our 
dear Pastor has succeeded in accomplishing the greatest desire 
and effort of his life-work — the leading of all truth-hungry 
hearts coming under his influence to Christ and the Bible 
instead of to himself? 

Your brethren in Christ, Waukesha Ecclesia. — Wis. 
HASTENING COMPLETION OX BRIDE OT CHRIST 
Dear Brethren ix the Lord: — 

We convey to you and all the dear roJahorers our mutual 
sympathy in the passing of our beloved Pastor from his 
labors of love in the flesh to a full realization of that divine, 
immortal nature which awaits those who have made their 
calling and election sure. Our sorrow is turned into gladness 
as we realize that he whom we have every reason to believe 
was true and faithful has passed beyond the veil, thus hastening
 the completion of the "bride of Christ," who ^vw ill soon 
rejoice with her Lord in bringing deliverance to all the captives
 of death. 

We assure you, dear brethren, of our hearty co-operation 
in all your efforts and labors of love, trusting that whatever 
is done in thought, word or deed may be done with an eye 
single to the honor and ,glory of God. 

With Christian love, Meaford Ecclbsia. — Canada. 


PICTURES OF BROTHER RUSSELL FOR CLASSES 

Intern atonal Bible Student's Ass'n with one of these 
photographs* provided the class is organized and has a definite 
meeting-place. All requests must be Bent by the Class Secretary
, and addressed to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society, Brooklyn, N. Y. The picture is a splendid likeness. 


September 10 last, about two months before Brother Russell
's death, Brother Mitchell, of Los Angeles, made some 
photographs of Brother Russell which have been much appreciated
 by those who have seen them. Brother Mitchell 
now advises us that he desires to present each class of the 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JULY 1, 1917 


No. 13 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

"WHAT SHALL BE THE SIGN OP THY PRESENCE!" 


"AND THESE SHALL BE FAMINES" 

One of the leading economists in the United States, Arthur 
R. Harsh* recently wrote in the N. Y. City World regarding the 
earth's food supply as follows (the article speaks for itself) : 

"If there be any virtue in publicity, the people of this 
country are now completely informed of the seriousness of the 
present and prospective food situation throughout the world. 
It may perhaps be doubted, however, whether they have as yet 
really passed from the stage of intellectual apperception of the 
facts to that of personal realization of what these facts will 
ultimately mean for themselves as individuals. 

"The people of the United States have to face, certainly 
for the coming twelvemonth, and in all probability for more 
than one year thereafter, a condition of things with respect 
to their supply of food the like of which has not been seen 
on the North American Continent since its earliest colonization
 by the white race, unless exception perhaps be made of 
the first winter of the Pilgrim Fathers. 

GBEAT DBAIN UPON OUR OWN GRAIN STOCKS 

"The American crop season of 1916 was relatively one of 
the most unpropitious experienced in this country within the 
memory of any persons now living. Two of our major food 
crops, wheat and potatoes, were short of a comfortable provision
 for our own population; a third food crop, corn, fell 
three or four hundred millions of bushels below the aggregate 
of the natural domestic demands upon it. The production of 
vegetables was scanty in proportion to our own needs. Of 
only two or three of the minor crops could it be said that 
they gave a full yield. Taking all our crops together and 
adding to them the food reserves brought forward from the 
previous year or years, the total food supply for the crop 
season 1916-1017 was a close fit against our domestic requirements
 for consumption, seed and carry-over, and afforded 
nothing in the way of a surplus out of which a reasonable 
amount of exports could be drawn. 

"With such a crop out-turn for 1916 in the United States 
for the period up to the harvesting of the crop *>f 1917 it 
was obvious that the important food-importing countries of 
the world should look elsewhere than to us for their supplies. 
This, however, was not to be; on the contrary, the needs of 
these countries are greater than ever before, while the production
 of the other food-exporting countries has been disastrously
 small in comparison with that of recent normal 


years, while at least two of these countries — Russia and Rou 
mania — are to a very large extent cut off from any exportation 
of foodstuffs by reason of the war situation. Accordingly 
we have been subjected to an insistent demand for considerable
 portions of this supply for export, and under conditions 
such that we could not well refuse to let it go. 

SITUATION MOST THREATENING KNOWN 

"It is unnecessary to dilate upon the ieally appalling seriousness
 of the situation — a situation so threatening that no 
one now living in a civilized country has ever known its like. 
On the basis of the most trustworthy statistics' and estimates 
obtainable, we have been forced to the conclusion that, with 
every elevator in the world drained of its contents, with every 
bin and crib in the world scraped to the bottom, the world's 
supply of the grains usable for human food, whether directly 
or in the form of meat, not only would not suffice to meet 
the requirements of the unblockaded countries from April to 
August, but would fall 130,000,000 bushels short of those requirements
. 

'With the severest restriction of their consumption by 
multitudes of people somewhere, the last weeks of the period 
must be weeks of positive privation in some or all of the 
countries affected; and, except by chance here and there, not 
a bushel of these grains would remain at the end of the 
present crop year to serve as a surplus to supplement any 
possible deficiencies of the production of the coming year. 

FAMINE THREATENS PREMATURE AND INCONCLUSIVE 
PEACE 

"The case presented by the International Institute of Agriculture
, was by no means as bad as the actual facts. In its 
calculations the Institute undoubtedly assumed that the winter 
wheat crop of the United States would be at least of normal 
size, as its acreage was record-breaking and it was not known, 
even as late as the end of March, that the average condition 
of the growing crop had been extensively impaired. When, 
however, the Department of Agriculture, on April 7, estimated 
the condition of the crop at practically 23 per cent, lower than 
the past ten year's average, and indicative of a production 
of only 430,000,000 bushels of winter wheat, as compared with 
481,744,000 bushels last year and 673,947,000 bushels in 1915, 
it was seen at a glance that but an infinitesimal chance remained
 that the total wheat production of the United States 
in J917 would even fairly come up to our own normal re- 


[6107] 


(195-196) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


quirements for consumption and seed — about 640,000,000 
bushels—to say nothing of leaving an exportable surplus of 
proportions commensurate with the requirements of our allies 
in Europe. 

"The first outstanding fact, as shown above, is that assuming
 only normal crops (aside from winter wheat in the 
United States in 1917 for the food-exporting countries of the 
Northern Hemisphere and a normal consumption and distribution
 of the same, our European allies in the great war for 
democratic civilization have to face so great a shortage of 
their supply of grain that both their armies and their populations
 can scarcely hope to avoid the severest privations for 
more than a year to come and may conceivably have to yield 
that to hunger which they would never have yielded to the 
force of arms- — a premature and inconclusive peace, with 

NONE OF THE GREAT ENDS OF THE WAB ATTAINED!" 

"AND THE FIELDS SHALL YIELD NO MEAT" 

"Americans should get along on two meals a day during 
the war," Carl Vrooman, Assistant United States Secretary of 
Agriculture, told the members of the Medico-Psychological 
Association at the Hotel Astor, in a speech in which he made 
a bitter attack on food speculators and asked the physicians' 
help to arouse public sentiment that would 'club them into 
submission/ 

"In advocating two meals a day for the duration of the 
war, Mr. Vrooman said that at that we would be eating twice 
as much as the Germans get to eat. 

" 'There are more than 30,000,000 people in Germany who 
have had less than one square meal a day for weeks,' he said, 
'There is not a country in Europe where the people are on 
full rations. We can get along very well on two meals a day/ 

"Mr. Vrooman asked the heads of institutions present to 
see that enough food was raised on their farms to feed the 
inmates. He said that not only was this country called upon 
to feed itself and the Allies, but that at the end of the war it 
would be called upon to feed the decimated millions of the 
Central Powers. 

" 1 don't intend to make any statements to you that are 
exaggerations/ he said, because it would be impossible to 
exaggerate the seriousness of the war and what goes with it. 
Tt is America's problem to see that more men do not starve in 
Europe this year than were killed in the trenches last year. 
Famine is looking over the sky-line of every European country
. If we do not keep starvation away from the capitals of 
Europe it will not be kept away. Our crops are all that stand 
between mankind and starvation in the months to come. It 
is not humanly possible to overstate the seriousness of the 
food shortage the world is facing today/ " — New York Times. 
"THE PBUDENT HIDETH HIMSELF" 
[Proverbs 22:31 
From The Watch Tower, Nov. 1, 1914: 

Let no one suppose that it will be possible to escape the 
difficulties and trials of the great time of trouble, whose 
shadow is now beclouding the earth. The most and the best 
that could be hoped in this direction would he an amelioration 
of the conditions by the exercise of that wisdom which cometh 
from above, described by the Apostle, who says that it is 
"first pure, then peaceable, easy of entreatment, full of mercy 
and good fruits." To whatever extent any individual, anywhere
, shall follow this prescription of heavenly wisdom, to 
that extent we may be sure he will have God's favor; and that 
favor guarantees to the recipient that "all things shall work 
together for his good." 

The most valuable lessons that any parent or counselor can 
give to those subject to his direction would be,, first, the 
Golden Rule-^inculcating absolute justice — nothing less; second
, in addition to justice as represented by the Golden Rule, 
should be the lesson of mercy, compassion, sympathy, the 
spirit of helpfulness. The third lesson in the series should 
be meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering. The fourth 
lesson should be economy in everything — avoidance of waste — 
the realization that what he does not need, some one else does 
need. 

In suggesting the foregoing lessons, we are presupposing 
a Christian basis — that our readers are themselves children 
of God, who have been feeding at the Lord's table upon spiritual
, heavenly food; and that they have been seeking to bless 
their families by training them in harmony with God's will. 
A PARENT'S BEST HERITAGE TO BIS CHILD 

For the dire distress which we see nearing, such character 
preparation is the best heritage that anv parent could leave 
to his children. Bonds and stocks will be unavailable for 
food; bank accounts may become uncertain; and the possession
 of money may become a temptation to the vicious to rob 
and to murder; but a good character cannot be taken away. 


Its possession will give a measure of peace, security and confidence
 in the Lord that is beyond all price. 

We recommend that none be urged unduly to make a full 
consecration of their hearts, their lives, their all, to the Lord 
and to his service. The lives of God's people should in every 
case be "living epistles, known and read of all men" — especially
 by their own families. Those lives should testify not 
only to the completeness of the consecration to the Lora, but 
also to the peace, joy and comfort resulting. "Let the peace 
of God rule in your hearts; and be ye thankful/ 5 (Colossians 
3:15) Your being a living epistle, without a single word of 
exhortation, will be powerful in its lessons to all those directly
 under your influence. Additionally, at a suitable time, 
it would be proper to intimate to your family, friends and 
neighbors the comfort and joy, the peace and blessing, which 
you have received through a full acceptance of the Lord Jesus 
Christ and the message of his Word, and what a pleasure it 
would be to you to see your dear ones similarly blessed, comforted
 and -spiritually healed. 

It is better, however, that your children and friends should 
refrain from any profession of consecration to the Lord 
which would be a mere hypocrisy. There are too many hypocritical
 professors already. They are doing harm to the 
cause of Christ as well as harming themselves; for hypocrisy 
seems to be especially disdained of the Lord, and an insurmountable
 wall of hindrance to the hypocrite himself. Our 
influence, therefore, should always be on the side of honesty, 
not only in matters financial and social, but also, and particularly
, in respect to God and religion. 

ALSO FBOVIDE THINGS HONEST 

The Apostle urges God's people to provide for their own — 
for their own families — their necessities; and he also urges 
that such provision shall be honestly made — if not honestly, 
then not at all. Again, he exhorts the Lord's people to "labor 
wita their hands," that they may have to give to others who 
may be in need. These exhortations are not to be understood 
as recommendations to lay up earthly treasure — an earthly 
fortune. The Lord's people are to live in harmony with their 
faith — to lay up their treasure in heaven. These suggestions, 
therefore, respecting temporalities are not recommendations to 
hoard wealth, but merely "to use this world as not abusing it." 

In harmony with the heading of this article, and in accordance
 with our views of the possibilities of the future, we 
have some recommendations to offer to our readers. While 
we are not certain that all the dire calamities of the day of 
the Lord will befall the earth within the next eleven months, 
nevertheless there seems to he a sufficient possibility of this 
to warrant us in making certain provisions against the distress 
of that time — in the interest of our families, our friends and 
our neighbors. 

We recommend to those having clean, dry cellars or other 
places suitable and well-ventilated, to lay in a good stock of 
life's necessities; for instance, a large supply of coal, of rice, 
dried peas, dry beans, rolled oats, wheat, barley, sugar, molasses
, fish, etc. Have in mind the keeping qualities and 
nutritive values of foods — especially the fact that soups are 
economical and nourishing. Do not be afraid of having too 
much of such commodities as will keep well until the heat of 
next summer begins even if it were necessary to sell them at 
a loss, to prevent spoiling. Think of this hoard to eat, not 
too selfishly, but as being a provision for any who may be in 
need, and who in the Lord's providence may come your" way — 
"that you may have to give to those who lack." — Eph. 4:28. 

Do not sound a trumpet before you, telling of your provisions
, intentions, etc. "Hast thou faith? Have it to thyself 
before God." Only your own family should know of this 
storing of food, and they should be under strict injunctions 
not to tell it to others. At most, suggest to your friends or 
neighbors the wisdom of keeping a stock of staple foods ahead 
in view of the possibilities of storms, strikes, etc., during the 
winter. Do not attempt to go into too great details respecting
 the time of trouble; for the majority of people are blind 
and deaf anyway on this subject. 

Do not make these purchases on credit if you have not the 
money. Leave the matter, and exercise the more faith, remembering
 that the Golden Rule is the very lowest standard 
that can be recognized by the Lord's people, and that it comes 
in advance of any kind of charity. 

BAT CORN AND SAVE MONET 
From the Literary Digest: 

One way to reduce the cost of food, according to specialists
 in the United States Department of Agriculture, is to use 
more corn-meal. At present prices charged in retail stores, 
corn-meal costs about half as much per pound as wheat-flour, 
one-third as much as rolled oats, one-fourth as much as rolled 
wheat, and about half as much as broken rice. That is, it 


[6108] 


July 1, 191? 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(196-197) 


costs less than any of the other popular cereal foods, yet "Look forward! Look to the end! Look to the golden 

even the bolted meal usually sold has a food value that com- year!" 

pares favorably with that of wheat-flour. Says the author of A noticeable absence in the Doctor's article is the failure 

a recent food-bulletin issued by the Department: to attribute the crumbling thrones of earth to the presence of 

"'The old-fashioned unbolted corn-meal made from the earth's new King and the imminence of the time for the eswhole
 grain, which can often be obtained by the farmer who tablishment of his kingdom, for which the true church haswill
 take his grain to mill, and can often be purchased in shops so long and earnestly prayed, "Thy kingdom come!" 

and markets, contains more of the tissue-building material and WHOM DO WE SEBVE? 

has what many consider even a better flavor than the bolted As we advance into this time of "distress of nations" 

meal, and is much liked for making some forms of corn-bread. (Luke 21:25), the wiles of the devil will be more and more 

"'Any family, in town or country, can have the best of exerted through every device of his cunning to befog and encorn
-meal by grinding it at home in a hand grist-mill. The city trap the awakening masses of the world. 

man can buy corn by the bushel at a grain-store. He can We are admoniajied that "there is a time for every purgrmd
 it coarse or fine, to suit the taste of the family, and in p oae under heaven" (Ecclesiastes 3:1-8) ; and from the signs 
quantities to last a day or a week, or longer. Most people will 9 f the tianes we know that God is judging the nations (Psalm 
agree that this meal containing the germ is very palatable 82:8), gathering them into "the Valley of Jehoshaphat" to 
and compares well in this respect with that ordinarily pur- execute retribution upon them for their wickedness, manichased
 ready ground. Prices of hand-mills of substantial fested in misrule and oppression. (Joel 3:2, 12, 13; Jeremiah 
make run from $2.50 to $5. A small mill can be had for 25:15-29) These conditions are of man, under the madias
 httle as $1.50, though this probably would prove too tedious inations of the arch-enemy— Satan. Forseeing the issue in 
to use, except for small quantities.' the permission of evil, God designed to permit this time of 

"In this connection, Dr. Arthur W. Smith, a consulting war> "the day of vengeance of our God" (Isaiah 01:2), that 
chemist of Baltimore, writes us that he has recently made an u 3 fruitage, as a great object lesson, should help to demonexhaustive
 investigation of the comparative food-value of the strate the exceeding evil of evil, the exceeding sinfulness of 
products of white corn, and that the results show these prod- sin— sin in its full fruition. "The harvest is ripe."— Joel 
ucts to be much more economical than many of the foods com- 3:13, 
monly used. He says: _ In the arrangement for the delivery of President Wilson's 

" "The food value of one pound of corn- meal, grits, or horn- wa r message, one of the most notable electrical displays was 

iny, costing three cents, is equal to the food-value of any of entitled, "Jesus, The Light of the World," thus by implication 

the following used foods: ^ proclaiming that this nation was going forth in its mission 

1 pound of wheat flour, costing $0.06 under the authority of the Prince of Peace — a claim which 

1 pound rice, costing 09 every one of the warring nations has made. It is true that the 

iy 2 pounds of cheese, costing 60 position of this country is unique. It is standing squarely on 

2% pounds of round steak, costing 80 international law and believes it is fighting for the mainte- 

2 dozen eggs, costing, . . 90 nance of justice and liberty. Truly a noble purpose ! But the 

x k neck of potatoes, costing 45 Prince of Peace, while upholding the law- of justice, taught 

6 pints of milk, costing 30 and exemplified another law for himself and his followers ; 

** 'The South knows and appreciates the value of white corn i. e ., the law of love, in which by laying down his life, "the 

for table use; why not the North, the East, and the West?' " Just for the unjust," he satisfies the claims of divine justice 

"THE MEAHING OP THE DAT" against condemned man, and brings life and immortality to 

~ - ,, ,. , _. , m± ^ light, "leaving us an example that we should follow in his 

One of the most widely known syndicate writers, Dr. s teps » 1 Peter 2-21 

Frank Crane, has recently penned something which corres- OUB LOBD'S IKSTETTCTIONS TO HIS TOIXOWEBS 

ponds so well with what The Watch Tower publications have ' u . . , ° ^ , 7 i Y , ? , a Z a «w> + 

from Bible chronology and prophecy advanced for about forty .. When in judgment before Pilate our Lord was asked about 

years that we append it here. The Lord of the harvest is J« kingdom, he specifically stated, "My kingdom is not of 

surelv waking up the nations: Hi 18 world f° rder] ; lf my WrTw^ thlS world / order J> 

"this is ffie strange day. This is the day of his coming. *» would my servants fight" mth the weapons of carnal 

"Terrible and strange Is his coming; with trampling* of J^S* ♦ (^18:36) The Apostle Paul, truly taught of 

innumerable armies, desolate and salt-sown fields, strewn 2» M * Bter > <******" tfce o^™* ^ 8tlH ♦ furtW JTft 

with corpses; soil- ploughed, crater-furrowed with monstrous 7* 0u f ™ walk in f e nesh we do not war after tiie 

shells; the night sk P y Ld and streaked with deadly shrap- tf^^l* ^th™^^^ 

'"It is the day of judgment. It is the end of the world. ****** do^ l^MtioM and every high thing that exalteth 

"History has two phages. One, a slow preparation-forces }£" ^.^ft ±£°*^ & o^nX 
brewing, fires long kindling, waters gathering, electricity gen- J™* ™7 fought to the obedience of Christ. -2 Connecting
. The other, a sudden change; at last the barrier falls, tlua jJ s *u.4, o. 

the vessel explodes, the electric force leaps out in flash and , Recognizing our Lord Jesus' word as not his own, but that 

fury, the dan? breaks, the floods roar forth. ?* * he heavenly Father we recall that he taught positively 

''This is the day of accomplishment. The bell has rung. that neither he nor his faithful church was to resist by force 

The signal has been given. iL titanic potencies accumulat- * he ™J™« P:??™'> «* m fidelity to his teaching he laid 

ing through centuries have come to a head* dwn *" °™ b a' ^ v" ^P^ized-proved-his stateS
 -Evolution moves slowly, as a glacier; but at times leaps, ment ^ "the Son of Man is come not to destroy men's 

as an avalanche * lve8 > but to save them " (Luke 9:56) The servant is not 

«T^ a i a i-hJ ov +^ rt , T «« rt „+ a«~ *i, a* ~* «, i^j * greater than his Master; and "as he was, so are we in this 

thei^Ub£o^ ™}*" .(1 Jota4.1T) This being true of the individual, 

tirrv \a • a i . iV * j rp. , ,. it is perforce true of any association of individuals m his 

The world is drunk with freedom. They are toppling over name / If therefore this 4 ere a nat ion of obedient followers 

old thrones, sweeping away ancient dynasties,bursting through of j H wouM ^^ it clahns to ^—a Christian nation. 

venerable creeds, snapping the rusted chains of tradition, If aa a nation it is not obedien t to this fundamental doctrine, 

smashing impregnable institutions can it rightfully claim to be a Christian nation? 

Nature has her own plans. God maketh the wrath of "Well," one says, "if we were a Christian nation, should 

man to praise him. What began as a ouarrel between rival ^ e unresistingly endure all that has been put on us? If so, 

nations will end as a triumph for humanity. Out of the dash tnia ^.n^d nation buffeting us would destroy us!" True, 

of kings the people will emerge victorious. Democracy is us- prov i ded God himself in his own power and way did not 

mg 3 e ^ a " e11 !?* ? ut0C1 * a «es to kill each other. protect. In his protection of the Jewish nation under the 

Terrible is the day of the Lord and past understanding. j^ dispensation, when faithful, we see his protecting power 

Yet his purposes are for the health of the world. After the exemplified. Again, it was demonstrated in Jesus' experience; 

storm, the ozone-laden sunshine. After the volcanic upheaval, for w he n his enemies would destroy him, he could go out 

the smiling and fertile continent. irom their midst unarmed, and this repeatedly, under divine 

"And after all this destruction— peace, with law. He is protection, until "his time was come." And ? 'when his time 

trampling the wine press; ffom the crushed grapes shall flow ^ ft s come," he suffered willingly, 

the sweet wine. A DEVICE OF THE ADVEBSABY 

"After this the ships of the world shall sail more safely, As our Lord was taken up into an exceedingly high mounthe
 lanes of commerce shall be opened, the barriers between tain and shown the kingdoms of the world and their glory, 

nations weaker, and their bonds stronger. After this shall and was offered them by Satan — who was permitted dominion 

men work with gladder songs, and women love with less fear. ior a predetermined time — so now as his lease expires, and 

VIl-19 [6109] 


(198-204) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


he is being dethroned, he seems to be taking apostate Christianity
 into a high mountain and showing them the kingdoms 
of the world, and a prospective glory, if they will worship him. 
And they are accepting the terms and worshiping him as they 
cause their sons and their daughters to go through the awful 
fire of this most demoniacal war. It is a cunning device, and 
belongs among the things that will deceive, if possible, the 
very elect. — Matthew 24:24. 

We are reminded that the Master spake a parable of this 
time, saying, "Strait is the gate and narrow the way which 
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. Beware of 
false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but 
inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by 
their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs 
of thistles? Even sq every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; 
but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree 
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring 
forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good 
fruit is hewn dowit and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their 


fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that saith unto me, 
Lord, Lord, sfcall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he 
that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many 
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
 in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and 
in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I 
profess unto them, I never knew you j depart from me, ye that 
work iniquity. 

"Therefore whosoever heareth these saying3 of mine, and 
doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which build his 
house upon a rock; and the Tain descended, and the floods 
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it 
fell not; for it was founded upon a rock. And every one 
that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall 
be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the 
sand; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the 
winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell; and great 
was the fall of it."— Matthew 7:13-27, 


HEZEKIAH, THE FAITHFUL KING 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Hezekiah's Great Passover/ ' published in issue of November 1, 1898, which please 

see.] 

SENNACHERIB'S INVASION OF ISRAEL 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Two Prayers and Their Answers," published in issue of November 1, 1898, which 

please see.] 

GOD'S GRACIOUS INVITATION 

[This article was a reprint of that which appeared in issue of July 15, 1905, under the title "God's Ways Higher Than Man's 

Ways," which please see.] 

GOVERNMENT RECOGNIZES OUR ASSOCIATION 

D. L. Roscoe, Captain of Cavalry, U. S. A. 

WAR DEPARTMENT 

Office of Provost Marshal General 

Washington 

BULLETIN 

Concerning Exemptions, Exclusions and Discharges 

1. From the lists of persons registered on June 5th, names 
will, on a day to be announced later, be drawn by lot by the 
fairest system that can be devised. Persons whose names 
are drawn, and other persons interested, will be given an 
opportunity to present claims for exemption, exclusion or 
discharge from the draft and to support such claims by 
evidence. 

2. The determination of whether a particular claim for 
exemption, exclusion or discharge shall be granted, will be 
made by boards to be appointed by the* President. These 
boards will function under the law and under regulations prescribed
 by the President. Regulations governing the determination
 of exemptions, exclusions and discharges will, when 
promulgated, be made available to all concerned at the offices 
of the local and District Boards. Until such regulations have 
been promulgated further information cannot be given, as 
it might later prove misleading; and even after the regulations
 have been made public, decisions concerning exemptions, 
exclusions or discharges in individual cases cannot be made 
by this office, since the law provides that all such cases shall 
he heard and determined by the Boards to be established 
for that purpose. The President's Regulations, for the execution
 of the draft, will be given to the public as soon as 
possible. 

3. The law provides for the exemption from draft, of 
persons in the military and naval service of the United States, 
of officers of the legislative, executive, or judicial departments 
of the United States and of the several States, Territories and 
District of Columbia; of regular or duly ordained ministers 
of religion and students who on May 18th were preparing 
for the ministry in recognized theological or divinity schools, 
of aliens and of subjects of Germany whether they have or 
have not taken out their first papers. 

4. Persons who are members of well-recognized religious 
sects or organizations, organized and existing on May 18th, 
and whose creed at that time, forbade its members to participate
 in war in any form, and whose religious convictions are 
against war or participation therein in accordance with the 
creed or principles of said religious organizations, cannot be 
compelled to serve in any of the military forces created by 
the Selective Service Act of ^lay 18th, but no such person shall 
be exempted from any service which the President may declare
 to be non-combatant. 

5-a. The President is authorized to exclude or discharge 
from the selective draft, or to draft for partial military servThe
 appended correspondence between this office and the 
War Department in Washington, D. C, is self-explanatory. 
We believe it will be read with interest by our many friends. 
We call attention especially to paragraph No. 4 of the Official 
Bulletin of the War Department which states that members 
of religious bodies which were organized and existing on May 
18th, and whose religious convictions are against war or participating
 therein, according to the principles of said organization
, cannot be compelled to serve in any of the military forces. 
The War Department has on file a statement from our Association
, showing it has been a recognized religious Association 
for more than thirty years. We publish the correspondence, 
together with the Bulletin for the benefit of our readers: 
OTO LETTER 

June 15, 1917 
Gen. E, H. Cbowdeb, Provost Marshal, 
Office of Provost Marshal General, 
Washington, D. C. 
Deab SiBS: — 

On the 24th of May, 1917, we filed with you a statement 
of the International Bible Students Association, which 
is a religious organization, setting forth the reasons why 
such Association comes within the purview of the Selective 
Draft Act with reference to exemption. We understand that 
the question of exemption will, of course, be determined by 
courts constituted by the President for that purpose, in due 
time. 

The County Clerk of one County has made statements to 
some of our members that his office has received from the 
Government a list of such religious organizations as would 
be recognized, and that the Government had not recognized 
the International Bible Students Association; and this 
statement is disturbing some of our people. 

We will thank you to kindly write us concerning this matter
, so that we may be able to set at rest the minds of many 
who are disturbed and to assure them that in due time the 
Government will consider their application for exemption 
along with any others claiming exemption because their religious
 belief or teaching forbids them to engage in war, as 
provided by law. An early reply hereto will be very much 
appreciated. 

Very respectfully yours, 

International Bible Students Association. 
PROVOST MARSHAL'S REPLY 

June 19, 1917 
International Bible Students Assn., 
Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Deab Sirs: — 

Receipt is acknowledged of your letter of June 15th. 

For your information I enclose herewith bulletin No, 1, 
which covers the subject of your inquiry. 

By direction of General Cbowdeb: 


[6110] 


Juf.y 1, 1917 


r II E WA T C II T O IV E R 


(204-20=;) 


ice only, persons of, the following classes: County and 
municipal officials; customhouse clerks; persons employed by 
the United States in the transmission of the mails; artificers 
and workmen employed in the armories, arsenals and navy 
yards of the United States and such other persons employed 
in the service of the United States as the President may 
designate; pilots; mariners actually employed in the sea service
 of any citizen or merchant within the United States ; 
those in a status with respect to persons dependent upon them 
for support which renders their exclusion or discharge advisable
; and those found to be physically or morally deficient
; 

(b) Also, persons engaged in industries, including agriculture
, found to be necessary to the maintenance of the 
Military Establishment or the effective operation of the Military
 forces or the maintenance of national interest during 
the emergency, 

6. No exemption or exclusion shall continue when a cause 
therefore no longer exists. 

7. Whether or not any class or any individual, falls within 


the meaning of any of the above enumerated provisions, is 
a question of fact and must, in order to constitute a proper 
claim for exemption, he proved and established before the 
boards to bo appointed by the President for the purpose of 
passing upon all such claims. 

8. There will be one board in each county or, in large 
cities, one for each 30,000 inhabitants. These boards will 
hear and determine, subject to review by District Boards, all 
questions of exemptions except those coming under Par. 5-b 
above. Those coming under the provision of that paragraph 
must be determined by District Boards, one of which will 
be appointed by the President for each Federal District. 
These District Boards, in addition to having original jurisdiction
 over the classes falling under Par. 5-b, shall also on 
appeal, have the power to affirm, modify or reverse any 
decision of any local board, and the decision of such District 
Boards will be final, except that the President may affirm, 
modify or reverse such decision under such rules and regulations
 as the President may prescribe. 

E. II. Chowder, Provost Marshal General. 


"FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 


'"Faithful unto death!' Lord, day by day, 
Help me thus to keep the narrow way! 
Strengthen me to bear the scorn and shamePortion
 of all those who take thy name. 
'Faithful unto death!' When all is done, 


Cross is changed to crown, the victory won, 
Let me hear thee say, O, blessed Lord, 
'Child, come enter into thy reward! 
Faithful thou hast been, come share with me 
Glory, honor, immortality!'" 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


"MUCH DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OP 0OX>" 

Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings and much love in Christ! My former studies in 
connection with light and optics have enabled me to appreciate
 so much Brother Russell's valued remarks in regard to 
the colors of the 'Tabernacle in the Wilderness," and especially
 those found in the garments of the high priest. 

How appropriate that the sun is a symbol of the divine 
Creator, seeing that the sun is the source of light, warmth 
and color, and God the source of life, love and grace! (Malachi 
4:2; John 8:12; 1 John 1:5) It is generally known among 
optical students that sunlight is vibration of that elastic, subtle
 medium pervading space and termed ether. These vibrations
 are due to the disturbing influence of the sun, which 
affects the ether just as a stone dropped into a pool of water 
sets up circular ripples therein. 

It is interesting to note that just as love is the sum of all 
the divine graces, so white sunlight is the sum of all the 
known varied hues; for the prismatic effect of rain, which 
produces the bow, tells this story of a complication of colors 
derived from sunlight. 

Moreover, it is the same white light that falls on every 
object perceived by the eye, and yet in what exquisite variety 
of shades is the light reflected! This is due to the intrinsic 
property of the material upon which the light falls, which 
absorbs certain vibratory wave-lengths, responsible for color, 
and reflects others. 

There is a beautiful harmony found in the scientific and 
Scriptural viewpoint of all this : for instance, note how unselfishly
 white objects will reflect the purity of the sunlight, 
and how it is written that white raiment is reserved for those 
who will most unselfishly reflect divine grace and truth* — 
2 Chronicles 5:12; Revelation 3:4, 5; 19:8. 

We note, too, in vivid contrast how black objects will 
practically absorb all white light. They destroy every beauteous
 ray from the sun, so that darkness and blackness are 
apparent; and so, too, for all who will not reflect divine 
grace and truth* is reserved blackness and darkness forever. 
(Jude 13; 2 Peter 2:17) The wearing of black mourning 
apparel tells the sad story of a "light" gone from a home. 
Hence black is synonymous with death. Other Scriptures are 
harmonious with the thought.— Canticles 1:5,6; Isaiah 50:3. 

Scarlet reminds one of Bhed blood, the penalty of sin, and 
is a symbol of the precious blood of our dear Redeemer, who 
took the sinner's place. The saving and cleansing power 
symbolized by this color permeates throughout Scripture. — 
Ex. 12:13; Lev. 14:51, 52; Josh. 2:18-20; Isa. 1:18; 1 John 
1:7. 

Blue implies faith. The very heavens cast this beautiful 
color into the eyes of all observers, and that while they reflect 
on the importance of a faithful law-giver. The necessity of 
maintaining full control of the stellar system is evidenced 
when we are told that the system containing more than a 
thousand million suns with their satellites is traveling at 


about twelve miles a second through space, and yet order and 
harmony are so accurate that positions and eclipses may be 
gauged thousands of years apart with perfect accuracy. 

"Thy faithfulness." says the Psalmist, "shall thou establish 
in the. very heavens." 

The sign of blue as representing faith is general; for we 
remember the Blue Ribbon League and the street guardians 
clothed in blue and the Scriptural testimony including the blue 
robe of the ephod.— Psalm 89:1,2; Num. 15:38; Isa. 54:11. 

It is interesting to note how this color tells in such plain 
language that none should be a king unless he prove faithful 
unto the shedding of blood, or death. 

In history, purple has been a sign of royalty, and mention 
is made of this fact so far back as the time of Israel's judges. 
— Judges 8:26. 

Purple is a compound of blue and red, blue implying faithfulness
, and this, together with red, implying faithfulness even 
unto death. 

It is remarkable that it was just at the appropriate time. 
when Jesus bad practically demonstrated bis wortbiness of 
the kingly title, that he was arrayed in this regal-colored 
apparel, even though through the scornful mockery of base 
men.— Mark 15:9-20. 

Gold seems a very fitting symbol of divinity. It is wonderfully
 malleable — one ounce of beaten gold covering the area 
of 1466 square feet, thus portraying how divine glory may 
spread throughout the universe. Further, of all metals, it is 
most like the sun in appearance, and the sun has light within 
itself and can impart the same without apparent exhaustion, 
And so, too, the divine nature with its inherent life.— Lamentations
 4:1,2; Psalm 45:9,13; Exodus 25:10,11, 

Green, being like fresh vegetation, tells it* own story in 
Scripture. — Psalm 23:2; Luke 23:31; Revelation 8:7. 

Where many colors are manifest there is portrayed the 
manifold glory of sunlight, from which all the colors are 
derived, and herein lies the appropriateness of the Scriptural 
symbol generally portrayed by the rainbow; for just as in the 
latter beautiful elementary colors are seen by the natural 
vision, so by the eyes of understanding the graces divine are 
manifest as we gaze and reflect upon the covenants. — Genesis 
9:11-17; Ezekiel 1:28; Rev. 4:3rEzekiel 28:13; Isaiah 54:11. 

It was upon the reflection of this latter thought that I 
felt impressed with Brother Russell's statements in regard to 
the ephod and its jeweled breastplate; for he says that the 
ephod represented the Abrahamic and the New Covenant. 
Truly, as we meditate on the meaning of each of its five 
colors, and see how they twine about, it must be so, for 
the covenants in question very particularly manifest th* 1 
manifold glory of God, which will be revealed to all mankind 
in due time. 

This had led me, dear Brethren, to alter a few words here 
and there of the beautiful poem found in the Divine Plan 
of the Ages, and illuminating the thought just given: 


[6111] 


(205-206) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Loveliest to the fairest eyes, 

Grand the mystic ephod lies; 

Soft and smooth and glory shedding, 

As if made for angels* treading — 

Wondrous tintings, touching ever, 

White and hlue and these together 

With purple, red and shining gold: 

In God's own Word it all is told. 

Every color has its meaning 

(Deeper thoughts from deeper gleaning), 

And illumined — what a riddle — 

By the gems that deck the middle! 

There is a truth — though some reject it — 
That its light is all reflected, 
That the ephod's hues are given 
By the sun that shines in heaven; 
And 'tis thought — by saints believing — 
That great God himself is weaving, 
Bringing out the world's dark history, 
To the light of truth — its mystery ; 
And as works of men dimmish, 
Comes the grand and glorious finish, 
When begin the Golden Ages, 
Long foretold by seers and sages. 

With much love in our dear Redeemer, 
Your Brother, rejoicing in the glorious hope, through 
divine favor, Frederick Lardext. — England. 

SWEDISH— NORWEGIAN— DAMlSH—mmiSH REPORT 

Dear Brethren: — 

It is herewith my privilege to send you the usual financial 
report for the last quarter and at the same time to be able to 
add that the harvest work continues to make very good 
progress here. Our present prospects are still better. 

During the past three months, Nov., 1916, to Jan., 1917, 
the Orebro office has sent out more than 12,000 copies of the 
Studies and about 3,000 other books, Drama Scenarios, 
Mannas, etc. Tn that same period of time we have received 
2,034 subscriptions to the Swedish Watch Toweb, and 2,724 
letters and cards. The letters and cards sent out amount to 
2,481, and the total number of sendings (by mail and by railroad
) from this office is 18,658. The number of meetings 
held under its direction was 427, and the nuimber of kilometers
 traveled in its service, 29,340. It may be of interest 
to you to know that I had four meetings in Stockholm yesterday
, amongst which was one baptismal service, in which 10 
brethren and 9 sisters (all belonging to the class in Stockholm
), symbolized their consecration. At the beginning of 
this year (Dec. 30, 31 and Jan. 1), we had a splendid and 
very well attended convention in Gothenburgh. This week 
I am going to Norway, in order, D. V., to give some more 
"push" to the Society's work there, by some necessary changes 
and improvements in the Christiania office, etc. 

From that (the Norwegian) office I am able to give you 
the following report, or figures, for Nov. 1 to Jan. 31: 
Studies sent out, 1,245; other books, Mannas, Drama, Scenarios
, etc., 1,187; letters received, 96; letters sent out, 58. 
Expenditures, kr. 874:18; receipts, kr. 851:15. 

The Danish office has during this same quarter sent out 
2,333 copies of the Studies and 881 other books, Mannas, 
etc. Tts income during the time was kr. 5,185: 58, and its 
expenditures kr. 5,436: 90. It has amongst other meetings 
during the quarter also given 73 Deama presentations at different
 places in Denmark and attended by 23,395 people. 

The Finnish report for the quarter (Oct. 15 to Jan 15) 
shows the following figures: Studies sent out, 1,472; other 
books and booklets, 1,582; letters and cards sent out, 1,285; 
letters and cards received, 276; subscriptions to the Finnish 
Tower, 477; meetings held, 109; kilometers traveled in preaching
 tours, 10,360; receipts, Fmrk. 7,872: 93; expenditures, 
Fmrk. 5,166: 07. 

We continue the printing of the Dano-Norwegian Studies 
and pamphlets and tracts here in Orebro as rapidly as possible
. By the Dord*s grace I hope that our next quarterly report
 will show you a not insignificant increase above this 
one. 

Assuring you of our deep appreciation of the great privilege
 of being your (and the Lord's) colaborers, and asking 
you to kindly accept our heartiest greetings and love in Christ, 
I remain as ever, 

Yours in our dear Redeemer's blessed name and service, 

August Lundboeg. — Sweden. 


EXPENDITURES : 
NOV., 1916— JAN., 1917 

Deficit in cash Nov. 1, 1916 kr. 38,441.42 

Pilgrim, convention and other 

meetings kr. 4,450.33 

Printing " 2,618.71 

Printing paper « 7,794.00 

Binding " 332.04 

Freights and postage " 1,443.73 

Translations and other helps- " 954.68 

Bibles, Cards, etc., for sale.. " 3,496.80 

The newspaper service " 20.65 

Expenses for the work in Norway
 and Denmark " 135.00 

Helps to poor colporteurs.. . . " 840.31 
Office expenses, rent, light, 

heat, inventory, etc " 2,166.01 

Paid on debts from foregoing
 quarter " 16,586.58 

kr. 40,838.84 kr. 40,838.84 

RECEIPTS: kr. 79,280.26 

Voluntary donations to the 

Tract Fund kr. 9,487.02 

Swedish Watch Tower subscriptions
 " 4,870.56 

Books sold and other incomes. " 22,021.20 


kr. 36,378.78 kr. 36,378.78 
Deficit in the cash Feb. I, 1917 kr. 42,901.48 


kr. 79,280.26 
August Lundboro. — Sweden. 

_ NOT ASHAMED OF THE TBTJTH 

Dear Doctor: — 

Your kind letter we have received. To say that it did not 
cost us a severe pang of sorrow to think of severing our connection
 with the Central Church, would be to say what is 
untrue; but when it comes to a matter of conscience, there is 
One above and beyond all others to whom we owe first allegiance
. "Lovest thou me more than these V applies to all 
sincere and consecrated followers of Jesus. 

I doubt whether you fully realize with what implicit faith 
I received the interpretation of our "orthodox" preachers as 
to the meaning of the Greek text. I verily believe that they 
were giving us the full benefit of the true meaning. Instead, 
1 find upon personal inquiry, after learning through Pastor 
Russell's clear interpretation, that the Bible does not teach, 
for instance, the doctrine of eternal torment, which the ministers
 have to adimit. Now the truth is that eternal torment 
is publicly preached and privately denied. I for one cannot 
conscientiously stand for this. Do they not realize in permitting
 the world to think they stand tor this devilish doctrine
 that they are defaming God's character? I have always 
had to keep this doctrine behind my back, as it were, in 
order not to go too deep in questioning God's love and mercy. 
Tlunk of the many who have not only questioned, but have 
given up all faith and trust in a God whom they were taught 
could inflict such punishment upon humanity! I do not 

think, dear Dr. , that our ministers realize how fully 

the common people trusted! I now have the Greek Testament 
and see for myself that the true meaning is not eternal torment
, but is the aiortian cutting off (Matt. 25:46), as of a 
branch cut off, this being in the second death — everlasting destruction
. 

Then there is the great doctrine of restitution, which I certainly
 never was taught in either of the Baptist churches with 
which I was affiliated, and yet this is clearly taught by the 
apostles. And, oh, what a wonderful, glorious doctrine it is! 
How clearly we can understand in this light why God has been 
selecting a kittle flock" in this Gospel age, of consecrated believers
, to be the bride of Christ, who with him are to reign 
for the thousand years on the spirit plane. All humanity, 
those brought forth from their graves as well as those who 
shall be on the earth when he begins his glorious reign, shall 
have an opportunity to be raised to a perfect^ human condition
, those not accepting this great offer of mfcrcy being cut 
off in the second death. 

How beautifully clear and Scriptural it all is to me now! 
In view of all that I now see clearly, and which I fully believe, 
I cannot remain in a church which would prevent my expressing
 these views. I should be looked upon as a heretic. 
I also believe that there should he no division in the church; 
it should be one body of consecrated believers — Christ being
 the Head, and the little groups being the congregations; 


[6112J 


July 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(206 20/) 


as we read in the Greek; the congregation at Corinth, Philippi, 
etc. 

Mr. A and I are therefore identifying ourselves with 

these followers of Christ, who we believe are more nearly 
keeping to the simple form our Savior instituted. You remember
, Dr. , there was no recorded membership in the 

early church — take instance after instance in the book of the 
Acts, and there is no word of such an arrangement; there was 
only a bond between Christ and the believer. I believe out of 
a recorded membership many evils grow. 

We meet Sunday morning and evening for worship and 
have the mid-week prayer and testimony meeting, so surely 
we are not neglected. 

You mentioned in conversation with me that Pastor Russell
 teaches that Christ is a created being. Yea, do not the 
Scriptures so teach? For instance, Rev. 3:14, which says that 
he was "the beginning of the creation of God"? 

NoW as to the last matter mentioned. You will recall, 
perhaps, that my reason for leaving the People's Church was 
the disreputable character of the minister. Leaving there almost
 cost me the loss of my class of young men, of whom, 
as you know, I was extremely fond, yet I could not stand 

for this. You may rest assured, therefore, that Mr. A 

and I have been and are fully convinced, after a very careful 
investigation of all the evil things that have been brought 
against Pastor Russell, that these accusations are wholly false. 
If one will take the trouble and time to inquire into many of 
the evil reports one hears of others, he will as a rule find 
them to be untrue. You remember our Savior's words: "Woe 
unto you when all men speak well of you!" "If any man will 
live godly in this life he shall suffer persecution." "If they 
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more 
shall they call them of his household!" 

It is my sincere desire that with an unprejudiced mind you 
may look into this matter for yourself, letting God's Spirit 
guide you into all truth. With sincere appreciation of your 
kind offer of friendship for us both, I am 

Yours sincerely, . 

HARVESTING IN MEXICO 
Dear Brethren: — 

In Bending you this letter, I desire to tell you of my, joy 
in the precious message which brought light to my mind — 
this precious light which has come to awaken us out of the 
sleep in which we were, to recognize the presence of the Great 
Anointed of Jehovah, who will be the King, both of the living
 and of those sleeping in the tomb. 

This message has completely changed my plans. 1 was 
thinking of studying medicine; but since I have come to 
know of the glorious work of our Head and his glorious 
body during the Millennium, already begun, I have changed 
from medicine such as men teach, to the great plan of God. 

I came here to this place with the object of presenting the 
glad tidings to the Indians who live here. Yesterday I gave 
them an explanation of the plan of the ages, with a chart 
given to me by Brother Moreyra, of San Antonio, Texas. 
After the talk, I distributed copies of the Bible Students' 
Monthly, and took a note of those who wished to have books 
on the Divine Plan and the Scenarios, These persons already
 number fifteen. 

In the evening I celebrated the Memorial Supper of our 
Lord, in which several brethren took part. May the Lord 
give me more of his spirit, that I may be faithful to my 
vow, renewed on partaking of the symbols of his body and 
his blood, offered for our benefit. 

This morning, I gave another explanation of the divine 
plan, the brethren having been very desirous of hearing it. 
On concluding, I distributed more B. S. M.'s. In these places, 
as in many others in Mexico, the sickle of the Lord has not 
yet been put in for the ingathering of the wheat, which is 
scattered in many places. I thank the Lord for this grand 
blessing granted me of participation in the work of the harvest. 
Truly, "the harvest is great, but the laborers are few!" 

I am in expectation of receiving literature for which I 
asked Brother Montero of Los Angeles, to distribute at once. 

I beg that you will be so good as to send me a copy of 
the second edition of the Memorial number of The Watch 
Toweb of the pilgrimage here of our dear brother, Pastor 
Russell, whom I had not the pleasure of knowing in this life, 
but whom T hope to see, by the grace of God, in the glorious 
kingdom of our Savior Jesus Christ. For the moment, I want 
to know more of his character, so full of zeal for our Redeemer
 and the brethren, and of his ardent zeal in the upholding
 of the truth at all costs. The portion of his life which he 
left in the Studies in the Scriptures has been for me a 
powerful influence. All we who love him rejoice to know that 
he is already participating in the joy of our Lord. 


With Christian love, and praying the Father of mercies that 
he may bless you richly in the precious work that is in your 
hands, 

Your brother in the Lord, Abel Ortega. — Mexico. 

FAITH IN GOD VS. FAITH IN OHBISTENDOM 
Dear Brethren: — 

We are taking this opportunity of conveying our love to 
you in the Lord. We almost feel as if we were intruding 
on your time in writing you; but as no reply is expected, it 
would perhaps be a little relaxation for you to know how 
we are getting along over here. Our great thanks go out to 
Almighty God for his great goodness in permitting us to bask 
in the light of his glorious revelation as contained in the 
divine Word, when many others are in darkness. We realize 
that every good and perfect jjift cometh from the Father, and 
rejoice that Pastor Russell has been favored above so 
many to unfold to the household of faith the things both new 
and old from the divine storehouse. 

We are truly living (( in the days of the Son of Man," and 
we in this country are receiving at the present time many 
evidences of the establishment of the kingdom, and that the 
adversary has but a short time in power. We would like 
you to know that our faith in God, in spite of the dark 
clouds on the world, is increasing in contrast to the faith 
in Christendom, which is almost at vanishing point. 

The classes in Liverpool and district are, we consider, in 
a healthy condition, and all the dear brethren are eager to 
cooperate in the harvest work. We have had a number of 
productions of the Photo-Drama here and in this vicinity, 
and with the "follow-up" meetings our time has been very 
well occupied. The seating accommodation at our Sunday 
meeting-place in the city is limited and prevents us from having
 as large attendance as we would like. Our efforts to get 
another place have been unsuccessful. 

We are now every second or third month having what 
we call "home gatherings," when all the brethren in the 
suburbs, etc., join in a combine meeting. On the last occasion
 we had the use of the Deutsche Church {it not being 
in use on account of so many being interned), and we had 
an attendance of about 300. We have, regularly, afternoon 
and evening meetings every Sunday in five places in the 
district, and seventeen week-night meetings. Then we have 
also calls upon us for "follow-up" meetings in districts beyond
 our own. 

Last year we had a convention under the auspices of the 
Society, resulting in a most uplifting time for all. We would 
like another if we can induce the London friends to move; 
and we are still hopeful that we may succeed. There are, of 
course, no excursion fares here since the outbreak of the war, 
but everybody is employed, and money is being spent freely. 
We have a nice number of young men in our meetings; and as 
you know, they are under a severe test just now. I am pleased 
to say that their faith in him to whom they have consecrated 
themselves is unwavering, and they aTe prepared to show their 
loyalty to the Lord even unto death, and despite all the pressure
 that may be brought to bear upon them by the powers that 
were. We think that the British thinking people are being 
sobered by this war now. Of course, we know that we are 
the Lord's peculiar care, and that no evil can befall us, everything
 being of his permission. 

And now, with much love in the Lord from Sister McCloy, 
myself and all our household, T remain 

Your fellow-servant in the Lord, 

Thomson McClot, — England. 
TROTH STANDS MAJESTIC AS THE GLUTS 
Dearly Beloved in Christ: — 

I received your kind letter telling me of Pastor Russell's 
death. He rests from his labors and his works do follow. 
How true this is of him! My daily prayer before the throne 
of grace is that we may be strong enough to carry out the 
noble work he has left us to do. We should endeavor to grow 
stronger all the while; for it does seem as if the blessed 
Master thought we were able to carry on this grand work now 
which was so well done by our dear, faithful Pastor, 

How many times daily do I thank our dear Master for 
sending us such a teacher as our beloved Pastor was! We 
will certainly miss him, although it had never been my pleasure
 to meet him. I always looked forward to having the 
pleasure of doing so sometime. 

We are very isolated here — no one of like precious faith. 
They will not even let one of the pilgrims speak here. It 
makes life almost unbearable. My daughter is such a good 
Bible student and longs to get near some class. I am trying 
to teach the truth to all my little ones, and we have our 
music in our home every eve. Pray for me, for it is a great 
undertaking it guide these little feet alone, I have been a 


[6113] 


(207-212) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


widow for three years and I need your prayers, and be assured
 you have mine daily. 

Let us go on with this grand work until, like our Pastor, 
we hear the sweet words, "Well done." May we be just as 
well prepared as he was, and I feel all will go well for us. I 
am always so glad to hear from the Bethel Home. 

Please pardon me for taking so much of your time, but 
I feel as if I must tell you a little of my life experiences and 
how I came into present truth. It was just a short time 
before my husband's death — about a week, 1 suppose. We 
were in the South for my husband's health, when one day a 
book agent came to my house. I would not talk to him at 
first, but I saw the title "Watch Tower" on a paper in his 
pocket, and immediately became interested, because several 
years before I had seen and read some of them, but could 
never get any more. 

We bought the hooks and my husband would have mo 


read to him from them. He did not live more than one week 
afterwards. So I have found a great deal of comfort from 
the books. The man who Bold to me was a dear, good pilgrim, 
ire came back to our house when he heard of my husband's 
death, and gave a lecture, and I found more relief from the 
sweet, simple story, the way he told it, than ever before; and 
I have been tried as by fire since coming into the light. But 
the truth stands out as majestically as the cliffs along the 
shore that are lashed by the waves. When the furious storms 
abate, the clifTs are there just the same. So it is with me; 
when my people and my friends turn me down, the truth 
stands there just as plain as ever, and I can say, "Why can 
1 hey not are, too? 1 ' Oh, what a joy to know that I have come 
from dirkness into <day! God bless you and keep you all, i^ 
the prayer of 

Your humble servant, Mrs. Anna Brockweix. — Mo, 


Vol, XXXVTTT 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JULY 15, 1917 


No. 14 


OUR "BLESSED HOPE" 

Waiting for that blessed hope, even the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ.*' — Titus 2:13. — 

Diaglott. 


St. Paul here speaks the sentiment of his own heart and 
that of every truly consecrated child of God who is waiting 
for the full consummation of his hope and for the appearing 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he might be with him forever in 
glory. Hope and faith are inseparably allied, for there can 
be no real hope without a well-grounded faith. 

Hope means a keen desire for a good thing, with the expectation
 of receiving that thing, and with the belief that 
when received it will afford great joy and pleasure. We do 
not hope for a tiling which we do not wish, but for that which 
we greatly desire. There must be, however, a sound basis for 
that hope; for without some sure foundation upon which to 
build there could be no continuing, abiding hope of receiving
 the good thing. 

What is it that all intelligent creatures most desire? 
All will answer, "Life everlasting in a state of perfect happiness
." Yet there might be a strong desire for life, and no 
hope whatever of receiving it. But in due time all will have 
an opportunity to obtain life everlasting. 

THE HOPE SET BEFORE THE CHRISTIAN 

For what great thing, then, do we now as children of 
God hope? What do we expect to receive? And to what 
are we looking forward with rejoicing? Is it that we might 
wield a golden sceptre and exercise power over others? 
No; for that would be selfish ambition. Is it that we might 
be like unto the angels? No; for we are not called to Sat 
position. Or that we might get away from this earth and 
thus see greater things than others of God's human creatures 
see? Could any such hope inspire with zeal and love and 
willingness to sacrifice everything else to obtain it? Without 
the one great thing for which we really hope, all other things 
would fail of accomplishment. 

Standing as we are today in the very last hours of the 
Gospel age — a fearful and wonderful time in which to live — 
and looking back over the way we have traveled, we as children
 of GotLdo well now to pause and with sobriety of mind 
ask, W T hy do w T e find ourselves in our present position? Behind
 us we have left earthly home3, earthly friends, earthly 
hopes and prospects, earthly umbitions and desires. What 
is the reason? With one accord we answer, Because of the 
blessed hope that is set before us. And what is this hope? It 
is that we might have life pverlasting on the divine plane; that 
we might see and be like Jesus, who redeemed us from death 
and called us out of darkness into the glorious light; and that 
we might behold Jehovah in his grandeur, receive his loving 
smile and hear his words of approval. 

If we have such a hope as this, there must be good reason
 for it. How could imperfect creatures such as we dare 
have so wonderful a hope? It is not because there is merit 
in us deserving of such great favor, but because God in his 
loving-kindness has made provision that we might have this 
wonderful blessing, because he has promised it to those who 
exercise faith in his great arrangement and who strive with 
joyful hearts to obey his rule and comply with the terms that 
lead to a consummation of such a hope. Therefore the basis 
for that hope is faith in the exceeding great and precious 
promises of God. 

The Apostle Paul advises us that "faith is the basis of 
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." There 
might be a hope based upon vague and uncertain testimony, 
but such a hope would not bring joy; for it would not bring 
full assurance of receiving that for which we hoped, Hence 


the importance of seeing that our hope has a sure foundation
. Many who claim to be Christians say, "We hope to go 
to heaven*'; yet they are filled with fear and superstition. They 
have no desire for the second coming of the Lord and hi3 
glorious revealment. They do not possess that blessed hope 
which yearns for the coming of the day when they shall see 
him face to face. The reason for this is that what hope' they 
have is based upon credulity, and not upon faith. 

A hope that is based upon credulity merely has the word 
or opinion of another as to what the future holds. A hope 
that is based upon faith has the unimpeachable promise of 
the everlasting God that the things for which the Christian 
hopes are absolutely certain if he continues faithful unto the 
end. 

BEGINNING OF OUR HOPE 

Since no one can have hope without faith, so none can 
have faith without knowledge. "Faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God." It therefore follows that the 
one who knows not of God cannot have the blessed hope mentioned
 by St. Paul in our text. The Apostle points out our 
original condition, and then shows us how we are led to this 
blessed hope. "Wherefore, remember that ye being in time 
past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision by 
that which is called the circumcision in the flesh made by 
hands, that at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens 
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants
 of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world ; 
but now in Christ Jesus ye who sometime were afar off are 
made nigh by the blood of Christ" — Ephesians 2:11-13. 

The hope of the Christian is progressive. First he has 
the desire to live everlastingly. He hears the words of Jesus, 
saying, "I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; no man 
cometh unto the Father but by me" (John 14:6) ; and, "This 
is life everlasting, that they might know thee, the only true 
God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3) 
This knowledge gained from the Word inspires a hope that he 
might attain unto this life. 

The hope of many is that they may escape eternal torment
. Such is not the Christian's hope. That could not be 
a hope attended with joy such as is contemplated by the text. 
Having now gained some knowledge of the way leading to 
life, such an one begins to progress in hope; and to him the 
Apostle says, "This is the promise that he hath promised us. 
even eternal life." (1 John 2:25) Thus the searcher for 
truth sees that eternal life is promised to some, He may ask, 
Why do not all have life everlasting? The Scriptures answer, 
Because death — the absence of life — is the penalty for sin ; 
our first parent brought this penalty upon us by disobedience; 
and by inheritance we are all now imperfect. Our present 
hope is insured by the fact that Jehovah, tnrough Christ 
Jesus, has made provision for the satisfaction of that one offense
 of Father Adam's. "For if by one man's offense death 
reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of 
grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by 
one, Jesus Christ. Therefore, as by the offense of one judgment
 came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the 
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto 
justification of life."— Rom. 5:17, 18. 

StTCH A HOPE DEPENDENT UPON CONDITIONS 


WTiile Jehovah has made provision that all who are 
obedient to his law may live everlastingly upon some plane, yet 

[6114] 


July 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


{2\2 2\$) 


he has set this blessed hope before a limited number and 
has made it dependent upon their compliance with certain 
conditions. What are the conditions? We answer: They 
are (1) Faith in the merit of the precious blood of Jesus; (2 J 
■ Justification ; (3} Spirit-begetting; (4) Sanctification; (5) 
Transformation; (6) Suffering and tribulation. Ultimately 
comes the realization of the hope — the receiving of the glory 
of God. Let us consider these conditions in the order named, 
to the end that our hope may be strengthened. 
FAITH IN JESUS' BLOOD 

Tt ha3 pleased God to arrange that those who may entertain 
this blessed, hope shall base that hope upon the merit of Christ. 
Every doctrine is to be tested by the ransom-sacrifice. It is 
the square, the infallible rule, by which we are to measure 
every doctrine that is presented for our investigation. If we 
find that any doctrine does not square with the ransom-sacrifice
, we may be absolutely certain that such doctrine is false. 

The Apostle Paul presents this argument: "Moreover, 
brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto 
you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand; by 
which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what 1 have 
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain. For I 
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how 
that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures; and 
that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day, according
 to the Scriptures ; and that he was seen of Cephas, 
then of the twelve; after that he was seen of above five hundred
 brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain unto 
the present time, but some are fallen asleep. After that he 
was seen of James; then of all of the apostles. And last of 
all, he was seen of me also, as of one born before the due 
time." (1 Cor. 15:1-8) Faith in the shed blood of Jesus 
means a recognition that we are sinners by nature; that Jesus 
died to save us from our sins ; that he rose again and appeared
 in the presence of God for us. Knowing these facts, 
and relying on them, we have faith. 

JUSTIFICATION FOLLOWS 

Justification means to be made right with God. Nothing 
imperfect is right with God. Before we can be justified, however
, some one must stand for us and make up for our deficiencies
. After Jesus had ascended on high, he appeared 
in heaven and presented the merit of his sacrifice on behalf 
of all who should come to Jehovah through him during the 
age of sacrifice. (Hebrews 9:24) If we believe and rely upon 
these facts, and present ourselves in full consecration by surrendering
 our will to do God's will, our Lord Jesus imputes 
to us a sufficiency of hia merit to make up our deficiencies. 
Thus we stand before God as perfect human beings, and he 
counts to us, or imputes to us, righteousness, thereby justifying
 us. — Romans 4:1-11. 

"It is God that justified." This justification is granted 
upon condition that we become a part of the sacrifice of the 
body of Christ. Therefore our consecration must precede our 
justification. God now accepts us and begets us by his own 
spirit to the divine nature. As St. Paul puts it: ''Therefore, 
being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have access by faith into 
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory 
of God. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also; 
knowing that tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience
, and experience hope; and hope maketh not ashamed, 
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the 
holy Spirit which is given unto us." — Romans 5:1-5. 

According to St. Peter, all such are begotten to a hope of 
life through Christ Jesus, "to an inheritance incorruptible 
[which means the divine nature! and undefiled, reserved in 
heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation, ready to be' revealed in the last time." — 
1 Peter 1:3-5. 

SANCTIFICATION NEXT IN ORDER 

Sanctification means to be completely set apart for the 
purpose of Jehovah, according to his holy will. "This is the 
will of God [concerning you], even your sanctification." (1 
Thess. 4:3) Now, we have left all to follow in- the footsteps 
of the Lord Jesus, obeying the Father's will, saying as did 
our Master, "Lo, I come to do thy will, my God!" This 
setting aside of ourselves to do the Father's will means that 
now, as new creatures, we shall walk in newness of life while 
in the flesh, the complete sanctification, or setting aside, being 
when we have received our glorious new bodies in the first 
resurrection. But how is this sanctification to be accomplished
? The Lord Jesus said, "Sanctify them through thy 
truth; thy Word is truth."— John 17:17. 

THE TRANSFORMATION PROCESS 

The transformation is the process of bringing us to full 
and complete sanctification, preparing us and making us meet 


for the Master's use in glory. St. Paul exhorts, "Be not conformed
 to this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing
 of your mind, that ye may prove [try — put to the test] 
what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God." 
(Romans 12:2) The transformation into the likeness of our 
Lord is accomplished by feeding upon the Word of God, appropriating
 it to ourselves, and having our characters developed
 in harmony with the* principles thereof. For this 
cause the exceeding great and precious promises are given. 
When we enter the narrow way, we begin to hear the words of 
the Lord saying to us, "All things heretofore written were for 
your learning, that ye through patience and comfort of the 
Scriptures might have hope." (Romans 15:4) And thus we 
see that our hope increases as we feed upon the blessed Word 
of promise. 

For our benefit the Psalmist has said, "Thou hast seized 
hold of me by thy right hand ; with thy counsel thou wilt 
guide me, and afterwards take me to glory." (Psalm 73:23, 
24 — Leeser) Jesus is the right hand of Jehovah here mentioned
; his Word by which we are sanctified is his counsel; 
arid thus being led on we shall be received into glory — xhe full 
consummation of that blessed hope! Again the Lord through 
the Psalmist said, "I will instruct thee and teach thee in the 
way which thou shalt go; I will guide thee with mine eye" 
(Psalm 32:8} The eye is a symbol of wisdom; and his wisdom
 is expressed in his Word. Thus by his Word he leads us 
on to a fuller appreciation of our blessed hope. 

Again we read, "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, 
and lean not unto thine own understanding; in all thy ways 
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Proverbs 
3:5, 6) "And thine ear shall hear a voice behind thee, saying
, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the left." 
(Isaiah 30:21) The voice here mentioned is the Word of 
God, written before we knew of it, before we were born ; therefor
 it is said to be behind us. Thus he assures us again that 
he will guide us by his Word. s 

This transformation comes to us gradually, as one beholding
 the Lord's face in a mirror. St. Paul says, "But we 
all, with open face, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the 
Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, 
even as by the spirit of the Lord," — 2 Corinthians 3:18. 
TRIBULATION AND SUFFERING NECESSARY 

But this wonderful transformation does not come to us 
with ease and comfort; for, as the Apostle says, "Through 
much tribulation must we enter the kingdom." (Acts 14:22) 
"It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall 
live with him; if we suffer with him, we shall reign with 
him." (2 Timothy 2:11, 12) We shall experience that blessed 
hope, "if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the 
hope firm unto the end." (Hebrews 3:0) Who would care 
to enter the kingdom of the Lord amidst ease and comfort 
when our Lord endured such great suffering on our behalf? 
Truly the poet has expressed the sentiment that should be in 
every Christian's heart: 

"Must I be borne to Paradise 
On flowery beds of ease, 
While others fought to win the prize, 
And sailed through bloody seas? 

"Sure I must fight if I would reign ; 
Increase my courage, Lord; 
I'll bear the toil, endure the pain, 
Supported by thy Word." 
SOME THINGS THE CHRISTIAN MUST SUFFER 

Any suffering that is endured for righteousness' sake 
may be counted as profitable. Physical suffering often results 
from faithful service. For instance, the feet of the dear colporteurs
 grow tired and sore from long journeys and the entire
 body becomes w T orn and weary. /Phis suffering results 
from faithful efforts in trying to deliver the message of God's 
love to others of the groaning creation. Faithfulness in any 
branch of the Lord's service brings physical suffering, and one 
may be said to be laying down life in the cause of the Master 
when faithfulness in service entails suffering and destroys 
(physical vitality, and energy. But the glorious hope set before
 the Christian impels him on, and fills his heart with joy 
when he contemplates the Psalmist's words: ''Precious in the 
sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." — Psa. 116:15. 

Sometimes one suffers mental anguish because of his own 
fault or mistake. The new creature resides in an imperfect 
earthen vessel and is striving to overcome the weaknesses and 
besetments of the flesh. Failures result; and there is much 
suffering of mind, and sometimes the disposition to feel that 
he has been cast off from the Lord's favor. Hope, however, 
revives vfhen he calls to mind the precious promises of the 
Lord : "If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, 


[6116] 


(213-214) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKtYH, K. V. 


Christ Jesus the righteous." "Let us therefore come confidently 
unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need." (1 John 2:1; Hebrews 4:16) 
"Blessed are they that mourn ; for they shall be comforted." — 
Matt 5:4. 

Being misunderstood is the cause of much suffering. So 
it was with the Lord himself. Of him it was written, "I 
have trodden the wine-press alont, and of the people there were 
none with me" (Isaiah 63:3) — because they could not understand
 him. Even so it is with those who are his followers. 
They are misunderstood by the world, and often misunderstood
 by the brethren. One may try to do right in the faithful
 performance of his duty. Being misunderstood by another 
brother, his motives are impugned. His brother may, therefore
, become a conscientious busybody and unwitting persecutor
. 

Trouble in the homes of the consecrated and in the classes 
is very frequently the result of a misunderstanding. Such experiences
 bring fiery trials. The church is now in the midst 
of experiences of this kind, and many think it strange. St. 
Peter responds, "Beloved, be not surprised at the fire among 
you, occurring to you for a trial, as though some strange 
thing was befalling you ; but as you partake of the sufferings 
of the Anointed One, rejoice; so that at the revelation of his 
glory you may rejoice exultingly." — 1 Peter 4:12, 13. — 
Diaglott. 

Because of the Christian's faithfulness in maintaining his 
stand for the principles of righteousness, he is persecuted; 
and such persecution would become unbearable, even overwhelming
, except for the blessed hope lhat is set before him. 
In the time of keenest suffering he calls to mind the precious 
words of the Master; "Blessed are they which are persecuted 
for righteousness' sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for* my 
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad ; for great is your reward 
in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before
 you."— Matthew 5:10-12. 

THE PURPOSE SERVED BY TRIBULATIOH 
Jesua proved his loyalty and obedience to the Father's 
will by the things which he suffered. "The disciple is not 
above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough 
for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as 
his lord/' (Matthew 10:24, 25) The Lord said concerning 
St, Paul, "For I will show him how great things he must suffer
 for my name's sake." (Acts 9:18) And so it is with all 
of the Lord's followers who would continue faithful unto the 
end. To be counted worthy of suffering implies that there is 
a glorious prospect in the future, that the Lord has in reservation
 some great prize. Inspired with such a blessed hope the 
Apostle wrote, "For our light affliction, which is but for a 
moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are 
seen, but at the things which are not seen." (2 Corinthians 
4:17, 18) They are the unseen things for which we hope. The 
Christian possessing such hope of glory rejoices in tribulation
, and therefore patiently endures the same. 

That our hope may grow brighter, our faith must grow 
stronger; and to accomplish this, trials, tribulations and tests 
must come. The Apostle likens our hope to an anchor. A 
ship tossed by the storm drops its anchor for safety. The 
anchor would be of no value without a strong line and a solid 
plaice in which to fasten the anchor. The anchor therefore 
represents our hope; the line or cable, represents our faith; 
and the sure fastening of the anchor is in the exceeding great 
and precious promises that God gives to assure us of entering 
into glory. As St. Paul says, "'Wherein God, willing more 
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability
 of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable
 things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, 
we might have a strong consolation, we who have fled for 
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us; which hope 
we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, 
and which entereth into that within the veil." (Hebrews 
Q:X7'l&) If our faith is strong in his precious promises, our 
hope of entering into life everlasting will be strong; and we 
shall be very desirous of knowing the rules whereby we may 
enter into the fulness of life and of conforming ourselves to 
those rules. 

WHAT ARE THE REQUIRED RULES? 
The Apostle Peter layer down these rules explicitly, saying
: "Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious 
promises, that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature
, having escaped the corruption that is in the world 
through lust. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to 
your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge 


temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience 
godliness; and to godliness brotherly-kindness; and to brotherly
-kindness love; for if these things be in you, and abound, 
they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful 
in the kuowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that 
lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath 
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. Wherefore 
the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and 
election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall." 
{2 Peter 1:4-10) Let us now measure ourselves to see how 
we are coming up to these rules. 

The Revelator says, "And he that talked with me had a 
golden reed to measure the City." (Revelation 21:15) John, 
the Revelator, pictured the church. The golden measuringrod
 represents the divine truths given to the church, whereby 
each member may measure himself. 

The first of these rules is a strong and abiding faith ; 
and to this the Apostle says add virtue, which means fortitude
, the standing firmly upon the precious promises and developing
 that Christian character which nothing can shake. 
To this we are to add knowledge, which means a knowledge 
of the exceeding great and precious promises. Having acquired
 this knowledge, we must rely completely thereupon; 
and this constitutes our faith in God s Word. Hence to grow 
in faith we must grow in knowledge. To these we are admonished
 to add temperance, meaning self-control, or moderation
 in all things. And to these we are to add patient endurance
, which is one of the crowning attributes of Christian 
character, and which results after many and severe trials of 
faith. We must learn to be patient with the babes in Christ, 
patient with those who are more fully developed, patient with 
the slow and stupid, patient with the excitable and quicktempered
, patient with the blundering ones, forbearing one 
another. To forbear means to be patient under provocation. 
The Lord permits these trials to come to us for the very 
purpose of developing the quality of patient endurance; and 
hence we find amongst our number some slow, some stupid, 
some excitable, many blundering, but all striving for one end, 
<all having the same blessed hope. These light afflictions, 
which endure but for a short season, serve to polish us and 
to make brighter the hope set before us, and ultimately lead 
to glory. 

The measuring-rule further requires us to develop godliness, 
which means a joyful and loving conformity to God's holy 
will, thereby proving our love for him, thus growing God -like. 
(1 John 5:3) Furthermore, the rules require the development 
of brotherly-kindness, which means duty love of the brethren, 
acquired by putting into operation the Golden Rule, Finally, 
says the Apostle, we must develop love in its highest form, 
which means an unselfish desire to do good and the doing of 
good to others at a sacrifice to ourselves. The putting on of 
such love leads to perfection. 

THE GLORY OF THE LORD 

If thus we continue diligently and faithfully to the end, 
what will be the result? The Apostle says: "For so an entrance
 shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting
 kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." Ah, 
what a wonderful blessing that will be — to be made in the 
likeness of our Lord and Master! The attaining of this glorious
 hope means to receive life everlasting, life inherent — immortality
. (1 John 3:2, 3; Colossians 3:3, 4) It means 
that we shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever and behold
 his beauty. In all the ages to come the members of the 
bride class will continue to increase in knowledge. (Psalm 
27:4) It means that those who reach this glorious consummation
 of their hope shall shine forth as the brightness of the 
sun in the firmament. — Matthew 13:43. 

Jesus is head over all things, and those who enter with 
him into the kingdom shall be joint-heirs with him of the 
glories and wonders of that kingdom. Concerning these the 
Prophet of the Lord has said, "Thou shalt be a crown of glory 
in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand 
of thy God." (Isaiah 62:3) With Christ Jesus, those who 
reach the fulness of this hope, shall bless and uplift the human
 race, shall wipe away all tears and bring joy to every 
obedient heart. As the poet has aptly said: 

"And thou with grace and glory crowned 
Mayest lavish blessings all around." 

Then, dear brethren, what shall we do? The Apostle 
answers: "He who hath this hope in him purifieth himself, 
even as he [the Lord] is pure." (1 John 3:3) None but 
the pure in heart can truly and honestly entertain this hope. 
When we speak of the pure in heart, we are not to be under- 


[6116] 


July IS, 1917 


THE WA TCH TO IV E R 


(215-220) 


stood as meaning perfect men and perfect women in the flesh, 
perfect in every word and act and thought; for we have God's 
Word that there are none such. But we know from his Word 
that the Lord makes up for our unwilling imperfections. Being
 thus grounded in the faith, and having set before us this 
glorious hope, we shall seek to cleanse ourselves from all 


filthiness of body and mind, perfecting holiness in the fear of 
the Lord. 

"But the blessed hope of sharing, Lord, 
Thy glory from above 
Is linked with that most precious thought — > 
Thine everlasting love." 


MANASSEH'S SIN AND REPENTANCE 

[The first ten paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Manasseh's Transgression and Repentance " published
 in issue of November 15, 1898. The last four paragraphs were reprinted from article entitled "A Dishonor to 
His Father," published in issue of July 15, 1905. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled ''Divine 
Justice and Mercy/* published in issue of June 15, 1911. Please see the articles named.] 


"How shall I praise thee, Savior dear, 

For this new life so sweet, 

For taking all the care I laid 

At thy beloved feet. 
Keeping thy hand upon my heart 
To still each anxious beat! 


MY BEST AND TRUEST FRIEND 


"Oh, thou hast done far more for me 
Than I had asked or thought! 

I stand and marvel to behold 

What thou, my Lord, hast wrought, 

And wonder what glad lessons yet 
I shall be daily taught," 


JOSIAH'S GOOD REIGN 


[The first paragraph of this article was reprinted from article entitled "The Lost Book Found," published in issue of November
 15, 1898. Paragraphs 2 to 10 inclusive were reprinted from article entitled "A Good Son of a Bad Father, " published
 in issue of August 1, 1905. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled ' ' A Godly Young Kinff ' ' 


published in issue of June 15, 1911 


Godly Young King, ' 
Please see the articles named.] 


FINDING THE BOOK OF THE LAW 

LThe first two paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "The Lost Book Found, M published in issue of 

November 15, 1898. The third, *— **■ — J -* s - ±1 - A - x — ■*■*- *-- --■■'■- * ....*'... .. - . 

'Thy Word Was Found, 
reprinted from article < 

the articles named.] 

THE COLPORTEUR FIELD 



"Thrust in thy sickle and reap; for the time is come for thee 

Below we present extracts from a typewritten bulletin issued
 by the Colporteur Department some time ago, and sent to 
all the workers in the field. Throughout the Winter over 300 
of this noble band of sacrificers have braved both storm and 
cold, and each month have received a bulletin from headquarters
, giving crisp and up-to-date information respecting 
conditions at home and abroad and containing advice and letters
 of special interest and comfort. This bulletin has served 
those afield so well, and proved to be such a blessing, that 
it has been thought well to continue it throughout the Spring 
and Summer. 

About three years ago there were upwards of a thousand 
colporteurs at work; but when the world-war broke out and 
disturbed business in every country for a time, many were 
obliged like St. Paul of old*, to resort to "tent-making** for a 
time. Now that business improvement is general, and colporteurs
 afield find wonderful opportunities for placing the 
message of the kingdom, and report their business good, we 
would not be surprised to see many of the veterans of this 
class return to their first love, remembering that "he that 
reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal." 
—John 4:36. 

"THE HARVEST IS WHITE" 

"The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few. 
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send 
forth laborers into his harvest." (Matthew 9:37, 38) While 
thus praying, let us each consider his share in the same and 
see if he cannot increase his efforts in forwarding the message 
in this, the most wonderful period of the age — when the world 
is waking up and signs are multiplying on every hand that 
the overthrow of the present order is fast approaching, to 
make ready for the new order of a thousand years of peace, to 
be inaugurated by Messiah's kingdom I Following are the extracts
 from the colporteur bulletin and a few letters from 
those afield: 
"Dear Fellow Servants in the Lord: — 

"What might be termed the Colporteur's Season begins in 
the Spring and continues throughout the year until the holidays
. During these months the colporteur usually obtains 
the best results. 

"The past year has been a prosperous one in the industrial 
world, likewise to the colporteur, for the success of the latter 
is usually proportionate to the success of the former. 

"Big business reports that 1917's outlook is not a shade 
less favorable than was the past year — in fact, promises to 
eclipse it. 

[61 


to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe." — Rev. 14:15. 

"As has been remarked in the previous monthly letters, 
increased interest in The Watch Tower publications is found 
everywhere, An Ontario colporteur writes: 'I find quite a 
number who bought the books some years ago, and have read 
them; others are interested with a talk on the coming kingdom
. I find many hearing ears.' 

"From New York State a colporteur writes: *It is a common
 occurrence to meet those who are reading the Studies 
and have sufficient interest to stand for the teachings even 
to endurance of persecution. The truth is finding its way 
into the hearts of the truly humble. 1 

"From Florida we hear: 'I find many who are disposed 
to give good attention to the message of present truth. 1 

"A California colporteur writes: 'I find a great many are 
more anxious than ever to obtain books written by Pastor 
Russell/ 

"From Washington come this: *Have found many interested
 ones who have read borrowed volumes or sermons.' 

"A Minnesota colporteur advises: 'I notice quite a difference
 in the attitude toward Brother Russell and his work. 1 

"A successful Virginia colporteur writes: 'Enclosed find 
an order for 100 hz (hell towers.) The reason I am ordering 
so many is that I use them in connection with my canvassing. 
I put about six in my pocket when I go out to canvass, and 
sell them for 5c each, or take orders. I have sold a few every 
trip. I show it only when people fail to order even Vol. I. 
They will often say, *1 don't believe in hell.* Then I explain
 what the pamphlet teaches, and they are anxious for it*' 

"From Arkansas we hear: *It is surprising to see how 
the people take to the Scenario — men, women and children. 
They seem able to comprehend it — the pictures interest them, 
and the lessons are short and condensed. One young man who 
had studied evolution was interested in the first lessons in 
the book on the creation of the earth. He said that he could 
not believe the earth was created in six twenty-four hour 
days. Another man told me he had a discussion with an 
infidel and answered all his objections from the Scenario; 
and now he carries it around with him and settles every 
argument with it.' 

"Another colporteur, ten years in the service, writes from 
Virginia: 'The past year has been the most blessed and successful
 of my ten and one-half years of colporteur service, 
not only in the sale of books, but also in the number of grains 
of wheat gathered. We have knowledge of several who now 
are rejoicing in present truth as a result of our recent la- 

17] 


(220 221) 


T HE W A T C H T W E R 


BROOKLYN, N. V. 


bors. it has been a very busy year. Often 1 am out evenings 
talking to the interested ones; and the present year bids fair 
to be as busy, if not more so. Many who are interested 
desire me to call again; and we are doing onr best to help 
them along.' 

"From (Hah we hear that 'the harvest work is great. Although
 not placing so many volumes, yet we find a, great many 
whose minds are opening up to the great truths of God's 
Word. I had a sweet experience canvassing a lady — was very 
busy, could hardly give me time. I left her a Do-You-Know? 
tract. The following day, when* I was going along the next 
block, one of her neighbors said, JUrs. Forshaw wants to see 
vou. When I met her she said, I read your tract through, 
and [ became so interested that I wanted'more. She ordered 
the six volumes.' 

"Another writes: 'About six weeks ago I called to see a 
lady who had attended the Photo- Dram a. She talked with 
me in her parlor; and a young man, her son, was in the room, 
but apparently engrossed in his newspaper. 1 told her about 
the books; and' finding her not inclined to buy, I told her as 
much as I could of the plan of God. When I arose to go, the 
young man put aside hia paper and said, 'I'll take the books.' 
I delivered them. lie has since read the six volumes, and is 
convinced that he now has the truth. Evidently he is in a 
consecrated condition, though from the world. He took the 
first volume to the Baptist minister, a~nd requested to be baptized
. The minister said that Russell was the greatest impostor
 of the 20th Century. lie did not join the minister's 
church. Then he wrote to Brooklyn to find if there were any 
interested in Boston; and you can imagine his joy when he 
sat in the hall with over 400 of like precious faith. I feel 
that we must be using every minute to spread the truth. People
 are hungry as never before. Thank God for the arrangement
 of the harvest work that gives us a share!" 

We append herewith a letter from our colporteur brother, 
Joseph Greig, which is self-explanatory: 

"Dear Friends: — Enclosed find letter replying to communication
 I had in a local paper. Have not called on the party 
as yet. I am of the same opinion as outlined in a recent 
Tower regarding the changing sentiments of the people. My 
letter also appeared in the Bes Moines Register. The newspapers
 present a bi^ field for feeling the public pulse. Brother 
Wood worth was quite successful along this line. 

Faithfully, Joseph Greig." 

Following is the letter referred to by Brother Greig: "Dear 
Sir: — I was much interested in reading your communication 
in tonight's Messenger. You are evidently a student of 
prophecy, in which I, too, am much interested. May I ask 
you to call and make yourself known to me, as I would surely 
like to meet you and have a talk with you. If you are a resident
 of , it might be that you would enjoy meeting with 

a small company of others who also are interested m the 


study of the future in the light of the Scriptures. Assuring 
you of my desire to meet you, and trusting that I may have 
the pleasure of your acquaintance in the near future, I am 
very sincerely, G. P. Allabd.— Iowa," 

Here is an inspiring letter from a couple who have been in 
the colporteur service for many years: 

"Dear Friends: — Greetings in the name of our dear Redeemer
. Enclosed please find Money Order for $ , for 

books ordered yesterday. Our territory has been worked over 
and over for the Studies. Now we are placing the Scenarios 
and the Mannas in the same homes where the Studies have 
been sold. People will read them who would not read the 
Studies. 

"Our hearts are being greatly refreshed in overcoming some 
of the bitter opposition against the truth. The dear Lord 
has given us great victory in overcoming the fear of what man 
might do to us. We never have experienced such joy and peace 

in the midst of bitter opposition. The little town of — 

has been greatly stirred by one of the D.IX's who tried to hinder 
the Lord's work. The dear Lord showed how he could use a 
weak, broken vessel to confound the wise. The D. D. tried to 
have a public burning of the Studies; but the people refused 
to cooperate. They said that we had been in their homes and 
had ^manifested a nice spirit; that our books seemed to be according
 to the Bible; and that they were going to read them. 
We know of only one burning the book thus far. We asked 
to have an interview with the D, T>. ; but he refused, saying 
that I would come with the intention of convincing him that 
he was wrong. This was the best advertisement he could have 
given us. Some of his flock said that his foundation was not 
very strong if he feared that one woman could upset him. 

"How -we pity these blind leaders! How glad we are that 
soon all the blind eyes shall be opened! We bore with him 
until he slandered our beloved Pastor's- character from the 
pulpit. Then we distributed 1,200 B. S. M/s— 'Why the Preachers
 Attack Pastor Russell.' We have also started a series of 
chart talks. We had twenty out at the first meeting; and they 
are anxious for us to continue the meetings. We are not strong 
physically, so cannot keep at the work as we would like. But 
we do thank the dear Lord for the little share he has given 
us in this glorious work, and we are looking forward to the 
time when in glory we can do his will perfectly. Continue to 
pray for us, as we do for you daily. With warmest Christian 
love to you all, 

(f Your3 in joyful service of our King/' 

J. & E. Hettenbaugh." 

"P. S. We want to thank the dear one who is helping the 
colporteurs materially — and the dear Lord, too." 

Prospective colporteurs should write us at once for information
 respecting territory, etc. Our Colporteur Department is 
keeping close watch upon the field, and from Bradstreet's and 
other sources is obtaining reliable information respecting conditions
 in practically every section of the country. 


REAL TEACHING OF BIBLE VS. THE CREEDS 

Deab Brethren: — 

I heard Brother Russell preach once at the London Tabernacle
; and though we shall never meet again in the flesh, his 
warm hand-grasp will never leave my memory. 

I was brought up a baptized member of the Calvinistic 
Presbyterian church of Ulster. When I reached manhood 1 
deliberately concluded that a God capable of dooming his creatures
 to eternal torture must be the essence of hate, and therefore
 unworthy the worship of any intelligent person. 

I had always been a student of the Scriptures, but the fixed 
ideas of the trinity, hell and human immortality with which 
I had been saturated, prevented my really understanding them. 
I therefore abandoned them as well as the Presbyterian creed, 
taking refuge in agnosticism and indifference. 

Passing through our showroom one day my attention was 
called by t]xe head clerk, who was a papist, saying, "This man 
<a colporteur) wants me to buy and read The Divine Plan 
or the Ages, which the priest would not let me read." 

Not being under such control, I bought the book. I read 
it and, noting its appeal to reason, I reread it, referring to 
the Scriptures cited. This induced a new study of the Bible, 
which proved to me that the crBeds, irrational and illogical 
in themselves, wholly misrepresent the plain Bible teaching. 

I then bought the other five volumes, which confirmed the 
strong impression created by the first one. I have since bought 
and circulated many copies among my friends. 

Invoking upon you the divine blessing, I remain 

Your fellow-servant, R. O. Lkbs. — Eng. 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


MAY THE KEYS BECOME INCBEASINGLY PBEOIOUS 

Dear Brethbej?:— 

The news that our beloved brother and pastor had been 
called away caused a deep impression amongst us. We realize 
our loss to be very great, the extent of which can be appreciated 
only by those who have enjoyed the same spiritual fellowship 
with him, and have learned to love hia words of sane counsel 
and exhortation as "meat in due season." Verily his ministrations
 to us, as "that faithful servant," have been characterized 
by unabating zeal and love; and we earnestly pray that his 
works (the result of faithful service and loyal devotion), the 
key which has unlocked so much of present truth, may become 
increasingly precious and more encouraging as the day of our 
deliverance draws nigh. 

As members of the I. B. S. A., we desire to assure you 
of our united, loyal and continued support in the work in 
which we have been privileged so far to engage; and we trust 
with increased vigor to accept the added responsibilities which, 
we understand, devolve upon every branch of the Society as 
the result of our great loss. 

Wfhile our hearts are wounded by our dear brother's removal
, we rejoice to think that his is the reward of the faithful
, and that he is now crowned at the hands of the dear 
Master, whom he loved and for whom he labored so much. -We 
pray that all our dear brethren will more zealously endeavor to 
emulate the beautiful examples which characterized his noble 
life, so that when the call shall come, each one may be found 
as faithful a follower of our dear Lord and Master. With 
much Christian love, 

Your brethren in Christ, Sydney Class. — Australia. 


[<U18] 


Jui» 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(222-223^ 


8EBI0US MISTAKE MADE BT SOME 

Dear Brethren : — In the issue of The Watch Tower of June 
1, 1916, article on "The Harvest Siftings/' page 172, is found 
this clear, concise statement, "The book, 'Food for Thinking 
Christians' (now out of print), published and circulated during 
the year 1881, 1 no longer commend, because it is less systematic 
and therefore leas clear than later publications." Then in the 
same article reference is made to two other publications, "The 
Three Worlds," and "Day Dawn," and answer is made to a 
suppositional question as to whether these are considered profitable
 books to loan to truth seekers. The reply is, "Certainly 
not!" Then aro given cogent reasons for the reply. It seems 
almost inconceivable that the clearness of the language could 
be misunderstood; but such is the fact. 

The issue of The Watch Tower (the Journal, not book) 
of Jan. 15, 1910, treats the subject of ''Where are the Dead?" 
— -likewise every text in the King James Version of the Bible, 
containing the word hell. This issue is usually referred to 
by the friends as the "Hell Tower." On the top margin of the 
front cover is the suggestive expression, "food for thinking 
christians." Now, how any thinking Christian could confuse 
this expression with the title of a book, I cannot imagine ; yet 
that is just what has resulted in some instances. 

To my astonshment some of the dear friends have told 
me that since the item above referred to in the tower of June 
1, 1916, came to their attention, they had burned the "hell 
towers" they had in their possession, 'thinking" that this was 
in line with the suggestion as noted. 

This matter seems of sufficient importance to merit your 
attention, in order to save some of the unthinking Cliristians
 from unwittingly cooperating with the enemies of the 
truth by burning what you commend and send forth for enlightening
 the blinded minds of Satan's dupes. 

With ever increasing love and abiding confidence in you, 
dear brethren, I am, by his kind favor, 

Your brother and fellow-servant in the Lord, 

W. M. Wisdom. — Pilgrim. 
AS TO THE DES&VING 

Frequently mention has been made in The Watch Tower 
regarding schemes worked by various people for securing 
alms or donations from the friends. We have recently received
 a number of letters, some of them enclosing missives 
from a person in Georgia. These letters have a very pitiful 
tone, and would naturally work upon the sympathies of any 
who are seeking to serve the Lord. A brother who recently 
made inquiries into the case writes as below. As we have 
suggested before, we believe that it would be wise for the 
friends to exercise more caution regarding solicitations for 
funds, by letter or in person. The brother's letter follows: 
Dear Brethren: — 

"The individual knew but very little about his Bible, could 
not locate the chapter (John 12:1) in which the lesson was 
to be found, knew nothing about consecration, etc. Would 
state further that the individual was given a cow by the 
readers of a paper published in Maine, called 'Comfort,' This 
cow keeps the family supplied with milk and butter, and is a 
source of income from a calf each year. They have a good 
house and fine garden spot, free of rent, and about three acres 
of very fertile land, rent free; and the County pays them $5 
per month. 

With much Christian love to each and all, and praying our 
Father's continued love and guidance upon you, 

Very sincerely yours in our dear Redeemer, 

Chas. Owens. — Tenn. 
RENEW VOWS WHILE SOME FALL AWAY 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

Words are inadequate to express to you dear ones the 
feeling of deep appreciation to you, for so kindly remembering
 us at this season. The beautiful hymn books were received
 this morning. The dear Lord has dealt so kindly with 
us, that our hearts are filled to overflowing. Pray for us; 
we need your prayers. We have renewed our vows, and as we 
see many who were once true and loyal fall from their steadfastness
, it drives us closer to the One who never forsakes his 
children. 

Truly your sisters and coworkers, 

Mrs. Ida Zallmanzig, Mrs. H, A. Varro. — Cat 
"WHAT HAVE I THAT I EH) NOT BEGETVE7" 
Dear Brethren: — • 

Greetings in the name of our Lord! 

Please find enclosed Postal Money Order for $ — , to 

be applied to the interests of the harvest work, wherever, 
according to your best judgment, it is most needed. I want 
to assure you of my cooperation in the future as in the past, 
and am glad to observe that the work is going grandly on. 
I am sure we are greatly encouraged with the thought that 

[61 


we did not merely consecrate until Brother Russell's death, 
but until our own death: "Be thou faithful unto death." 

Am still enjoying the Scripture Studies and Towers, 
written by dear Brother Russell's pen. The more I read 
them the more X feel my responsibility increases. We know 
the dear brother didn't write these things for fun nor form, 
but wrote them to impiess upon our minds the necessity for 
putting the admonitions into practice, if ever we expect to gain 
the kingdom. I assure you 1 appreciate his great labor of love 
as much as ever. 

Another thought: I feel I have been greatly privileged 
in the harvest work, yet I have never felt once that I have ever 
done enough; and no matter what I do in the service there is 
no praise coming to me; for ''what have I that I did not receive
?" We are assured that "the meek will he guide in 
judgment; the meek will he teach his way." 

I feel that there are three great tilings to cultivate — love, 
self-sacrifice and submission. How it makes us put forth 
every nerve to yield full submission! But we know that being 
submissive is the road to happiness- — and further, our great 
enemy is "Self." 

I trust 1 have not wearied your patience in the reading of 
this epistle, but it is some time since I have written the Society
, and thought a few words would be in order. 

Bear brethren, I assure you that all will have my prayers 
in future as I have offered them in the past, W T ith much 
Christian love, 

Yours by his grace, Mrs, Daniel F. Robinson. — Pa. 
"HIS WRITINGS OPENED THE BIBLE TO ME" 
Dear Brethren: — 

Though late, accept my heart's deepest sympathy in your 
great loss — it is also my loss — in the death of our beloved 
Pastor, C. T. Russell. What could replace on this earth. that 
pen, that eloquent voice, calling the world to Christ! For us 
it is deep grief, for him joy. What a glorious Christmas must 
have been his! Oh, that God in his mercy may raise one to 
continue his work! Not until the last day will it be known 
the numbers of souls he has been the means of bringing to God. 
As for me, his writings .have brought peace to my soul and 
opened the Bible to me as no preaching in the nominal church 
could ever do. 

Soon my earthly career will be run. Soon we shall be in 
the midst of the dreadful world-conflict, when God seems forgotten
. All the illusions of this world are passing away. 
What joy for us to know we shall be called upon! May the 
Lord Jesus strengthen us, so that our hearts may not fail, 
and that no matter where we may be, we shall be ready to 
give our testimony. 

May God comfort all the brothers and sisters .and assist 
them in carrying out our beloved Pastor's wishes. I remain, 

Your aged sister in the Lord, 

Susanna Rapple. — Ireland. 
LOYAIiTT AND EARNEST COOPERATION 
To the Friends at Bethel: — 

The passing away of "that servant" — loyal, loving, humble 
and faithful — -has deeply affected' the friends in the truth everywhere
. W 7 e all have great love for him and for the fruit of 
the spirit he displayed; but we appreciate the fact that those 
in the Bethel family must feel our Pastor's departure more 
keenly, having been so closely associated with him for so many 
years. 

The Philadelphia Ecclesia, therefore, by unanimous vote, 
extends to the Bethel family their great sympathy in this 
time of *mutual bereavement. We pray that our dear Lord 
will encircle you with his arms of love and give you that 
peace which passeth all understanding, At the same time we 
wish to assure you of our earnest desire to cooperate and to 
assist you in carrying Jorward the great work which our 
Lord has determined and has given to us through "that servant
." W T ith great Christian love, 

The Philadelphia Ecclesia. — Pa. 
"DECETvTNa AND BEING DECEIVED*' 
Dear Brethren: — 

I am enclosing herewith a clipping which is self-explanatory
. I thank you for mailing the Spiritism booklet. We 
have read it with much interest and profit. We are surprised 
at the extent to which Spiritism is spreading throughout the 
world. Not having seen any of the workings of professional 
spiritualists and mediums, we were inclined to disbelieve that 
they actually did the things which we read in the newspapers, 
W 7 hen I was a young man, thirty-three years ago, two of us 
sat at a seance with some professed mediums. When the working
 of the table began, some of us, by prearrangement, directed
 that the knocking indicate two of us to be the chief 
mediums, and it responded perfectly. This aroused the jealousy
 of the professed epi ritualists. Our seances were pro- 

191 


(223-210) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


longed and we met together all winter, often having fifty 
at our Sunday night meeting. This depleted the attendance 
at the village church. We had the table move around the 
room, had it stand on two legs, answer questions, and in this 
way we entertained doctors and bankers, who often sat with 
ua. However, strange as it may seem, we never thoroughly 
believed in it. 

Since reading, What Say the Scriptures About Spiritism
? we have been wondering whether one of the demons was 
assisting us in our seances at that time. Long since, we left 
the village, and have many times thought of how we used to 
talk and laugh over the events of the evening, and as to what 
the crowd would have done to us if they had found out our 
deception. And now comes the thought that perhaps we ourselves
 were the ones deceived. 

Very truly yours, S. P. Grabill. — Mont. 

[We are in receipt of other letters respecting the one published
 in The Watch Tower of March 15, page 93, and headed, 
"One of the Snares of the Fowler." We are not surprised 
that the persons mentioned foregoing were innocent of the 
power that operated the table at their seances. Hundreds of 
letters have come to us relating similar experiences. The object
 in moving the table and in answering the questions is 
doubtle&s intended to excite curiosity and to lead on to obsession
 and later to possession of both mind and body.] 

LOYALTY, LOVE AND STJPFOBT 
Dear Brethren: — 

We have noticed the many letters published in The Watch 
Tower encouraging you and assuring you of the hearty support
 of the writers. The fact that such a letter has not been 
sent by the Chicago class should not be construed to mean that 
those letters do not express our attitude nor that we have 
been so long in determining what stand we would take with 
regard to the changes necessitated by the passing from our 
midst of dear Pastor Russell. 

It will be remembered that one of our elders, when speaking
 at the funeral service of Pastor Russell, expressed the attitude
 of the Chicago class with reference to the matter. However
, it has been thought well by the cjass to approve the matter
 by vote. This was done by a unanimous vote, and the 
secretary was instructed to write you assuring you of our 
hearty sympathy and prayers according to the Vow and earnest
 cooperation to the extent of our ability and opportunity. 
The trial and testing of the church in general seems to be 
progressing with growing intensity, as we should expect, and 
therefore we need the sympathy and aid of eaeh other and, 
realizing that as you have the greater responsibility you would 
also have the greater trial, we want to especially assure you of 
our loyalty, love and support in prayer and all possible ways. 

Yours in Christ, A. L. Seeley.— III. 

"CHART OF THE AGES" 
Dear Brethren: — 

Why not tell speaking brethren through The Tower of 
the great advantage in using the chart in nearly all public 
lectures? Nearly all of the brethren seem "afraid to touch the 
chart" with a pointer. Sometimes we almost feel that the 
public learn more by looking at the chart than from what the 
average class lecturer has to say. That chart, with its Millennial
 age, is a wonderful, Lord-given asset in publw exposition
, and we think should be used more. Brother Russell was 
very favorable to its use. Cannot you get it used more? The 
chart interests the public readily, when it is used, which is very 
seldom. With much Christian love, 

Your brother in the service of the King of kings, 

C. W. Gebdes.— Cal. 
"LET HTM DO WHAT SEEMETH HIM GOOD" 

Beloved Brethren: — 

I want to tell you that the article in The Watch Tower, 
under the heading, "Harvest Gatherings and Sittings," has 
done me a lot of good. I think that it was timely. I had 
heard of some of the things told in this article, but in a disconnected
 way. Now I am better able to look back with 
you and see the winding path which it pleased ! the Lord to 


cause Brother Russell to tread. There is nothing that he 
has said that should be an offense to any. As for myself, I 
am one of those in whom Psalm 1 19-: 165 is fulfilled. I love 
"his law/' I have "great peace," and nothing "shall offend" 
[stumblej me. But as I now note more clearly the Lord's 
providential leadings in the winding, thorny [and yet flowery] 
path in which he had been walking, lo, these many years, my 
heart goes out further to you. My own experiences in the 
painful and joyous winding way cause me to understand and 
to sympathize more deeply. 

I have noted how the Lord at different times in the past 
has delayed different publications, for a wise purpose known 
only to himself at the time of their delay. And although I 
already knew that it was he who was delaying the publication 
of the Seventh volume, I now know it still better, and am 
the better prepared to wait for it. "It is the Lord, let him do 
what seemeth him good." I think there is no doubt that we 
have reached another juncture of the harvest period, in which 
special sifting and testing will take place, and that our hearts 
will again be pained by the various experiences — the parting 
with some friends, etc. But, if it shall prove so, again we say, 
"It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good." 

Yours in his peace and love, waiting for the kingdom, 

Alex. Evans. — Lowauina. 
THINKS THE STONES WOT7LD CBT OUT 
Dearly Beloved Brethren; — 

Often have I felt like writing to you, but knowing of your 
busy life, I have refrained from domg so. 1 can now keep 
silent no longer, as I feel that the very stones around me 
would cry out. I thank my God daily for Pastor Russell and 
for the grand work that he has done in conjunction with his 
beloved colaborers. 

Now that we are in the midst of the evil day, we hourly 
feel the unspeakable benefit of an intellectual understanding 
of God's glorious plan of salvation, when all the conceivable 
wiles of the adversary are at work to deceive, if it were possible
, the very elect. 

As a worthy instrument in the hand of Almighty God 
Pastor Russell has led the little flock in the four corners of 
the earth, and patiently shown them how to adjust the 
"panoply of God," Many are the staunch and loving hearts 
that beat in South Africa for him today-^both black and 
white — and who, in the name of Jesus (that sweetest name in 
heaven or on earth) bless the day that by God's command he 
directed the footsteps of our honored and deeply loved pilgrim 
brother W. W. Johnston to our shores. His grand example in 
laying down his life for Christ and the brethren, no less than 
that of our late and much beloved Pastor, has been an everincreasing
 daily inspiration to us, 

May the Eternal God always be your refuge, and may his 
everlasting arms enfold you and finally take you to himself, 
when your work on earth for him is done! 

With loving devotion, we have the privilege to subscribe 
ourselves by the grace of God, 

Your brother and sister in the Lord, 

Edw. W, and Mabel A. H, Gamble. — 8. Africa. 
"SCBXPTOBE STUDIES*' CHANGED HIS WHOLE XJFB 

Dear Brethren: — 

While sending for supplies, as contained on separate sheet, 
I wish to express, as best I can, the void felt by the writer 
and no doubt by every member of the Bible Students in the 
loss sustained in the death of our beloved Pastor, Brother 
Russell. For the past ten years I have feasted on the words 
of counsel as well as upon the opened Bible as set forth in 
the Scrtpture Studies. Could I have known myself thirty 
years ago as I now understand myself, what a different life 
I would have led! Words fail to express the uplift in character
 his teachings have produced. I am now close on to three 
score and ten, and there remains but a brief time at most 
when I hope to meet him. In the meantime, I am striving to 
so run as to win the prize which his teachings pointed out, in 
the Bible. In love and in the one hope, I am 

Your brother, B. B, Chandler. — Calif. 


SHIPPING DIFFICULTIES 

Since the declaration of war the railroads and other transportation
 companies are practically under the control of the 
Government. Shipping of war supplies and food will have 
preference to all other shipments. We therefore suggest that 
all classes engaged in the pastoral work, colporteur work 


and all persons using quantities of Studies in the Scriptures 
order sufficient books, literature, etc., to meet the probable 
needs for six months or more, if possible. These books, etc., 
might be stored at the various class headquarters and supplied 
to the members of the class and others as they may desire. 


The 


PILGRIM SERVICE FOR COLORED BRETHREN 


Society takes pleasure in announcing that a pilgrim service should be made to the Society; and the brother will 

brother who is able to serve and is well qualified can be sup- be assigned in due course of time. This is without expense 

plied by the Society for the purpose of serving the colored to the brethren, it being understood, of course, that local 

brethren in various parts of the country. Requests for such brethren will be pleased to entertain the pilgrim brother. 

[6120] 


OUR UNDER SHEPHERD 


"0 Under Shepherd of the flock, 

Thou who didst safely keep 
The little ones of God's dear fold 

While hirelings lay asleep, 
Thy watch upon the mountain side 

Is o'er ; and thou hast 
Within the palace of the King, 

With glory crowned at last! 

"Thy lot, faithful one, was hard; 

Sharp were the rocks that tried 
Thy weary feet, when thou didst search 

The rugged mountain side 
For those poor, hungry lambs who strayed 

Far from the Bafe, warm fold, 
Led by the hireling's careless voice 

Into the darkness cold! 

"The Master's staff was in thy hand; 

The Master's rod was thine; 
They comforted the weary sheep, 

They spoke the Word divine. 
They led through thorns and briers rude 

The weakest and the worst, 
Who wandered, in their blindness, far 

In paths of sin accursed. 


"No burning lake of awful fire 

Did thy keen eye discern 
To frighten timid little lambs, 

And faith to terror turn; 
But up the mountain's rugged height, 

A path that ever led 
From darkness into that clear light 

Where dwells our living Head. 

"Beyond the shadows thou hast climbed, 

But still thy clear voice calls: 
'Press onward, little flock, thy God 

Is true; no ill befalls 
The sheep who walk the narrow way, 

The way the Master trod, 
The way which seems all loneliness, 

But where Faith's eye sees God! 1 

"The shadows o'er that mountain top 

Will lift ere long; and we 
Who follow on shall find him there. 

And with him Christ shall see. 
O thou great Shepherd of the flock, 

Whom we, like him, adore, 
Be with us till at last we meet 

To sever nevermore!" 


Vol, XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., AUGUST 1, 1917 


No. 15 


"WALK CIRCUMSPECTLY BECAUSE THE DAYS ARE EVIL" 

[This article with the exception of the paragraphs below, was a reprint of that published in issue of July 15, 1905, which please 

see.] 


It poorly befits an instructed child of God to denounce 
with scorn and contempt those of the poor world whose failings
 and lacks in character may be apparent to us. If in 
some respects we have been more nobly born than are many 
others, have we anything whereof to boast in this regard? 
"What hast thou that thou hast not received? And if thou 
hast received it, wherefore shouldst thou boast?*' Since we 
realize more and more as we go on in the narrow way how 
many and how humiliating are our own infirmities, we should 
learn to be very pitiful toward the infirmities of the poor, 
fallen world. And since the Lord is graciously willing to cover 
our many blemishes with the merit of the precious blood, we 
cannot do less than manifest this same spirit, if we hope to 
be pleasing and acceptable to him. Self-righteousness and a 
"holier than thou" attitude will surely separate us from the 
favor of the Lord to whatever extent we harbor such a spirit. 
Let us search our hearts carefully along this line, for we have 
a wily adversary, and our own flesh is very deceitful. 


Even though the failings and weaknesses of some of the 
brethren or of the members of our own family be different 
from our own, who shall judge that they are less acceptable 
to the Lord than are we? "To his own Master each servant 
standeth or falleth." A captious spirit of criticism and of 
magnifying the faults of others, a desire to show them up in 
their worst light, may be far more culpable in the eyes of 
the Lord than are the faults that seem so reprehensible to us. 

Let parents and children, brethren in the church — all who 
name the name of Christ — be of tender compassion toward one 
another. All have inherited and acquired weaknesses. Our 
own may be as serious as are those of some whose faults 
grate upon our sensibilities. Do our best, yet none of us 
can measure nearly up to the perfect standard. Who, then, 
are we, that we should sit in severe judgment upon others, 
whether of the brethren or of those outside, whose responsibility
 would be far less than ours? 


APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION 

The Government is putting into motion ite machinery re- and states that he resides at in the City 

lating to Selective Draft for military service. Local boards of . ; that he has had notice of call to 

have been selected for each county and for various districts in military service under the Selective Draft Act; that he has 

the cities. The drawing is now made. presented himself for physical examination, and being adIf
 you are on the list of the called ones you will first vised that he is physically qualified, he now makes applicareport
 for physical examination on the date named in the tion for exemption from military service under the provisions 

call. If you are found physically disqualified you will re- of said Selective Draft Act, and claims exemption upon the 

ceive a certificate to that effect, with further instructions following grounds, to wit: 
from the Board as to what to do. (1) Because this applicant was, on and prior to the 18th 

If you are found physically qualified and you desire to day of May, 1917, a member of the International Bible 

claim exemption from military service, then you should file Students Association, a well-recognized religious organizayour
 application for exemption. After having been found tion, which has been such religious organization and existing 

to be physically qualified you will have seven days in which for a period of more than thirty years, the creed or teaching 

to file your application for exemption ; and you will be given of which said religious organization forbids its members to 

ten days' time after the filing of your application in which participate in war in any form; that the religious convictions 

to file proof in support of your claims for exemption. of the undersigned, this applicant, are against war or particiWe
 have been expecting the Government to publish a pation therein in any form, in accordance with the creed or 

form of application for exemption, but up to this time none principles of said International Bible Students Assn. 
has been published. As the calling of the men under the (2) This applicant therefore prays that he be exempted 

selective Draft Act has now been made, and knowing that from military service under the provision of said Selective 

many of our brethren will be desirous of filing application for Draft Act. 

exemption, and as many have written the Society for a form (Signed) 

of application, we have prepared one, which we publish be- State of SS: 

low, and which may be used, provided the Government fur- County of 

nishes no form for that purpose. t being duly sworn, upon his 

APPLICATION oath says that he has read the above and foregoing applicato
 the local board of exemption under the tion for exemption, and is fully acquainted with the contents 

selective draft act: thereof, and that the matters and things stated therein are 

Comes now the undersigned No. true. 

( here insert your name and serial number ) , 

[6121] (221-231) 


(231-232) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


Subscribed and sworn to before 
me this day of . . . ., 1917 

Notary Public. 

If you can procure a form of application for exemption 
use and insert the grounds named in this application. 

If you claim exemption on any other ground than that 
of religious conviction, then insert such additional ground 
under paragraph marked "2" in the application; and if you 
claim exemption upon any further additional grounds, insert
 a third paragraph, and so on. Such other ground or 
grounds for claiming exemption are set forth in a bulletin 
issued by the office of the Provost Marshal General and are 
published in the July 1 issue of The Tower, page 204, 

HOW TO PROVE CLAIMS 

Proof must be made by affidavits. Go to the Local 
Board and consult the regulations to find out the form number
 of the aflidavits that you must submit for your particular 
claim. 

Ask the Board for the blank affidavits that are necessary 
in presenting your proof ; if the Board has not the forms ask 
to consult the pamphlet of forms. 

Have the affidavits properly accomplished and return them 
to the Board within the time limit assigned you — ten days 
from the filing of your claim. 

Set out in your affidavit the following: that the International
 Bihlk Students Association is a well-recognized 
religious organization and lias existed for more than 
thirty years; that said Association has a branch or church 
at (the place where you live) ; that you are a member 
of said Association and associated with said church; that you 
ace fully consecrated to the Lord, and that you follow the 
teachings of Jesus and the apostles as set forth and explained 
in the Bible and in the publications of the International 
Bible Students Association and the Watch Toweb Bible 
and Tract Society; that you are in harmony with and believe
 the teachings of said Association, which forbids its members
 to participate in war in any form, and that your religious 
convictions are against war or participation therein in any 
form, in accordance with the creed or principles of said International
 Bible Students Association ; that the teachings of 
said International Bible Students Association, in harmony
 with those of Jesus and the 'apostles, are briefly epitomized
 in the following: "Thou shalt not kill." (Romans 
13:9) "All they that take the sword shall perish by the 
sword." (Matt. 26:52) "For even hereunto were ye called, 
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example 
that ye should follow in his steps." {1 Peter 2:21) il For the 
Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save 
them." (Luke 0:56) "No murderer hath eternal life abiding 
in him." (1 John 3:15) "Follow peace with all men, and 
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." (Heb. 
12:14) "As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all 
men."— Or], 6:10. 

You may further add to your affidavit the quotation 
from The Watch Tower of September 1, 1915, page 260, 
column 2, which is quoted in the May 15, 1917, issue of The 
Watch Towi:k, page 151. 

W T ithin three days after the production of this proof before
 the Local Board, that Board will decide the question of 
exemption one way or the other. Appeal may be made to the 
District Board, and must be taken within ten days after notice
 that exemption claim has been denied by the Local Board. 
The Local Board may grant longer time to perfect appeal, in 
its discretion. 

Because of the fact that many of these exemption cases 
are apt to arise at the same time in different parts of the 
country, we make the above general statement in the interests
 of all of our brethren of the Association who may desire
 to avail themselves of the provisions of the law for exemption
. If any one feels that he should have a lawyer to 
assist him, then if might be wise to employ some local 
counsel to advise and conduct his case before the Board. We 
stand ready to advise and assist any of the brethren at any 
time to the extent of our ability. 

Let us all trust in the Lord for his guidance, and claim 
the promise that he will cause all things to work together 
for our good, because we love him and have been called according
 to his purpose. Be calm and sober of mind, and having 
done all you can, stand fast in the faith. Hia blessings be with 
you! 


"UNTO THE END!" 

"Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. M 


'"Unto the end!* What strange, 
Sweet, wondrous love! .How deep, how fond and true! 

For love that knows no change 
We seek, but seek in vain, the wide world through. 

Until the end he loved 
The frail, weak, timid ones he called 'his own.' 

Nor ever heard unmoved 
Their cry for help, in sorrow's plaintive tone. 

'"Unto the end!* AH, all 
Who are his own are known to him by name; 

No tear of theirs can fall 
But Jesus knows the source from whence it came. 

Unto the end, though 
Faithless and wayward we may be, 

With calm and ceaseless flow 
The tide of love divine rolls strong and free! 

'"Unto the end!' Though wide 
And high along our way dark barriers frown, 

This truth will still abide 
To comfort and sustain. We are his own 


Unto the end. His own ! 
Not death itself from him our souls can part; 

His hand has overthrown 
All that divides us from his home and heart. 

' "Unto the end!' With arms 
Outstretched, he waits to clasp us to his breast; 

Where, safe from all alarms, 
He offers us our shelter and our rest, 

'Unto the end' to live 
And know that we are his, and only his ! 

The joys that life can give, 
Its sweetest and its best, yield no such bliss. 

"'Unto the end!!' Thine own! 
dear and blessed Master! Can it be 

That, never more alone, 
Our weary hearts may dwell in peace with thee, 

Knowing that to the end 
Thou wilt be with us, walking by our side, 

Our Guardian, Guide and Friend, 
Until in heaven we shall with thee abide!" 


THE CAPTIVITY OF JUDAH 

[The first and fifth paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "A Broken Vow a Fulfilled Penalty/ 
lished in issue of September 1, 1905. Paragraphs 2, 3, 8 and 9 were reprinted from article entitled ''The Holy 
Land Desolated, ' > published in issue of December 3, 1898. The remainder appears below.) 


pubAfter
 King Nebuchadnezzar had taken a part of the 
Jews captive, he left King Zedekiah in control as his vassal 
under tribute. But Zedekiah treacherously entered into a 
league with the king of Egypt in a vain attempt to throw off 
the Babylonian yoke. When Nebuchadnezzar learned of the 
rebellion he came again to besiege Jerusalem. Famine and 
pestilence resulted; and ultimately the city was captured and 
utterly destroyed. The king's eyes were put out; and he was 
taken captive to Babylon, with all the people except a few of 
the poorest and leas* competent. Subsequently these went 

[61 


down into Egypt, so that Jerusalem and the country round 
about lay "desolate without inhabitant for seventy year*, to 
fulfil the word of the Lord at the mouth of the Prophet 
Jeremiah." 

The folly of King Zedekiah in violating his oath of allegiance
 to the Babylonian king is only an illustration of the 
general folly of all who reject the counsel' of the Lord. 
Through the Prophet Jeremiah the Lord had warned Zedekiah
 respecting the keeping of his oath and the certainty 
that the king of Babylon would vanquish him. But the self- 

221 


August 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(232-233) 


willed, unbelieving king, abetted by his princes and counsellors
, took the course which proved to be the way of folly, 
and which led to the utter overthrow of the nation. The Lord 
permitted the natural consequences of his wrong course to 
overtake the king; and they were severe indeed. His sons were 
slain before his very eyes. Then he was blinded and carried 
to Babylon, where he remained a prisoner until his death. 

From these facts we infer that King Zedekiah never came 
to a proper repentant attitude of heart before the Lord. On 
the contrary, Jehoiachin, the previous king of Judah, who 
had been taken captive to Babylon eleven years before, was 
subsequently released from prison and granted many favors 
at the hand of Evil-Merod«rh. (Jornviah .V2:31-34) Properly 
enough these high ones in natural Israel may represent the 
more highly favored ones of the Lord's people in spiritual 
Israel; and we may draw the lesson that the unfaithful, like 
Jehoiachin, might be chastened and afterward treated with 
leniency, but that those who violate the oath of their covenant 
with God by breaking that vow will suffer I0S3 in every sense 
of the word — that thenceforth they shall be blinded by the 
adversary to the blessings once enjoyed, and that subsequently 
they shall die the second death. 

Everywhere the Scriptures uphold the thought that a vow, 
a solemn compact with the Lord, ia a most binding obligation. 
Under such a solemn obligation all the members of the new 
creation have been granted the first-fruits of the holy Spirit. 
Therefore disloyalty or renouncement of this vow could to lis 
mean nothing short of the second death, from which there is 
no redemption. 

Judah represented those Israelites who were faithful to 
the Lord, those who trusted in the promises, all of which 
centered in the tribe of Judah; and many of the faithful of the 
ten tribes had moved into the territory of the smaller kingdom
. Yet with all these lessons, and with the instructions of 
the prophets, the history of the nation is one long record of 
unfaithfulness to their great King, Jehovah God. Now the 
time had come for the change which God saw best to bring 
upon them; and nothing could divert the impending doom. 
Nevertheless, they were given a hope that at the end of a certain
 period — after seventy years of chastisement — the Lord 
would graciously bring those back who reverenced him. 
"THE TIMES OF THE GENTILES" 

When God gave the law to Israel he plainly told them the 
terms and conditions upon which he would receive them as 
his people. If they would be obedient to the divine requirements
, all would be well with them. They would be prosperous
, a rich nation, blessed of the Lord. But if they should 
neglect the divine law and become idolatrous, the Lord would 
oppose them and would deliver them into the hand of their enemies
 for chastisement. If they persisted in following the 
wrong course, He would finally punish them "seven times 
more/'— Leviticus 26; 18, 21, 24, 28. 

Of course God knew the end from the beginning. Nevertheless
, divine patience was manifested throughout the experiences
 of the nation leading up to the overthrow of King 
Zedekiah's government; for he was the last king of the Davidic 
dynasty to sit upon the throne of Israel. We have seen how 
evil followed good, both in the kings and in the practises 
of the nation ; and how divine providence chastened the people, 
yet repeatedly brought them back from idolatry. Now had 
come the time for the complete overthrow of the national 
polity, for a period of "seven times," as foretold by Moses, 
the mediator of the Law Covenant. In this case, however, the 
"times," or years, must have been symbolic; for frequently 
the nation had had captivities for more than seven years each. 


Accepting the fact that these seven years, or "times," 
were symbolic years, we now proceed to determine how long a 
period they would indicate. We find that it is an accepted 
fact that in Bible symbolism a day represents a year; and 
that the Jewish year had twelve months of thirty days each. 
Thus each year symbolically represented three hundred and 
sixty years; and the seven years of chastisement foretold by 
Moses would represent 7 X 36 ^ year3, or 2520 years. When 
therefore we read the Prophet EzekieFs statement that the 
kingdom would be "overturned, overturned, overturned," until 
Messiah should come, we are to understand that the period of 
the overturned condition of the Jewish polity would be 2,520 
years, beginning with the time when the crown was removed 
from King Zedekiah— in 606 B. C, seventy years prior to the 
proclamation of Cyrus, king of Persia, permitting the people 
to return— 536 B. C. 

A LOOK AT THE FACTS OF THE CASE 

It is always both interesting and profitable to Bible students
 to note the fulfilment of prophecy; for thus are the 
divine promises made more real, and we are assured of divine 
supervision respecting the affairs of Israel — both natural and 
spiritual. As we glance back over the pages of Jewish history
, we see the fulfilment of the declaration that the nation 
of Israel would be overturned three times. After its restoration
 by King Cyrus, 536 B. C, it continued to have a sort 
of national existence for six hundred years. Yet in all that 
time it did not have one king of the line of David. On the contrary
, it was ruled over by the various adjoining nations. 
As it is written: "Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the 
Gentiles' until the times [years] of the Gentiles be filled 
full." 

Some may point to the Maccahaean kings as an offset to 
this declaration that Israel has had no king since the overthrow
 of King Zedekiah. We answer that the Maccahaean 
kings were not divinely appointed nor of the royal family. 
Others may remind us of the reign of the Herods at the 
beginning of the Christian era. We reply that the Herods 
not only were not of the line of David, but were not Jews at 
all; that they were, Kdomites — descendants of Esau, who ruled 
over 'the children of Israel as representatives of the Roman 
Empire. 

THE PROPHET DANIEL'S TESTIMONY 

When God removed the typical kingdom of Israel and 
his typical throne in the world, he gave over the lease of 
earthly dominion to the Gentiles. This lease of power, as set 
forth in the prophecy of Daniel, was to continue for "seven 
times" — 2,520 years. * In other words, during the same period 
in which Israel would be undergoing tribulation and subjection
, the Gentiles would be having "sVven times" of prosperity; 
and both periods would of necessity terminate at the same 
time. Since both began in the fall of 606 B. C, and since 
both were ''seven times," or 2,520 years long, both must have 
ended in the fall of 1914 A. D. 

During this period the world has been under the dominion 
of four universal empires; (1) Babylonia, (2) Medo-Persia, 
(3) Greece and (4) Rome. According to the Scriptural view 
of the matter, the fourth universal empire is still represented 
hi the various so-called Christian governments of the world. 
These have practised and prospered during the long period of 
Israel's subjection and the overturned condition of God's 
typical kingdom. After the expiration of the "seven times," 
the next feature of the divine program will be the establishment
 of the Messianic kingdom and its recognition by the children
 of Israel. Then will follow the long-promised blessing 
of all the families of the earth. — Genesis 12:3; Galatians 3:8. 
16, 29. 


NEW CREATURES IN CHRIST 


The new will begins when we turn from sin to the Redeemer
, desiring to be his followers. But the new will is not 
then the new creature. We do not become new creatures until 
the Redeemer has accepted our offering, covered it with the 
merit of his own sacrifice, and presented it as a part of his 
sacrifice, to the Father. The Father, accepting all who thus 
come unto him through the Son — up to the full limit of the 
number of the elect — begets them through the holy Spirit. 
Then, and not until then, is there a itew creature — a spiritbegotten
 beinj^— ■ whose development will be in the school of 
Christ, and whose full entrance upon the spirit plane as a 
new creature will come through the resurrection change. 

The new creature does not sacrifice itself; for, as we have 
just seen, it did not come into existence until the sacrifice 
had teen made and accepted by the Father. The new creature
 is in full accord with the consecration made originally 
by the new will, and with the sacrifice of its earthly rights 
and interests made to the Lord. The new creature therefore 


cooperates with the Lord, and manifest? this in profiting 
itself daily, hourly, a living sacrifice to the will of the Lord. 
It is the flesh that is to be sacrificed, and not the new 
creature. The High Priest, our glorified Lord, alone is able 
to offer the sacrifice acceptably; and we, as new creatures, 
merely cooperate with him, and thus make our calling and 
election sure. Any holding back on our part would spoil 
the matter aa a sacrifice; and the best thing that could be done 
with it would be to destroy the flesh that the spirit might be 
saved. The Scriptures seem to indicate that this will be 
the experience of the great company class. Any drawing back 
from the Lord in the sense of the repudiation of him and 
his work of righteousness in them, would signify what the 
Apostle calls "the drawing back unto perdition" — untG destruction
. (Hebrews 10:39) In that event the new creature
 would die; and it would be the second death, from which 
there would be no recovery. As we have before shown, the 
new creature never sacrifices itself. It merely cooperates 


[6128] 


(234-236) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, >. Y. 


with the great High Priest in the sacrifice of its flesh in 
which, for the time, it tabernacles.^ Prior to the harvest 
time, the new creature, at the death of the body, slept; for 
except in the case of wilful sin, the new creature is never to 
die. Since the Spring of 1878, however, the new creature 


does not sleep, but passes immediately into the new body. 
Tn the case of Jesus and the apostles the new creature slept 
for a longer or shorter time, awaiting the divine intervention 
and power for its perfecting on the spirit plane through the 
resurrection change. 


THE SHEPHERD OF CAPTIVE ISRAEL 

September 2. — Ezekiel 34. 
[This article, with the exception of the paragraph below, was a reprint of article entitled "Prophecy Against the Shepherds/' 

published in issue of May 15, 1915, which please see.] 


Verses 10-12 assert that at a certain time the Lord comes 
to the rescue of his sheep, and casts aside the unfaithful 
shepherds, Mark well that this time of his presence will be 
"in the cloudy and dark day" — in the time of trouble, already 
upon the nations and upon the unfaithful shepherds. Surely 
we have ample evidence that we are in this "cloudy and dark 
day" — that the Chief Shepherd is now present! Otherwise, 
whence comes the food upon which his flock has been feeding 
all the^e years and the refreshing rest of faith which they 


may enjoy even amidst the turmoil of the time of trouble 
now upon the world? During the past forty years the Chief 
Shepherd has been feeding his people upon the richest ot 
food: and all who have been strengthened thereby should be 
aware that he is gathering his sheep. Although the sheep 
have been scattered all over the hills of sectarianism, he calls 
them his own : and those who hear his voice are being gathered 
into the one fold — the true church — even as in the beginning 
of the Gospel age. 


INTERESTING 

THE LORD'S DIRECTION OF OCR AFT AIRS 

Question. — To what extent does the Lord actively direct our 
affairs, and guide us in thought, word and deed? When two 
courses perplex us, how may we know the divine will concerning
 us? 

Answer.— The Christian's relationship to God is based 
wholly upon faith. The Apostle declares, "According as it is 
written, 'I believed, and therefore have I spoken'; we also believe
, and therefore speak." So likewise, we believe, and 
therefore we speak; we believe and therefore we act. "He 
that cometh unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a 
rewarded of them that diligently seek him." — 2 Cor. 4:13: 
Heb. 11:6. 

Christians are those who have approached God along this 
line through Christ, who have turned from sin and have accepted
 the merit of Christ as their propitiation, and the- divine 
will aft their will; and who have embraced the divine promises 
respecting the rewards of righteousness, truth, holiness, instead
 of the rewards and delusive pleasures of sin. They have 
made their consecration unto death, have been begotten to a 
new nature, and have received the anointing of the holy 
Spirit. They then recognize themselves as children of God, 
because God has said eo. They know that all things will 
work together for good to them; for God has so informed them. 
—Rom. 8:28. 

The whole matter, then, is one of faith. It is for the 
Christian to perform his part and to trust that God will perform
 his part. God's part is to instruct him, and develop him 
in faith and obedience. Sometimes the way in which God will 
guide his people will he very contrary to the one we would 
naturally prefer. We are to remember, however, that we have 
fully given ourselves to the Lord; and that we are to abide 
in this condition loyally, and to accept in perfect faith all the 
experiences of life — the things that seem favorable and the 
things that seem unfavorable — and to bear in mind that all 
things will work out for good to us, who are the called according
 to God's purpose; and that "the steps of a good man 
are ordered by the Lord," if we continually seek his guidance
. 

If, therefore, trials and difficulties come, we are to look 
to the Lord and go to him in prayer and seek to know his 
will. How can we know that his will shall be done? We must 
make sure that we desire his will above all things — whether 
it be pleasant or unpleasant to us. After earnest prayer that 
we may be shown his will, we are to use our best judgment 
in the matter. We have asked God's wisdom and blessing, and 
we are to expect that the Lord will overrule the results for 
good. And we are to accept these results as of divine overruling
, divine providence, whether the matter turn out as we 
have expected or some other way. 

ASKING HIS BLESSING UPON OUR FOOD 

Question. — Why do we ask the Lord's blessing upon our 
food unless we expect him to bless it? 

Answer. — A very sensible question. Our bodies are a part 
of our endowment of the Lord; and we are responsible for 
these bodies, to keep them in as good order as possible, in 
addition to asking his blessing. We are to eat to his glory, 
and so far as possible, only foods which agree with us. The 
blessing we ask is supposed to be that we may have cooperation
 on God's part with our own endeavor. But we are to 
endeavor so to eat and drink aa to keep our bodies in the 
best possible condition to render the most effective service to 
Jum, Then we should expect his blessing. 


QUESTIONS 

COMPROMISING THE TBUTH 

Question. — Since the Lord's people are to be "wise as serpentB
 and harmless as doves,'* and not unnecessarily to bring 
upon themselves persecution, might it have been a lack of 
wisdom on the part of the three young Hebrews to refuse to 
bow down before the image set up 'by Nebuchadnezzar, king of 
Babylon ? Could they not, while bowing before the image, have 
in their hearts worshiped God? 

Answer. — It would be quite contrary to the teaching of 
God's Word to suppose that the Hebrews who were cast into 
the fiery furnace because of not worshiping the image of 
Nebuchadnezzar were unwise. We believe that they were very 
wise not to compromise the truth in respect to Nebuchadnezzar 
and the image which he had made. A careful reading of the 
Bible story should convince one of this. Whoever compromises
 the truth is very likely to have it taken from him. 

If the three Hebrews had been disloyal to God in this 
matter, then there would probahly have arisen other circumstances
 of like nature; an d they would have been likely to be 
finally swallowed up. They could not have made a reservation
 in bowing the knee in this -instance. The king had declared
 that any one who would fail in this matter should be 
thrown into the fiery furnace; that all must bow down 
and worship the golden image. If they had bowed down, it 
would have implied that they were worshiping the image. 
God surely set his seal of approval on their course! Any other 
course would have been disloyal to Jehovah. 

Applying this principle to our day, we see that churchianity
 is coming to be worshiped. The book of Revelation pictures 
the condition of things as we believe it soon will be. Whoever
 will not worship the first beast, nor his image, and will 
not receive the mark of the two-horned beast, or the number 
of his name, will come into a disadvantageous position. 
(Revelation 13:15-17) The question then would he, What 
shall be our attitude regarding such unfavorable arrangements
? We do not ourselves take the position of some that 
it would be wrong to enter a Catholic church building because
 we would feel that we were thus worshiping the images. 
Neither would we think it wrong to enter a Protestant church. 
We would not by so doing be thought to be accepting their 
doctrine. 

It we happened to go to a church where the congregation 
were partaking of their communion, doubtless we would commune
 with them, if they were willing. The fact that they did 
not understand the matter as we do would not affect us unfavorable
 at all. The Presbyterians, for instance, claim to 
recognize the great fundamentals of Christianity — the 
heavenly Father and the Lord Jesus as Savior; they affect to 
believe, at least. 

Going, therefore, on that broad platform, we might be 
able to enjoy ourselves with them. We could not mean that 
we were palming ourself off as a Presbyterian, a Lutheran or 
a Methodist, etc. To our understanding none of these denominations
 are up to the divine standard of the Word of God, none 
of them are recognized of the Lord. But we can fellowship 
with those who worship there, if they profess belief in the 
fundamental doctrines of the Bible. We can be interdenominational
 on the subject and can see their good points, while we 
need not be influenced by their wrong doctrines. 

We would not feel justified in giving any one the impression
 that we belonged to any of these denominations, by attending
 their church regularly or frequently. One might 


[6124] 


August 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(237-238) 


drop into any church, at any time, without being understood 
to be a devotee. 

But when the time shall come that church federation will 
make a test, and every other belief than theirs will be banned
, then we think it would be wrong for us to worship at all 
in any of their services; that it would be more or Jess upholding
 or supporting the errors for which they will be 
standing. We would consider it our duty then to stand out 
clearly and plainly, as did the young Hebrews of old, and refuse
 under any circumstances to bow down or worship among 
them. 

SINS BLOTTED OTJT 

Question. — Acts 3:19 refers to a blotting out of sins. Will 
the sins themselves be actually blotted from memory? 

Answer. — The Apostle Feter was not preaching restitution, 
although he mentioned restitution. He could not, therefore, 
be calling on the Jews as a nation to repent, for at that time 
repentance would not have been possible. Not until after 
Israel had been accepted could the Deliverer come out of Zion 
and turn away godliness from Jacob. (Romans 11:25-27) 
To have preached restitution at that time would have been 
premature by more than eighteen hundred years. 

But the Apostle's words were designed to reach those Jews 
who might become members of the church. The sins would 
be blotted out at the second coming of Christ. Our sins are 
now covered, and because of this we are treated as sons. God 
gives us the spirit of adoption, brings us into his family. This 
present relationship shows us still sinners so far as the flesh 
is concerned, but righteous bo far as the new creature is concerned
. 

However, in the second presence of Christ, he will change 
this vile body, the body of sin, and give us a body fashioned 
like unto his glorious body. We shall have none of these sins 
then, in any sense of the word. The sins will be absolutely 
blotted out — gone. God will remember them no more; that is, 
he will utterly ignore them, as though they had never been. He 
has never recognized these sins as belonging to the new creature
, although the new creature has been charged up with 
everything derelict on the part of the body. But after we 
have received our "change," from that time onward there will 
be no sins to be remembered. 

THE NEW CREATURE NOT A SINNER 

We read in Psalm 32:1, "Blessed is he . . . whose sin 
is covered." We understand that this class whose sins were 
covered typically during the Jewish Age were the Jewish 
people, whose sins were covered year by year under the arrangement
 God made with them. We understand that the 
church's sins are actually covered by the special arrangement 
God makes with them through Jesus Christ. Ours is not a 
covenant which is renewed year by year, as was the Law Covenant
 with the Jews. With us, God's covenant is perpetual, 
so long as we abide in him. Nevertheless, though our sins are 
thus covered by our Lord, there is not an actual blotting out 
of the sins ; it is a covering with the robe of righteousness, an 
imputation of the merit of Christ's sacrifice for Adamic sin. 

There is a difference between the covering we now receive 
through faith, and the blotting out of sin which we shall receive
 later, and which the world also will ultimately enjoy. 
When our sins are thus covered according to the divine arrangement
, our wills, which we determined to consecrate in 
sacrifice to God, are received of him through our great Advocate
; and we are begotten of the holy Spirit as new creatures
. The new creature never was a sinner. The new creature
 is in full accord with God. If he is a young new creature
, he is, it may be, not as yet fully established in his harmony
 with God. If an older new creature his character jb 
crystallized. 

So it could not be the new creature that would be 
referred to as having the sins blotted out at the second coming
 of Christ. But since the new creature is the possessor, or 
owner, of the fiesh, he is responsible for the things done by 
the flesh; just as a man who owns a dog is held responsible 
for what that dog does. The new creature reigns over the 
body of flesh; but sometimes the flesh slips the leash, as it 
were. As the Apostle Paul expresses it, "In my flesh dwelleth 
no good thing; for to will is present with me; but how to perform
 that which is good I find not. For the good that I 
would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do."— 
Romans 7:18, 19. 

The trespasses of the flesh are those for which we ask 
forgiveness when we pray, "Forgive us our trespasses!" A 
trespass is something which is done contrary to law, and yet 
in this ease it is something disapproved oi by us. But so 
long as we have the flesh, the mortal body is marred by blemishes
, by the imperfections of sin. Not, then, until the members
 of the body of Christ shall have passed beyond the veil 
will their sins be blotted out>— be no more. Meantime they 
are all covered and graciously arranged for in God's plan. 

We understand that all those sins that were ours up to the 
time we gave ourselves to the Lord were fully covered — that 
Christ assumed those for us at the moment of our consecration
. The Apostle refers to those as "sins that are past, by 
the forbearance of God." But we still have the flesh and are 
still liable to trespass, and all trespasses are offenses against 
the divine law. 

God could say: I will just count these as something that 
Jesus has arranged for. But he evidently did not see fit to do 
this, but to allow these trespasses to be counted up against 
the diseiple of Christ. Thus the child of God is continually 
reminded of his own shortcomings, and must go daily to the 
throne of grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time 
of need, and he becomes much more fortified against these 
weaknesses. It is these infirmities of the flesh that need to 
be settled for. These weaknesses still remain with the individual
, and he has the responsibility with him unto death. 
This is our thought; and it is all in God's record. In God's 
accounting, each trespass must be reckoned for. And so we 
do not pray to the Lord Jesus, "Forgive us our trespasses," 
but we go to the Father. And we think they are still in the 
divine record until forgiveness is sought through Christ; for 
we still need the Advocate. But the blotting out of these 
imperfections will not be accomplished for the church until 
they; shall have passed into glory, at the second coming of 
Christ. 

The new creature can sin, but in the act ceases to be a new 
creature. If we, the new creature, sin wilfully, there remaineth
 no more a sacrifice for sins. But in such a case the 
sin is unto death. But the new creature might sin partially, 
through beguilement of the flesh; through the weakness of the 
flesh it might participate to some extent — might not properly 
resist sin—and therefore would he more or less of a conniver 
and participant in sin. In such a case we understand the 
Scriptures to teach that the stripes which would follow would 
be for that element of participation into which the new creature
 had entered. 

The part for which the flesh would be responsible would 
be forgivable. Our Lord said: "If any blaspheme the Son 
of Man, it shall be forgiven him; hut blasphemy against the 
holy Spirit shall not he forgiven," Christ never made atonement
 for the sins of the new creature. Anything that is not 
clearly attributable to the Adamic sin is punishable. There 
can be no sacrifice for it. 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


BIN-OFrEEING— RANSOM— TBE8PASS OFTEWNG 
Dear Bbbthben: — 

In our Study of Tabernacle Shadows the point has come 
out that on page 105 it is stated that the red heifer is not an 
"offering" at all. But in both the Revised and the American 
Revised Bibles it is called a sin-offering {see verses 9 and 17 
of the 19th of Numbers) ; Strong's Concordance also bears this 
out. It seems to me that this point might help some to see 
that the word "sin-offering" is not synonymous with "ransom
." Maybe you can explain the apparent contradiction 
between this statement and that of Numbers 19. 

With Christian love, R. E. B. N. 


We are not to assume that the revisers were any more 
inspired than were the translators of the King James Version. 
There is a haziness connected with the subject which very few 


VII— 20 


escape until they come to a knowledge of that which we term 
"present truth." 

From our viewpoint, the sin-offerings were those of the 
Atonement Day, which typified the satisfaction of justice in 
respect to the sin of Adam and its penalty, which rested upon 
Adam and descended by laws of heredity to all of his children. 
We distinguish between this original sin and subsequent 
wrong-doings by styling the latter "trespasses," as they are 
called in our Lord's prayer. 

From this viewpoint, the red heifer was not a sin-offering — 
not offered for the original sin, either typically or otherwise; 
not offered on the Bay of Atonement; nor connected with the 
Atonement in any sense. 

The word ransom is separate and apart from either the 
trespass-offerings or the sin-offerings. It brings to our attention
 a different arrangement, with which we have nothing 


[6125] 


(238-2J9) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Bkookmn, N. \. 


w hate\ er to do — the arrangement that the one life of the Man 
Christ Jesus should constitute the basis for the satisfaction of 
Justice in respect to the original sin of the first man. The 
sin-offerings of the Bay of Atonement are not to be confused
 with the ransom, for they are separate pictures. 
"THAT THEY MAY SEE YOUB GOOD WORKS" 
Dear Brethren : 

May I have a moment of your valuable time to call attention
 to the habit many of" the friends have of "patting 
themselves on the back" and calling the attention of hotelkeepers
 and others, where considerable numbers are stopping, 
to their wonderfully good behavior, etc. ? 

I was privileged to attend a two-day I. B. S. A. convention 
recently, in a small town, where there was only one hotel, 
which was pretty well filled. The landlady had evidently 
put forth a great effort to please, in which she was successful
 to quite a degree, and she seemed anxious to know how 
her labors were appreciated. 

But the slightest query would be met with, "Well, what do 
you think of these people? are they hard to please?" and, 
"Are they hard to get along with?" *eto. Of course, the poor 
woman felt obliged to praise them, telling how nice they were, 
etc. 

Now, would it not be much better to keep our "lamps'* 
filled, and "trimmed and - burning," so that all could plainly 
see the light; and not be calling attention to it. as though 
people would not know we are good and well-behaved if we 
did not tell them? 

It looks to outsiders as though we are proud and boastful
 of our goodness. One man in our home-town, I am told, 
says he doesn't like our people because they are boastful 
and think themselves better than others. 

It it meets with your approval, perhaps a line in The 
Watch Tower would be well, calling the attention of the 
dear friends to these little oversights. I am sure a hint 
would be sufficient. 

Your brother in the service, Kans. 

"BROTHER TO HIM THAT IS A GREAT WASTER" 
Dear Friend: : — 

During the past six years I have visited many different ecclesias
 in Illinois, Iowa, Missouri, Texas, etc., and amongst 
other things, one thing has impressed me more and more and 
has pained me much — the careless way the Lord's tracts are 
treated by many of the consecrated children of God, and also 
by some of the ecclesias as a whole. 

Just a few samples : (1)1 was boarding with a prominent 
brother and sister in the truth during the year 1916, and at 
different times I picked up truth literature which was thrown 
down on the ground and scattered over the lawn and hack 
yard. I also picked up quite a number of colporteur envelopes
 in good condition. Finally I took the whole assortment
 and showed it to the brother, and asked him to take 
better care of the Lord's literature. He promised me to be 
more faithful in the future, 

(2) Recently 7 noticed several thousand copies of the 
Lord's literature going to waste in an upstairs store room in 
the home of a sister. A little ecclesia of about nine members 
met at said home three times a week. Pilgrim brothers from 
the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society conduct meetings
 there when they come to town. 

I have noticed similar conditions in other ecclesias. I feel 
it my duty to notify those in charge at headquarters of these 
deplorable conditions. From time to time we read glowing 
accounts in The Watch Tower of the great amount of tracts 
sent out and distributed by the members of the International 
Bible Students Association — some years as high as 50,000,000 
copies. To know that some of that quantity remain piled up 
in basements, garrets, barns, woodsheds, closets, etc., dusty 
and time-worn, in many of the homes of the friends in the 
United States and Canada, is a shame! (Luke 16:10) I am 
sorrowfully, 

Your hrother in Christ, Lorenzo Traub. — Ky. 

GREAT HELP RECEIVED FROM V. D. M. QUESTIONS 
Drab Brethren: — 

Your favor of the 9tlv, re my answers to V. D. M. questions
, received. I wish to express my appreciation of the 
same and my increasing love for God and his great -plan and 
gratitude for all the privileges of study atnd helps in growth 
afforded hy the dear servants of the Lord at Brooklyn, and 
elsewhere. " 

I have received great inspiration in the study of the 
V. D. M. Questions, and spent not one or two days in the 
study of them, but all the time I could spare for a month. 
They are indeed deep questions, and require skill in answering
 briefly. I feared I had fallen far short of the required 
percentage. 


I thank you for your patience in considering them. I 
will endeavor to continue their study, so as to become more 
proficient in expression of these great truths. I desire, too, 
the character growth necessary to please him and to attain 
the kingdom. 

May the dear Father continue his blessing upon you all 
and his work in your hands. With much Christian love 
in him, " Mrs. E, S, Webster. — S. Dakota. 

LEAVES AN EVERLASTING MONUMENT 
Dear Friends: — 

Our heart rejoices as we think of the glorious reward 
which has now come to our dear Brother Russell. Surely 
he did a noble work, and has left behind an everlasting 
monument to his fidelity, in the six volumes of Scripture 
Studies, in all the faithful warnings and exhortations in 
The Watch Tower and his sermons! 

We loved him for his faithful service, his untiring energy, 
and his devoted loyalty to the glorious cause to which he 
had consecrated his life. We are glad that he rests from 
his labors, and we are sure that his works do follow him. 
All the friends are calm and feel sure that the Lord is still at 
the helm and that Romans 8:28 is still true. 

Doubtless other and more varied experiences and problems
 face the Lord's dear qnes on this side the veil, to still 
further test our faith and patience ; but we need not fear, 
for the "Lord is for us." 

We should all heed carefully the noble words of warning
 left us by our dear Pastor in the November 1 Watch 
Tower. In the meantime let us also heed our Master's words, 
"Let not your heart be troubled!" Very soon, if faithful, we 
also shall join the ranks of those who have gone before; and 
what a blessed reunion that will he! How glad we will be 
to meet all those dear saints, our faithful devoted Pastor and 
our glorious Lord and Head! 

We are praying for all at headquarters, that each one 
may have the "grace sufficient" to wisely and properly meet 
the new duties and responsibilities thus suddenly thrust upon 
them. May the dear Lord richly bless your hearts. Brethren, 
pray for us also. 

Your brother and servant in His service, 

R. H. Barber. 
OREATEST BLESSING OF HIS CONSECRATED LIFE 
Dear Brethren: — 

The spiritual joy and refreshment of study and recording 
the great divine plan of God as outlined by the enclosed v. 
D. M. Question blanks has been the greatest blessing of my 
consecrated life. How thankful I feel to God that he has seen 
fit to grant me, even me, a knowledge of his glorious plan for 
the blessing of all. 

My heart fills with gratitude and praise; for although I 
have been a consecrated being, a "new creature in Christ," 
since 1908, yet never before has the effulgence of the light of 
the Gospel been so gloriously mine. If the answering of these 
questions has brought as much joy to all who have so far answered
 them, there should be the greatest rejoicing in the 
church that has ever been experienced. 

Surely all who have not answered them do well to do so 
speedily I 

I anxiously await your decision as to granting the degree 
"V. D. M."; for I do want to be corrected should I be incorrect
 even in only one little item. In joy and expectancy. 
By his grace, Elbert Thompson. — Wash. 

AWAKE TO THE NEARNESS OT THE KINGDOM 
Dear Brethren: — 

Resolved, That our heart -felt sympathy be expressed to the 
members of the Bethel family and Brooklyn Tabernacle, who 
because of their fellowship with our departed Pastor are most 
keenly affected by the finishing of his labors. Be it further 

Resolved, That while confident that our beloved Pastor is 
now among the glorified with Christ, we awaken more keenly 
to the nearness of the Messianic kingdom, increasing our 
zeal; and that recognizing the manner in which the work of 
the Society has been arranged, we will in every way possible 
cooperate with the work, continuing the promulgation of the 
Gospel of good tidings. Reading Ecclesia. — Pa. 

APPRECIATIVE WORDS TROM A STRANGER 
Gentlemen: — 

I condole with you in the great loss you have sustained an 
losing dear Pastor Russell. I was ill at the time with an attack
 of heart trouble. It was a shock to me; I never felt so 
bad about a stranger. I was in hopes of hearing him some 
time. He was a man of God. 

I thank you for the book and paper you so kindly sent 
me. T will buy another book some time, when I can. 

Very cordially yours, Mas. S. Roberts.— Maw. 


[6126] 


Aur.ttsT 1, 1917 


Tim WATCH TOWER 


(239 226) 


ONE YEAR'S BETEOSPECTION 

Dear Brethren in Cubist: — 

It is about a year since I became interested in Pastor 
Russell's Studies in the Scriptures, having first read his 
lectures in the San Francisco Bulletin, and almost immediately 
following, I ordered the first volume, and 1 think the fourth 
and fifth; then the whole six. I have since had a few of the 
first volumes circulating, with the hope that they will be appreciated
 as I appreciate the light. There has been a continual 
flow of light as I read volume after volume. Am now reading
 the sixth and still progressing, and anticipate more pleasure
, truth and strength as I peruse them again. But all this 
lias not been without its trials. I can now see my own weak 
ness and unworthiness. 1 can see the pitiful condition of the 
world, the confusion, the egotism of man. Romans 1:25 — 
what a meaning and what a picture! 

A year ago, in my estimation the Bible was not much of 
a book. I thought it something of a history, but not to be 
taken too seriously. No doubt I gave my opinion in that way 
many times, and I had never read it; in fact, I knew nothing 
about it, but was willing to express my opinion just the same! 
Perhaps this came from the fact that I was reared a Iloman 
Catholic. Jn my boyhood days we had Bible History, a book 
of its own kind,* and no doubt for its own purpose. 

What a difference in one year! All the years before I 
began to read Scripture Studies, I was aimlessly knocking
 about, in mental slavery and full of self-conceit. I was 
seeking truth, and I thought I saw truth in Socialism that 
was better than our churches of today. In Christian Science, 
I thought I saw something better than the hell of torment, 
but could not see how Mrs. Eddy could take what she wanted 
of the Bible and leave out the rest! I could not see real 
Christianity in a capitalized Christianity. I mean, I thought 
Christ's church should be where his people are; and then I 
could not see anything very definite in Christian Science; yet 
I was trying to "master it when I read Pastor Russell's lectures
 and began sending for his books. Now I see how logical
 and reasonable the law of God is — just what it should 
be! How could a Master Builder be without a definite plan! 
And how corroborative the Bible is of this wonderful and yet 
so reasonable plan! The higher critics in their conceit have 


caused a world of confusion. 1 shudder when I think of the 
blindness in Catholicism, Surely Catholicism is closely related 
to heathenism! Last-hour repentance is one of the strong 
points of the Roman Catholic church. That in itself showb 
the blindness that is upon Catholics; and the others are very 
much the same. 

Sincerely yours in Christ, C. J. Fry.— Calif. 

WILL CONTINUE TO CO-OPERATE IN THE WOBK 

Resolved, That we feel keenly the loss of our Pastor and 
friend, but rejoice* in the assurance that he is now with the 
Lord in glory; and that his passing into the heavenly courts 
has quickened our zeal to press more faithfully along the 
"narrow way" that we, too, may join that happy throng. 
And be it further 

Resolved, That we hereby assure the faithful officers of 
the W. T. B. & T. Society of our continued cooperation and 
hearty support in the advancement of the glad tidings so long 
as this work is conducted in the manner and spirit as exemplified
 by our beloved Pastor; and be it further 

Resolved, That we will continue to pray for the general 
interests of the work, that while we cannot now ask God 
to bless our dear Pastor as we have formerly done, yet we 
can and will ask him to bless the memory of our dear Brother 
Russell. Atlanta Ecclesia. — Ga. 

"THINKING MOBE EABNESLY THAN EVEB BEFORE' 1 
Bear Brethren: — 

The reading of the article about the V. D. M. Questions 
in the June 1 Watch Tower set me at thinking more earnestly
 than ever before, what a great responsibility, as well as 
a privilege, it is to be a servant of the Lord and the brethren. 
By studying those questions more carefully, I came to the 
conclusion that I could not have the Lord's approval in letting 
this opportunity go by to give testimony of what I have 
learned in the school of Christ, since he has called me out 
of darkness into his marvelous light. 

So, dear Brethren, I kindly ask you to send me one of 
those V. D. M. Question blanks, so that by trying to answer 
them, I may show forth his praises. With much Christian 
love. 

Your brother and servant in Christ, C. Nousen. — Wis. 


LONG-LOOKED-FOR SEVENTH VOLUME 


Last winter, under the supervision of the Society, the 
compilation of the matter for the Seventh Volume was begun. 
A short time ago the work was finished and sent to the 
printer. It was learned that, in order to get the volume out 
this summer at all on account of other heavy contracts which 
might later interfere, the publication must be put upon the 
press at on^e. Hence it was rushed; and when the printing 
was about done, it was thought that the volume might be 
placed in a carton and sent to Tower subscribers, so that 
everyone might receive it at the same time; this was done. 
The price is sixty cents per volume. Increased cost of paper 
and labor makes the cost of the book more. 

Brother Russell often spoke about writing the seventh 
volume, and one of his last utterances about it was to this 
effect: "Whenever I find the key, I will write the seventh 
volume; and if the Lord gives the key to someone else, he 
can write it" — or words to that effect. Brother Russell's 
modesty and humility may have prevented him from seeing 
the key. When you read the seventh volume, you may readily 


discover that Brother Russell himself is the key. This volume 
shows Brother Russell's relationship to the church as the 
seventh messenger. It is quite wonderful to see how this 
is shown both in Revelation and in Ezekiel, and both books 
are herein harmonized. 

The Society feels quite sure that the friends in reading 
this volume will greatly rejoice and it hopes that the book 
will be a strength and comfort to the church in the hour 
of need. To colporteurs and others the price of the volume, 
in lots of fifty, will be forty cents, carriage added. The Society
 hopes that the colporteurs will take up the sale of it 
quickly. 

We take this method of acknowledging receipt cl remittances
 for the volume, and also for orders for it and to give 
assurance that these will be rilled as rapidly as possible. 

Orders for Karatol and India paper editions are being 
entered on the books. These orders will be filled as soon aa 
these editions are ready — about six weeks. Karatol, 60c 
India paper, leather bound, $1 postpaid. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., AUGUST 15, 1917 


No. 1(> 


THE FAITH-BATTLES OF THE KING'S OWN BRIGADE 

"Fight the good fight of faith; lay hold on eternal life. ' * — 1 Timothy 6:12. 


Paradoxical as it may seem, the church of Christ are the 
greatest warriors the world has ever known. Yet the followers 
of Christ are instructed to be peace-makers, to "follow peace 
with all men," to "live peaceably with all," so far as in 
them lies. This, however, is on the principle that "he that 
ruleth his own spirit is greater than he that taketh a city." 
(Matthew 5:9; Hebrews 12:14; Romans 12:18; 14:19) Nevertheless
, this class are called upon to "Fight the good fight," 
the fight of faith. 

In our text St. Paul is addressing only the brigade of the 
"King's Own," the body of Christ, the consecrated church. 
As the mouthpiece of the great Captain of our salvation, the 
Apostle gives this injunction to the loyal soldiers of the 
cross. It would be wholly out of order for an officer to issue 
commands to those who have never joined his army, who do 
not recognize his authority. So it is very evident that the 
world is not addressed here. This i^ likewise shown by the 


introduction to all the apostolic epistles; for they are each 
addressed "to the saints in Christ Jesus." St. Paul, as a 
faithful lieutenant, gives us here the instruction of his superior, 
the Lord Jesus, the great General-in-Chief of Jehovah's Army. 

Jehovah has another great army, an agency which he is 
now using in this great time of trouble ; but the army referred 
to in our text is composed only of the most faithful soldiers 
of the cross. It is a picked company of the bravest and 
staun chest type — the "King's Own." As viewed from the 
world's standpoint it is not large in numbers; its excellence 
consists in its quality rather than in quantity. To these the 
instructions come that the fight is on, and that our great 
Commander-in-Chief expects each soldier to do his duty, to 
stand bravely by the colors and bear them up. 

OTJE BATTLE NOT WITH FELLOW OEEATTJEES 

Against whom do these soldiers fight? Against what do 
they fight? We answer, Our battle is not against our fellow 


T6127] 


(Ui-244) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


creatures, nor with carnal weapons. Indeed we can have 
large sympathy for even our most relentless foes, who, having 
not been enlightened as to the cause of our warfare, are will* 
ing and ready, to the extent that modern civilization will permit
, to despitefully use us, to persecute us and say all manner 
of evil against us falsely. We can readily see that they are 
blinded in considerable measure either by their own prejudice 
and passion or by the great adversary's delusive doctrines, 
superstitions, etc. In most eases it is probably both. Hence 
our warfare is not directed against these; and as opportunity 
offers we are glad to do them good, "in meekness instructing 
those that oppose themselves" — set themselves in opposition 
to us. 

When dealing with these, therefore, so far from battling 
with them and resisting evil with evil, we return good for 
evil, gentleness for rudeness, kindness for discourtesy, as our 
Captain has given us instruction. We seek to do good to 
those who speak evil of us, that thus the eyes of their understanding
 may, if possible, he opened to discern that there is 
such a thing as the spirit of love, of generosity and forbearance
; whereas they suppose that ull are actuated by the 
same malevolent, bitter spirit, the same spirit of selfishness, 
that controls themselves. 

Our fight is against Sin, the great taskmaster who captured
 our nice six thousand years ago and who has held mankind
 as slaves from then until now. A few only have hurst 
these bonds of slavery, through the grace of God, and are 
now enlisted in warfare against this enslaver. Satan, through 
whom the great taskmaster gained possession of mankind, is 
also the special enemy of the soldiers of Christ. But our 
battle is not directly with Satan, nor are we to "bring against 
him a railing accusation." Rather we are to say with Michael 
— our great Captain — "The Lord rebuke thee" ; and therefore
 we are to await the Lord's time and the Lord's way for 
rebuking Satan. Nevertheless, we are to resist him; we are 
to resist his influence, his deceptions and his endeavors to 
mislead us into error and sin. 

The Lord instructs us through the Apostle that "we wrestle 
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and 
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against wicked spirits in heavenly places" — the "powers of the 
air." (Ephesians 6:12-18) Satan, as the great general of the 
army of Sin, has largely to do with all the various influences 
against which we battle. It is his cunning, his "wiles," that 
supervise the battle against us; and since he is a spirit being 
of a high order, and therefore much more intelligent than 
ourselves, the contest would be a very unequal one without 
a still more powerful spirit Leader. But we are not left 
helpless to battle against superior wisdom and cunning. Our 
Chief Captain, the Lord Jesus, has conquered Sin, and has 
been exalted to the highest position in the universe next to 
Jehovah. So we can confidently say, "Greater is he that is 
on our part than all they that he against ub." Neither Satan 
nor his cohorts of evil spirit nor all his deluded earthly agents 
can harm us while we trust in our great Captain and obey 
his instructions faithfully. 

OUR BHBMIES— THE WOULD, THE FLESH. THE DEVIL 

The Apostle Paul seems to sum up the agencies through 
which our great enemy Sin seeks again to conquer us, as 
three — the world, the flesh, and the devil. All who have the 
spirit of the world are deceived by the arts of the adversary, 
Satan, who will endeavor to draw us away from the warfare 
in which we have enlisted, to draw us back into the world and 
its vanities. With this spirit of the world we must do battle. 
It is to be fought against and resisted. We must not permit 
its enticements, its ambitions, its pride, again to overpower 
ua and bring us into bondage. These we must resist steadfastly
; and it is a daily battle. 

But the most crucial and continuous part of our battle as 
soldiers of the Lord is with our own flesh. This is ever with 
us. Ever since Sin captured mankind in the person of father 
Adam, its slavery has been conducive to mental, moral and 
physical degradation. ' Its only tendency is to evil, and that 
continually; and only as we become rid of its binding influences
 and perverted tastes, desires, ambitions and hopes 
which sin cultivates, are we able to see matters in their true 
light and to have even a faint glimpse of our naturally degraded
 and fallen condition. But our great Captain has 
redeemed us from this slavery with his own precious blood, 
has delivered us from the thraldom of Sin; and so long as we 
keep our eyes of faith fixed upon him and follow wherever he 
leads, we shall not be reehslaved. 

But we must ever bear in mind that we are still tabernacling
 in fallen, earthly bodies, which have in them the 
motions of sin. These the Lord leaves with us to practise 
on and to develop in as new creatures. Consequently while 


we are now free in Christ, and with our minds we are serving 
our heavenly King, and are enlisted under the banner of the 
King's Son, fighting in his great army corps, yet we are still 
liable to temptations from without and within; and we must 
never for one instant trust to our own power or strength to 
stand. We find ourselves still harassed more or less by the 
perverted tastes and inclinations of our flesh toward the 
service of the old taskmaster. Thus we find that our battle 
with our old nature is also a daily battle, and that we require
 daily strength from above, from the Giver of all good. 
CONSTANT VIGILANCE NECESSARY 

Our flesh, though reckoned dead, and legally dead, is actually
 alive, and necessitates continual watchfulness and 
prayer on our part. But with the great Apostle Paul we 
should he able to say: "I keep my body under, and bring it into 
subjection, lest, while I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway." (1 Corinthians 9:27) When Satan 
attacks us, he appeals to these enemies in our own flesh and 
seeks to encourage these in a warfare against us as new 
creatures, as soldier of the army of the Lord. It is through 
our fleshly weaknesses and tendencies that the spirit of the 
woxld gains closest approach to us and seeks to recapture 
us and lead us hack into the old slavery. 

The new creature is beset, surrounded on every hand, by 
enemies seeking our spiritual disaster. We must battle — 
battle for ourselves — battle for our liberty, battle for victory 
over our own fleshly infirmities and inclinations, battle against 
the spirit of this present evil world, and against the delusions 
and snares set for our feet by our wily foe, Satan, who seeks 
to make evil appear good and good appear evil, and right 
appeal undesirable. No wonder that the Christian soldier is 
urged in, the Word of the Lord to be continually watchful and 
to have on the "whole armor of God." No wonder he is 
cautioned against his wily foes, and especially those of his 
own flesh! 

"PRAISE IS COMELY FOE THE RIGHTEOUS" 

Thanks be to God for the great Captain of our salvation! 
Thanks be to God for the great armory of his blessed word, 
from which we obtain the "helmet of salvation/' the intellectual 
knowledge to protect us from the delusions of our own natural, 
perverted sense, and from the deceptive wiles of the adversary 
of our souls! Thanks be to God for the "breastplate of righteousness
," the merit of our Redeemer, which covers us and 
compensates for all our imperfections and blemishes, which 
protects our vitals from the enemy's darts! Praise his name 
for the shield of faith, of trust, of confidence in him "who 
bought us with his own precious blood," of, assurance that 
he who has begun a good work in us will complete it! Praise 
be to him for the "sandals," the preparation to endure hardness
 patiently as good soldiers! We praise him for the 
wonderful "sword of the spirit/' the Word of his truth, a 
weapon both offensive and defensive, by which we can resist 
our great enemy and slay our internal foes, and "come off more 
than conquerors through him that loved us and bought us." 

We are fighting on behalf of ourselves and on behalf of 
each other. We are fighting to the death — the death of the 
old creature — to maintain our liberty and that of each other. 
The Apostle says: "Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, fighting
 against sin" (Hebrews 12:4); but we must continue the 
fight until we have poured out our blood in the glorious 
cause in which we have enlisted. It is a fight to the finish. 
We must give no quarter to the enemy, nor seek to spare 
ourselves. We are not of those who flee to the rear in time 
of severe conflict. When the battle wa^es hottest, there the 
faithful soldier will surely be found, face to the foe. There are 
no cowards in these ranks — no ignoble deserters! We rejoice 
to defend the honor of our King, the majesty of his righteous 
government. 

THE PARTICULAR OBJECT OF THE WAR 

There is another feature of our warfare aside from these 
which we have mentioned. To observe this feature with 
elearness and distinctness we must take an elevated position 
and note not only the entire trend of the conflict, which has 
now been in progress for over eighteen centuries, but also 
the particular object which the King himself has declared shall 
he attained by this great war. It is this: Not only the church, 
but the entire human race, were "sold under sin" by the disobedience
 of our first parent, Adam. And our great Redeemer, 
our Captain who bought us with his precious blood, gave his 
life as a "propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2) Thus 
he purchased the right, not only to release those who are 
now enlisted as his soldiers, but also to release from the 
power and slavery of Sin all the slaves of this dread taskmaster
. 


[6128] 


August IS, 191? 


THE WATCH TOWRR 


(245-246) 


The great Redeemer has not been prosecuting the work 
of releasing all these slaves up to the present time, but has 
been confining his work to the releasing of a special few, 
a little flock, a small, choice company, that these may be used 
in the later features of his work as associates and joint-heirs 
with himself. So all the *laves of Sin who so desire are yet 
to be delivered through the instrumentality of those who are 
fighting under the banner of the King of heaven. When their 
mighty warfare has been finished, these faithful soldiers will 
be exalted to reign with the King's Son. 

What a glorious prospect, what a benevolent ambition is 
thus set before us in the Gospel, in respect to the future work 
of all who are now called to be sons of God, joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ, and good soldiers in his cause — the cause of 
righteousness and truth. Oh, how anxious we are that we 
Khali be "overeomerV that we may inherit these blessed privileges
 — secure this great boon of association with' our Redeemer 
in his work of blessing ^all the families of the earth V 

Inspired by this vision of future glory, let us return to a 
further consideration of the requirements of this special, select 
company which the great King has chosen as particularly his 
own. Every soldier knows at the time of his enrollment that 
he is sure to see service, and not only in one battle, but in 
many; and that although there will be times of special 
fighting, there will never be a time until the close of the war, 
when there will be a cessation of hostilities. We may desert 
if we choose, for none are drafted in this army, but all are 
i\t liberty to abandon the cause if they wish. None are 
held in bondage; but true soldiers should be always at their 
post. 

MANY COUNTERFEIT ARMY CORPS 

Our Captain desires in this army only those who serve the 
truth in the love of it, who have a real desire for serviee. All 
others are in the wrong ranks, if they essay to join themselves
 to the King's brigade. The charge to each of these 
true soldiers is: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee the crown of life." (Revelation 2:10) Only in death 
can we finish our course, and be mustered out of the war. 

All who truly desire to be soldiers of Christ must beware 
of certain deceptions which the great adversary brings forward
, by which he would get us into the wrong army, by appearing
 as an angel of light, us a servant of righteousness, as 
a fighter in the Lord's cause. He has organized numerous 
false army corps, into which he endeavors to attract all 
who learn something of the liberty of Christ and who wish 
to become his soldiers. In order to make the matter the more 
deceptive, the adversary carefully guards against any intimation
 of his relationship with these. Indeed, he puts" forth as 
leaders and under-officers in these various armies as many 
nf the soldiers of the cross as he can get into a deluded condition
, that these armies may be the more attractive to those 
who are seeking the service of the true King, 

These armies are not as select as the King's army; but 
they offer many inducements to soldiers, and attract very many 
who are really servants of this great enemy of the King, because
 they promise great rewards and little or no fighting, and 
a generally pleasant and social camp life. These conditions 
of enlistment seem so much more favorable than those made 
in enlisting in the more select army, and on the whole these 
other army corps are so large, so tine and so attractive in 
appearance, that many of the soldiers of the cross make 
the mistake of enlisting under some one of these wrong 
banners. 

The banner of the "King's Own" is emblazoned with a 
cross and a crown and on the reverse side are the names of 
the great King and of the great General-in-Chief. The law 
of this army is briefly comprehended in one word — -"Love." 
Hence the soldiers who are taking the proper care to be 
guided into the right company, who have listened with the 
proper diligence to the King's directions, will make no mistake
. If any true soldiers of the King have inadvertently 
gotten into the wrong ranks, they are sure later to see their 
mistake; and then they promptly withdraw and join the 
ranks of the faithful. 

A "FIGHT OF FAITH" INDEED 

Our text calls this good fight a "fight of faith," and it is 
very properly so called; for it is a fight of faith in every 
particular. It is a fight under an unseen Leader and against an 
unseen foe. It is only by the eye of faith that we recognize 
the Captain of our salvation, and only by means of the Word 
of God do we recognize the wily leader who opposes us. It is 
a warfare which can be successfully conducted only by earnest 
prayer and constant watchfulness. If we begin to trust in 
our own strength and prowess, and forget to look always toour
 Captain for instructions, we are certain to weaken before 


our enemy, and are in continual danger of defeat. But with 
our eyes fixed on him, and keeping our banner held aloft 
as an inspiration, we can never fail. We can exclaim with 
the Apostle: 'Thanks be to God, who giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ!" 

This faith which we must have to be true soldiers ia not 
only an intellectual belief in God, but both head and heart— 
both intellect and affections — must be enlisted. Some have 
only the head belief. Others have only emotion. But neither 
of these alone is sufficient. Neither will stand the fiery 
ordeal. They must abide together if one would endure to the 
end and win the promised reward. The trial of our faith to 
which our Lord and the Apostles refer is a trial not only of 
our intellectual recognition of divine truth, but also of our 
heart-reliance upon God. In both respects every true child 
of God will find his faith sorely tried, and as a faithful 
soldier let him not fail to be armed for the conflict. 

If an attack is made upon the intellectual foundation ot 
our faith, we should see to it that we have a "thus saith the 
Lord" for every item of our belief. Let the Word of God 
alone settle every question, and let no human philosophies, 
however ingenious, lead us into error; for if the foundation of 
faith become unsettled, the superstructure cannot stand when 
the winds and floods of adversity beat against it. Doubt and 
fear will cause it to tremble; and when it is thus weakened, 
the vigilant adversary will surely send a blast of temptation 
against it, and great will be the soul's peril, 

"PURIFIED AND MADE WHITE AND TRIED" 

But having the doctrines of the Word of God clearly comprehended
 as a sure foundation of faith, we need also to look 
well to the superstructure of heart-reliance, which is really in 
greater danger from storms and floods than is the foundation, 
being more constantly exposed. The Apostle Peter, another 
faithful lieutenant in the army of our King, telU us that a 
tried, proven faith, a faith that has stood the test of fiery 
ordeal, and has come off victorious in the testings, is very 
precious in the sight of God, (1 Peter 1:7) Every time we 
pass through a conflict and still retain, not only the truth, but 
also our confidence in God, our reliance on his promises, our 
integrity of heart and of purpose, and our zeal for righteousness
 our characters grow stronger, more symmetrical, more 
Ohristlike; and hence we are more pleasing to oux King, 
who is subjecting us to discipline to this very end. 

Then "think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which 
is to try you, as though some strange thing happened to you. 
But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, 
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also 
with exceeding joy." (1 Peter 4:12, 13) The Prophet Daniel 
says that in this time — the time of the end of the present 
reign of evil — "Many Bhall be purified and made white and 
tried." (Daniel 12:10) Malachi the Prophet compares the 
trials and tests of this time to a "refiner's fire," and to "fuller's 
soap." (3:2, 3) The Word of our God abounds with promises, 
warnings, and counsels to t"hese soldiers who are valiantly 
fighting for the Lord and for his truth. Many are the words 
of comfort and consolation found in this storehouse of treasure 
for the battle-worn people of God — both in the Old Testament 
and in the New. 

Are you, dear brother or sister, t beloved comrade in the 
army corps of our King, hard pressed on every side with 
temptations to daubt that our great King thinks upon you? 
Are you tempted to doubt that his love and care are yours, 
that his precious promises belong to you? Have you grown 
discouraged and disheartened? Do the foes seem too many 
and too strong? Do the reproaches come with crushing weight, 
and do the clouds hang heavy over your seemingly defenseless 
head? Ah! it is just here that faith must claim her victory! 
Is it not written, "This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even your faith"? (1 John 5:4) Your faith is on 
trial now. You have been blessed with an understanding of 
God's glorious truth that few possess, that even the saints of 
former days did not have. Great blessings and great light 
call for corresponding faith. Will you rise to the occasion? 
Will you prove to be a faithful soldier of the cross who will 
stand the fiery darts of the enemy? 

THE BIJBSSEDNESS 07 PERFECT TRUST 

Can you doubt that he who cares for the lilies of the field 
cares for you? W T ill not he who nourishes and waters them, 
and who gives them the genial sunshine and the refreshing 
showers, more surely feed and water and nourish and care 
for his child? The lilies do not trouble themselves as to 
whether they shall have what they need for their growth 
and sustenance. They simply look up to God and Teceive 
their needs. 


[6129] 


(246-249) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N, Y. 


"They do not -toil; 
Content with their allotted task 
They do but grow; they do not ask 
A richer lot, a higher sphere, 
But in their loveliness appear, 
And grow, and smile, and do their best, 
And unto God they leave the rest." 

A Christian writer has beautifully expressed the proper 
attitude of the true child of God. He says: "Interpose no 
barrier to his mighty life-giving power, working in you all 
the goed pleasure of his will. Yield yourself up utterly to 
his sweet control. Put your growing into his hands as completely
 as you have put all your other affairs. Suffer him to 
manage it as he will. Bo not concern yourself about it, nor 
even think of it. Trust him absolutely and always. Accept 
each moment's dispensation as it comes to you from his dear 
hands, as being the needed sunshine or dew for that moment's 
growth. Say a continual 'yes' to your Father's will." 

So doing, the soul will surely thrive and grow up into the 
likeness of the Master, our great Leader and Captain. No 
sorrow can. overtake us except as his dear hand shall administer
 it. Nothing can come to the child of God by chance. 
It is blessed to thus yield ourselves wholly to the Lord in 
perfect trust, confidence and resignation. It brings a peace 
that none can know who do not place themselves fully in his 
hands in childlike faith, glad to let &im lead where he will. 
It is a lack of faith that causes a fear to yield ourselves thus 
wholly to God; and "without faith it is impossible to please 
him." (Hebrews 11:6) If we really believe in his infinite 
love for us, and in his infinite wisdom and power, we cannot 
doubt him. 

A NOTEWORTHY EXAMPLE OF FAITH 

The beloved Apostle Paul was a noteworthy example of 
this unwavering faith. He says of himself and of the other 
Apostles, "Ye have us for an ensample." (Philippians 3:17; 
1 Peter 5:3) And noble examples they were of faithfulness, 
of zeal, of patience, of endurance, of true Christian fortitude 
and heroism. At the beginning of St. Paul's Christian career, 
the Lord said of him, "I will show him how great things he 
must suffer for my flame's sake"; and the Apostle was not 
long in proving the truth of this prediction and assurance. 
But instead of permitting* the prospect of continual tribulation 
to depress him, he rejoiced in the privilege thus afforded of 
testifying his love to the Lord. He says: "And now, behold, 
I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the 
things that shall befall me there; save that the holy Spirit 
witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions 
await me. But none of these things move me; neither count 
I my life dear unto myself, so that I may finish my courte 
with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord 


Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God."— Acts 
20:22-24. 

Hear the Apostle's testimony of his experiences: "In labors 
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons frequent, in 
deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received 1 forty stripes, save 
one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I atoned, thrice 
1 suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I been in the 
deep; in journeyings often, in perils of water, in perils of robbers
, in perils of mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, 
in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the 
sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness
, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings 
often, in cold and nakedness. Besides those things that are 
without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the 
churches." — 2 Corinthians 11:23-28. 

Through all these tribulations the noble Apostle never 
wavered in his faith in God. Daily he pressed toward the 
prize: fighting, "not as uncertainly," nor "as one that beatetli 
the air." His singleness of purpose saved him from many 
temptations which come to those who are more or less doubleminded
. He f ol lowed the course which was sure to win , 
and no other course would win. He did not gaze around upon 
the objects on either side of him as he ran; but he kept his 
eyes steadfastly fixed upon the goal toward which he was 
bending his every energy. 

Thus only can we win this prize held out to us by our 
God, our great King. Faith and trust in the Lord and fullest 
heart obedience to him are paramount essentials in our winning
 out in the glorious warfare in which we are engaged. 
If our faith be of the proper kind we can say with the Psalmist
: "I will fear no evil, for thy rod and thy staff they comfort
 me." (Psalm 23:4) Such, and such alone, can be led 
of the Lord, in this time when we must walk by faith and 
not by sight. Such alone will have the confidence to go 
forward encountering the many oppositions within and without. 
Dear brethren, fellow soldiers in this glorious war, let us 
have such implicit trust and confidence in our Lord Jesus, 
and such entire and glad submission to his will that all 
the rage of the enemy, all the privations and hardships 
of the way, all the storms of shot and shell, the weariness of 
the soldier's camp life, the dreary marches, the fatigue — 
nothing — shall cause us to desert our great Captain. 

Let each of us prove our mettle. The hosts of heaven are 
looking down upon us. We do not fight alone. Strength all* 
sufficient will be ours for every day and hour and moment. 
The battle will be sharp and short. The conflict of the ages 
is drawing to its glorious close. Victory is certain to all 
the loyal soldiers. Ere long the enemy will flee in confusion, 
and we shall triumph through him who leads us and who can 
know no defeat. 


THE BENEFITS OF TOTAL ABSTINENCE 

[The first paragraph of this article was reprinted from article entitled "Darnel in Babylon," published in issue of July 1 
1899. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled " Good Purposes of Heart," published in issue of September
 15, 1905. Please see the articles named. J 


PROPER LIBERTY IN THE ECCLESIAS 


There is a certain amount of Christian liberty that we believe
 the Lord would be pleased to have exercised by the 
members of each ecclesia. For instance, suppose that a brother 
were to go to the home of another brother, and a few friends 
came in to spend the evening. Suppose that one of these 
should propose to have some secular music or some social 
games, and that another would say, "No, let us have a Bible 
study!" We do not think that it would be proper for the 
host to reply, "We cannot have a Bible study; for all meetings
 held must be authorized by our class. So we will have 
some music or games." This would be a narrow view, an 
arbitrary one. We could see no objection to the holding of 
a Bible study under these circumstances. 

The brother surely would have the right to decide how 
the evening should be spent in his own home, and to ask 
some capable brother to lead the study. And as the host, he 
might properly say, "We will ask in more of our neighbors 
for another meeting next week. I have been trying to interest 
my neighbors in these truths, and I shall be very glad to invite
 them over to hear the truth presented." We think this 
would be entirely proper. 

If, however, those attending the meetings should desire 
a regular meeting, it should be turned over to the local class 
of Associated Bible Students, that they might assign this 


meeting to a certain evening in this brother's home, if he so 
desired, or to another home, and might supply a leader. And 
if certain members of an ecclesia should say, "Let us start 
another regular meeting," this, we understand, would be improper
. They would have a right to start a new ecclesia, but 
if they did so they would thereby be severing their connection 
with the ecclesia of which they had been members. This 
would, we think, be very unwise, except under conditions 
that made such a course seem a necessity. Thereafter they 
would have no right to return to the other class and expect 
to have a voice in its matters, unless they dissolved their 
connection with the new class. Otherwise, confusion would 
result. 

There must be consistency in all that we do. Those who 
become members of an ecclesia, by association and by voting 
in their elections, etc., give up a measure of their personal 
liberties dn order that they may have the advantages of cooperation
 with others of the Lord's people. But this would 
not mean such a bondage that we could not have a study 
in the Bible at any time in our own home or by request in 
the home of another, without the consent of our class, and 
that we must therefore »pend the evening in some far less 
profitable way. We are p seek to have the Lord's spirit, the 
spirit of a sounfd mind, in all that we do. 


T6130] 


THE FIERY FURNACE 

(This article was a reprint of that published m issue o£ July 1, 1899, which please see.] 


THE BOSTON CONVENTION 


The convention at Boston is now a matter of history. 
The pleasure of the personal fellowship of the dear friends 
is past; but it will be a long, long time before the memory 
of those pleasant and blessed hours of fellowship will 'be* 
effaced. We have often heard of the hospitality of the New 
England people; but when to this were added the graces of the 
Spirit of the Lord which were manifested by many of the 
dear friends at Boston, our hearts were made exceedingly 
glad. 

They had placed at our disposal one of the finest auditoriums
 in the city of Boston — Tremont Temple, the home 
of the elite Baptist Church Congregation of that city. This 
beautiful auditorium seats about 3,000; but this was only one 
of the many conveniences placed at the disposal of the Convention
. There were reception rooms, consultation rooms, 
rest rooms, hospital rooms, if needed, with necessary conveniences
; chairman's room, president's room, typists and 
typewriters, musicians and almost everything oue could think 
of to increase the pleasure and to manifest love and hospitality. 
And the entertainment committee had given such careful 
attention to the selection of rooms for the visiting friends 
that the chairman reported that during the entire Convention 
lie had not received even one complaint from any one regarding
 this department. On the other hand, he had heard 
many expressions of appreciation and satisfaction. 

The opening day, Wednesday, was exceedingly hot, the 
temperature rnnging between 90 and 100. Thursday seemed 
to be even warmer; but on Friday the hot wave was broken, 
and during the remainder of the Convention the weather was 
agreeable — excellent convention weather. 

However, the "feast of fat things" which the Lord provides
 was the chief desire of all those in attendance. Tnouwinds
 no doubt had been praying for the Lord's rich blessing 
upon the Convention; and he* richly fulfilled his promise that 
w he re two or three might be gathered together in his name 
lie would be there, and would fulfil his promise — "Blessed 
are those servants whom the Lord when he eometh shall find 
watching; verily I say unto you that be shall gird himself 
and make them to sit down to meat and will come forth to 
serve them." It was the testimony of all who came seeking 
a blessing that the Lord fulfilled his promises. Truly he 
gave "things new and old" out of his Word; and he caused 
such rejoicing of heart and manifested his presence and blessing
 to such an extent that many expressed themselves to the 
effect that they had never attended a Convention where the 
presence of the Lord seemed to hover more lovingly over every 
session and to bless each waiting heart! 

The Convention was opened promptly on time with an 
address of welcome by Brother Margeson, chairman of the 
Board of Elders of the Boston ecclesia. Response was made 
by Brother Rutherford, President of the Society, accepting 
the hospitality of the Boston friends, and calling attention to 
the great privileges which are ours in attending the Convention
, with the thought of being in the presence of our Lord 
Jesus and the fellow-members of the body and of the great 
opportunity of pressing forward in the race which is now so 
nearly completed and of the ever brightening hope that we 
might finish our course with joy. The Convention was then 
turned over to the chairman. Following was an hour of rejoicing
 at a praise and testimony meeting. In the afternoon 
there was a short praise and testimony meeting, followed 
with addresses by Brothers Howlett and Graham. In the 
evening Part I of the Creation Drama was shown; and notwithstanding
 the exceeding hot weather the attendance was 
gratifying. 

Thursday was called "Our Warfare Day." In the morning 
a praise and testimony service was followed by discourses by 
Brothers Thornton and Van Amburgh; in the afternoon a 
praise and testimony service, then discourses by Brothers 
Thorn and Rutherford. Part II of the Drama was shown in 
the evening; and again the attendance was good. 

Friday was designated as "Consecration Day" and opened 
with a praise and testimony service, followed with discourses 
by Brothers Eshleman and Toole; and in the afternoon there 
were discourses from Brothers Ilerr, Stephenson and Barker. 
In the evening Part III of the Photo-Drama was shown. 

Saturday was "Harvesters' Day," and opened with a delightful
 morning praise and testimony meeting, particularly 
for the colporteurs and the pastoral workers. Surely it was 
inspiring to listen to the many account of the Lord's blessing 
resting upon those labors of love! This was followed by a 
discourse on baptism by Brother Sturgeon, after which forty 
sisters and twenty-eight brethren symbolized their consecration 
unto death by immersion in water. In the afternoon a short 
prayer and praise service was followed with discourses by 
Brothers Brenneisen and Woodworth. Brother Woodworth 
related some interesting incidents relative to the compilation 
of the Seventh volume, and spoke on the parable of the penny 
and some other things. In the evening Part IV of the Drama 
was shown to an appreciative audience. This closed the meetings
 at the Temple. 

Sunday all the services were held at the Arena. The day 
was designated as "Kingdom Day." The morning testimony 
service was much enjoyed, and was followed with discourses 
by Brothers Meggison and Mac-mill an, both of which were 
much appreciated. The afternoon was intended particularly 
for the public; and the discourse by Brother Rutherford was 
on the subject. "Are We at the End of the World?" It was 
estimated that tljere were between 3500 and 4000 present. 
Close attention was given, and many were the' expression? 
of interest. At seven o'clock the love-feast was held, preceded 
by remarks by Brother Rutherford, encouraging the dear 
friends to run with patience the race set before them, to 
hold fast that which they have, to gird up the loins of thefr 
mind and to give close heed to that which they had heard, 
lest at any time they let these things slip. The expressions 
of appreciation and the good-bys and the-Lord-be-with-you 
during the love -feast were encouraging and uplifting. It is 
estimated that there were 1100 at the love-feast. The attendance
 at the different sessions of the Convention averaged 
from 1000 to 1400. Truly it was good to be there; and all 
felt that the Lord had surely met with us by the way and 
blessed us ! We trust that each who attended returned to his 
home more determined than ever to press along the narrow 
way and to seek diligently to make his calling and election 
sure. May we have the great privilege of attending the 
general assembly of the church of the first-borns, which wc 
hope will convene soon! 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


ANOTHER NEW REJOICING READER 
Dear Brethren is Christ: — 

For the past few months I have been a very earnest 
student of Studies in the Scriptures, and words will not 
express nay joy and delight in this spiritual food that they 
show me in the Bible. 

One day last Spring, as I entered one of our leading stores, 
a group of men, including our Baptist minister, several of 
our leading men in business and politics, and also an escaped 
missionary from Armenia, were having a vi^ry animated conversation
 about God and why he would allow this terrible war 
to go on. The superintendent of our Presbyterian Sunday 
School said, "The Bible says that God repented that he had 
made man, and I think it is too had if human beings have 
got to suffer for God's mistakes." 

Not one of the other men offered one word in God's defense
, and as I could not help hearing their conversation, 


my heart just ached to step up and say, "Excuse me, gentlemen
, but God does not make mistakes." 

I am just a common farmer's wife and my natural modesty 
and timidity held me back, and besides I was very young in 
the truth then. But I know it was not fear that held me back, 
for if it had been a group of women, I know I should have 
spoken. 

Just before this, in the same store, the proprietor of the 
store and our Methodist minister were having a similar conversation
 as I entered, and I saw that the storekeeper's heart 
was very much troubled, and that neither the Methodist nor 
Baptist minister could help him any or offer any explanations 
of the troublous times we are passing through. 

As soon as I could I had a quiet talk with him alone in 
the rear of his store, and got him to promise to read the 
first volume. He kept it on his desk in the store, and soon 
after he told me that it had disappeared and could not be 

[6181] (250-254) 


(254-255) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


found. I said to never mind, I only hoped it had gone 
where it would do Bome one good, and I then took him my 
copy in cloth of Vol. 2, as he seemed very much interested 
in Christ's second coming. 

Your sister in Christ, Allie J. Jackson. — N. Y. 

DAILY PBAYINO FOE HUMILITY AND— DEATH TO 
SELFISHNESS 

Dear Brethren in the One Hope: — 

I have received the answers to the V. D. M. Questions, 
which you so kindly went over for me the second time; and 
words cannot express my rejoicing that I have received the 
85% required to pass this examination. I truly believe that 
this is the Lord's work and one of the ways of proving his 
saints. I appreciate your kindly suggestions on the questions 
as numbered, and also in the reading of the six volumes at 
least twice; and with the help of the Lord I intend doing 
this as soon as I can ; for I realize that we are living in a 
time when we need the whole armor of God to withstand the 
fiery darts of the great adversary, who is seeking every day 
to deceive the Lord's little ones. Each day I am seeking to 
be more humble and to keep self out of sight and to grow more 
in the knowledge of the Lord and in the graces of his Spirit. 

Accept of my love and my heart's thanks for your kindly 
labor of love in giving me a second chance in examining my 
answers to the V. D. M. Questions. I feel the Lord's approval
 now in speaking the glad tidings of his glorious kingdom
, which we believe is so near at hand. 

With much Christian love, J. M. Mountford, — Va. 

THE PASTOR'S VOICE INT HER HOME 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

In regard to the Angelophone, I am well pleased with it, 
and so glad to have our dear Pastor's noble voice in my home, 
as we long so much to hear him lecture and to see him as he 
was — so good, loving and kind to all. 

We are the only ones in the truth in this part of the 
country* My husband and his brother's family came here 
seven years ago from Eastern Tennessee. Our Uncle got 
some truth literature. As he was a Baptist minister, he 
preached it at once. He stood severe trials for the truth's 
sake, and was faithful unto death, which came a year ago. 
We feel that he is with Brother Russell in glory. 

Yours in hope, Mrs. Cora Wilmoth. — Mo, 

DEVOTED LOVE FOR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL 
Dear Brethren: — 

I wish to extend to you all as a family my deepest sympathy
 in your great bereavement, which has befallen you in 
the loss of our dear Pastor Russell. The sad intelligence 
of our Pastor's passing away was a great shock. I was 
greatly overcome. My husband and I devotedly loved Brother 
Russell. We could not help it, for he had done so much for 
us. He was the means of opening our blind eyes. Hia Bible 
helps gave us a more beautiful and harmonious understanding 
of God's great plan of the Bible. Praise the dear Lord for 
it all! 

My husband was one of our dear Pastor's first friends. 
This was in the year 1886. Brother Merrill passed away 
Feb. 8, 1915. He went "in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye." He passed away very peacefully, at our cozy home, 
in his easy rocking-chair. He wanted to go that way. I am 
all alone, as far as truth people are concerned, and isolated. 
Thank God I have the truth, and am happy in believing the 
Bible and believing in God and in his Only Begotten Son — 
not in human traditions. 

My husband was the means of bringing me into the truth, 
and he was one of the dearest men on earth. We were 
mutually agreed in believing the Gospel story. My husband 
was wholly the Lord's. One could see the Christ-like spirit 
in hi3 countenance. He was so devoted to God and to Christ, 
thoroughly rooted and grounded in God's plan of salvation! 
His life was pure and spotless. 

When I was married I was a Methodist — didn't know 
there was such a person on earth as our beloved Pastor 
Russell. I soon came into the truth when I heard the "glad 
tidings of great joy." Our beloved Brother Russell — oh, how 
my loved one and I loved him! We loved every sermon and 
message that came from his pen — could not live without our 
dear Pastor's sermons. God and our Savior came first in 
our hearts, and the plan of salvation. 

The grace of God is sufficient for us all in every time of 
need. My loved one saw our dear Pastor. I never did, but 
have his photograph. Praise the Lord! I have all the 
Studies, Watch Towers and sermons! Please read this 
letter to the Bethel family to show them my sympathy for 
you all. I am looking forward to that great day when I 
shall go to meet my heavenly Father, my Savior, my loved 


one, our dear Pastor, and all the dear ones gone before. Love 
and sympathy to all the brethren and sisters from 

Your sister in Christ, Mrs. Alice Merrill. — Vt. 

DEEP APPRECIATION OP THE TOWER 
Precious Brethren in Christ: — 

Greetings in the sweet name of Jesus! I have been feasting
 this morning on the April 15th Watch Tower. My! those 
articles are so good that my heart could not help but thrill 
with joy! Oh, how good our heavenly Father is! What a 
glorious feast the dear Lord has prepared for me! Truly it 
is a feast of fat things! It is actually just what I need that 
always comes out in The Watch Tower. 

"Jesus Anointed at Bethany" is truly a sweeter article than 
honey. It made my heart leap with joy. Yes, I do want to be 
more Christlike. Yes, I want to be like "the servant of all," 
while it is day. 

'The Christian's Duty in Time of War 1 ' was also a solving
 of a question in my mind. Those letters of the saints 
were an encouragement. It makes me put more energy into 
the battle when I see others doing the same. Be assured, 
loving brethren, that I appreciate your ministry of love for 
God and the brethren and that I "do remember you at the 
throne of grace. Praying God's blessing upon your noble 
efforts, I remain, with much Christian love. 

Your Greek brother, Gregory Sakatos. — Ohio. 

A VOICE FROM IRELAND 
Dear Brethren: — 

The members of the Belfast ecclesia desire to express 
their deep sympathy with the dear brethren of the Bethel 
family at Brooklyn in the passing beyond the veil of our 
dear Pastor. We hasten to assure you of our loyal cooperation
 in the harvest work; and we pray always for you 
all, that the Lord may continue to bless and guide you. 

We are looking forward to engaging in the pastoral work 
without delay and are rejoicing in the privilege. We remain, 
dear brethren, 

Your fellow-servants in the Lord, 

Belfast Ecclesia.— Ireland. 
"WHY DID HE NOT TEI#L ME?" 
My Dear Brethren: — 

Explanatory of the enclosed, I submit the following: About 
the year 1890 a friend put the volumes of Millennial Dawn 
in my hands, but he made no comment as to what they contained
 other than that they were a work on pre-millennialism. 
I had never heard of Pastor Russell and, therefore, was not 
interested in the author. At that time I was an elder in the 
church and my time was so fully occupied that I did not open 
the books, not imagining they were very different from other 
works. Why did not my friend tell me? 

Later, I worked in an office with a Bible Student, but he 
never opened up on me. Once or twice I heard him use the 
expression, "The truth," and immediately I sized him up as 
being of "the home of truth" or "new thought" cult. As I 
had no use for the cults that repudiated the ransom, I had no 
use for him from a religious standpoint. He never let me 
know his religion was different. Why did he irot tell me? 

Still later I was brought in contact with one whom I 
subsequently learned was a pilgrim. Even he did not broach 
religion to me, and when I learned he was a Bible Student, 
I did not know that meant anything different from the general
 run of beliefs. Why did he not tell me? 

Later still I attended now and then the Sunday services 
of the Bible Students, but always happened in when some 
ordinary Bible theme was being presented and, therefore, did 
not know even then that there was a difference. I did not read 
the literature, for I supposed it to be of the same nature as 
the discourses, and why take time from the reading of my 
Bible? 

Finally, a friend of mine, a Presbyterian elder, joined the 
Bible Students and he told me there was a difference. Then 
the Photo-Dbama of Creation came along, and I knew there 
was a difference. I prayed, "Lord, that which I see not, teach 
thou me." (Job 34:32) And my eyes were opened wide. Immediately
 I consecrated and symbolized my consecration at 
the very first opportunity, whieh chanced to be at the same 
time our dear pilgrim -brother R. 0. Hadley was baptized — 
October, 1914. 

I believe I would have welcomed the truth at any time 
had I but known there was a difference. As it is, I have 
lost a lifetime of opportunity for harvest work. 

Because of ray experience as here narrated, it ie my purpose
 to let my friends in the nominal church know there is a 
difference and a delightful and blessed difference! 

Lew Anderson. 


[6182] 


August 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(242-259) 


ANOEIiOPHONE IMPROVED WITH USE 

Dkab Brfthrkn: — 

We received the Angelophone on the 8th inst. We aTe indeed
 thankful that Pastor Russell's voice is audible. We 
know that it is he who is speaking. How great are God's 
wisdom and power! Our Pastor's memory will live throughout
 the ages. Through his teachings God has drawn us closer 
to himself. 

We would have written sooner, but were waiting to see 
if the Angelophone would improve with use. We find that it 
does. We hope that the dear friends who have been so badly 
disappointed will find their Angelophones improving in like 
manner. We very much regret the impatience shown on our 
part, and will try to improve along that line, as well as along 
many others. Asking your pardon for being so impatient, 
we are, dear friends, 

Yours in the one hope, . — Fta. 


DOING WHAT SHE CAN DO TO SPREAD THE TBUTH 

My Deab Brethren: — 

Greetings in our dear Redeemer's name! Having read 
the article in The Watch Towkr regarding the V. D. M. 
questions, I feel that it is meat in due season for me. I received
 great blessing from it, and now wish to have a blank 
mailed to me if you please, so that I may know just where 
I stand in the school of Christ, I am so thankful to the 
heavenly Father that you had that in The Wqtoh Tower. 
I feel it was especially for me, I am one of the few who 
cannot go ,out in the pastoral work, but I witness to my 
neighbors and friends as I have the opportunity, and hand 
out tracts in the car sometimes and to those who come to 
my door. Once in a while I get a hearing ear, and it makes 
my heart rejoice. In sincere Christian love, 

Your sister in the Lord, by his grace, 

Harriet H. Moore. — Ind. 


For some time the work in Jamaica has been hindered in 
a measure. We are pleased to announce now that the Society 
has opened a depot at No, 5 Duke St., Kingston; and from 
that headquarters all the work of the Society will be transacted
 throughout Jamaica and Porto Rico. We hope the dear 
friends will co-operate with the brethren there in spreading 
the glad tidings. The opportunities now for putting the 
Scripture Studies in the hands of the people, and for doing 
the volunteer work, and for the spreading of the glad tidTHE
 HARVEST WORK IN JAMAICA 


ings, are second to no time in the past; and we hope that all 
who can will go forth in the harvest while it is called day. 

Please address all communications concerning the work 
in the West Indies to the International Bible Students 
Assn., No. 5 Duke St., Kingston. 

A general convention is being arranged for the Island, to 
be held at Kinsgton, October 28 to 31, inclusive. All inquiries 
concerning the convention and arrangements should be addressed
 to the depot above named. 


BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS IN BOOK 


A book containing many of Brother Russell's choice sermons
 is being prepared. The number of orders from the 


friends will determine the size of the edition. Order now 
that we may know how many books to print. Price later. 


Vou XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., SEPTEMBER 1, 1917 


No. 17 


THE BOND OF PERFECTION 


" And besides all these things, put on love; it is the bond of completeness; and let the peace of the Anointed preside in your 
hearts, for which you were also called in one body; and be thankful. ' ; — Colossians 3 :14, 15, Diaglott. 
The children of God, walking toy faith, rejoice in the hope 
of the glory of God, and all along their journey are striving to 
put on the bond of perfection, which is love. To aid us in the 


development of the likeness of our Lord and Master, God has 
given us in his Word many great and precious promises. 

Love is an inexhaustible sirbject. Only when we have attained
 to that perfect state which Gad has promised as a reward
 to those who love him supremely shall we be able to love 
as we ought and to manifest it as we desire. 

The Apostle Paul, a faithful servant of Jesus Christ, was 
wholly devoted to the Lord and his righteous cause; and possessing
 a keen -desire to build up the brethren in the most holy 
faith, he wrote much to them concerning love. Since he tells 
us it is the bond of perfection, we can with profit meditate 
much upon the subject. 

What is love? It is the greatest and grandest attribute 
of character possessed by any creature. The Scripture declares
, "God is Love." This does not mean that Love i3 God, 
but that in Jehovah is found the perfect expression of love. 

The Scriptures show that there is a distinction between 
our love for God and our love for the brethren. It is well 
that we get this distinction clearly in our minds, that we may 
analyze the subject and have a deeper appreciation thereof. 
Love for God may be defined as a worshipful adoration of Jehovah
, a fellowship of spirit, and a joyful submission to his 
holy will because of our reverence for him and gratitude to 
him as the Almighty One, for what he has done for us. 

WHY IW> WE LOVE GOD? 

We believe that our heavenly Father is pleased with an intelligent
 worship of him. The Apostle Peter tells us that we 
should be able to give a reason for the hope that is in us. ( 1 
Peter 3:15) We should likewise be able to give the reason 
why we love Jehovah. The reason that must appeal to our 
minds is the reason which we find in the Word of the Lord. 

Sweeter than all things else is love. The human race has 
had only a taste of that which pertains to life, and never the 
enjoyment of life with the right thereto, since Adam forfeited 
that right. Any one who would give to us the thing that we 
chiefly desire would merit our deepest gratitude. Desiring life, 
death has ever been the certain portion of man. Desiring love, 
how few have found its satisfaction! Behold the unselfish 
desire of God to do good to man, to give him a supreme exon
 him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 
3 j 16) It would be impossible for one to truly love God without
 having a knowledge of him; and as a man with a reverential
 mind increases in knowledge of the gracious and loving
 character of* Jehovah, his love necessarily increases. 

WHO 18 GOD? 

Who is the great and mighty One who has taken cognizance 
of us to provide a means whereby we may obtain life? — the 
Giver of this unspeakable gift provided for all his obedient 
creatures? Answer: He is the great First Cause, without beginning
 and without ending, "from everlasting to everlasting/' 
It is he who created all things for his pleasure and for the Joy 
of those who will love and serve him faithfully. All creation 
bespeaks his justice, wisdom, love and power. Truly did David, 
the sweet musician and singer of Israel, say to him: "The 
heavens relate the glory of God, and the expanse telleth of 
the works of his hands; day unto day uttereth speech, and night 
unto night showeth knowledge. There is no speech; there are 
no words ; their voice is not heard ; but their melody extendeth 
through all the earth and to the end of the world their words. 
For the sun hath he set a tabernacle among them." — 'Psalm 
19:1-5, Leeser. 

As a youthful shepherd David reveled in the visible- creation
 of God. With the field for his bedchamber, with probably 
a sheepskin for his mattress and a stone for his pillow, he gazed 
into the expanse above him with the naked eye and beheld the 
myriads of stars moving noiselessly through space, and his own 
heart was moved to adoration and praise, and with reverential 
mind he gave utterance to these words of worship and devotion
. 

What might one say if he could behold all the wonders of 
God's creation? By the use of modern appliances, scientists 
tell us that they are able to measure the distance to the sun, 
and even to the Pleiades, supposed to be the throne of Jehovah. 
They tell us that millions of planets— which are merely the 
satellites of great suns and which have their own satellites — 
have been discovered by the use of such ■ instruments ; and 
doubtless if man could stand on the outer rim of the orbit of 
the farthest world that has been discovered, and gaze on into 
space with even stronger instruments, millions more of God's 
wonderful suns with their retinue of planets would appear. 

As we have in mind the visible creation of Jehovah and 


pression of his love by making provision whereby these deep contemplate its wonders, beyond all that man can comprehend, 
fully gratified! "God so loved the world we begin to have a deeper appreciation of the works of King 


longings may yet be 

that he gave his Only Begotten Son that whosoever believeth 


David, when he said on another occasion, "0 Lord, how mani- 


[6133] 


(260-261) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


fold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all! The 
earth is full of thy riches! So is this great and wide sea, 
wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great 

beasts The glory of the Lord endureth forever; the Lord 

shall rejoice in his works. T will sing unto the Lord as long aa 
I live; 1 will sing praises to my God while I have my being. 
My meditation of him shall be^sweet; 1 will be glad in the 
Lord."— Psalm 104:24, 25, 31, 33, 34. 

Language is a poor vehicle to convey our conception of 
God ; and yet our conception is as nothing compared to what 
he really is. This is the Mighty One who takes cognizance 
of man. Who, then, beholding his power and wisdom, would 
not reverence this great One? He who possesses a reverential 
mind is led indeed to adore and worship such a God. It was 
his beloved Son Jesus who said, "This is life eternal, that they 
might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent." (John 17:3) If to know him and his beloved
 Son means life, and life in perfection, the greatest thing 
that we desire, then why should not all with eagerness seek a 
knowledge of Jehovah and of his Son? Truly, if mankind knew 
the Lord, the earth would be filled with the creatures who 
would love and adore him. 

But for six thousand years the adversary has blinded man 
to the goodness of God. " As St. Paul declares, "The god of 
this world [Satan] hath blinded the minds of them which believe
 not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who 
is the image of God, should shine unto them," — 2 Corinthians 
4:4. 

GOD'S GEE AT PLAN OP REDEMPTION 

Let us review some of the reasons why we should have 
gratitude and why we should worship and adore Jehovah and 
obey his holy will. Created in the image of God, man lost this 
by disobedience. In sorrow he went forth to battle against his 
many foes, and to battle thus unto death. There was no way 
for him to regain life by his own efforts. But Jehovah in his 
own due time and in the exercise of his wisdom and lovingkindness
 sent his dearly beloved Son to redeem man from death. 
This he did at great cost to himself. He gave up the dearest 
thing to his heart — that great and unspeakable gift, his Only 
Begotten! St. John tells us, "In this was manifested the love 
of God toward us, because that God sent his Only Begotten 
Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein 
is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent 
his Son to be the propitiation for our sins." (1 John 4:9, 10) 
All this Jehovah did for us without our knowledge, yea, even 
before our existence. Abstractly, then, we may define love as 
an unselfish desire to do good, and to do good without regard 
to whether the recipient knows or does not know of it. This 
love may include the sentiment of appreciation, or it may be 
only a sympathetic desire to aid, its scope depending upon the 
object loved. 

HEAVENLY CAUSING OF THE GOSPEL AGE 

God foreordained before the foundation of the world that 
Christ Jesus should be the Redeemer and King of the world, 
and that he should have associated with him in this great work 
144,000, designated as members of his body and as his bride. 
He did not call the angels of heaven to this high and honored 
place, but his call was issued to some from the children of 
men. This call was an invitation. Jesus, having ascended into 
heaven, opened the way to life and immortality! and then the 
invitation went out, calling some to become j oint-aacrificers 
with him and to share his glory. In phrase more beautiful than 
human tongue could form, Jehovah sent this call: *'Hearken, 
O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also 
thine own people and thy father's house; so shall the King 
greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou 
him." (Psalm 45:10, 11) Never was a proposal of marriage 
couched in phrase so sweet! Thus he called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light! He called us to a heavenly calling, 
to be kings ajid priests unto him and unto Christ, and to reign 
with Christ in glory ; to be joint heirs with him in all blessings
 to be received at the hands of Jehovah in the ages to come. 

Those who hear and respond to this call by fully consecrating
 themselves to do the will of Jehovah he begets to the divine
 nature. (James 1:18; 1 Peter 1:3, 4) Such also he 
anoints at the same time to the high office of kings and priests ; 
and this anointing enables such to grasp the deep things of 
God's Word. (1 Corinthians 2:9, 10) "The anointing which 
ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that 
any man teach you; but as the same anointing teacheth you of 
all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath 
taught you, ye shall abide in him." — 1 John 2:27. 

Foreknowing the church, God aforetime made provision for 
their feeding and nourishing. He caused to be prepared for 
their benefit the expression of his will, which is set forth in 
the holy Scriptures: "For whatsoever things were written 


aforetime were written for our learning, that jve through patience
 and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope." {Romans
 15:4) All the types and shadows recorded in the Old 
Testament and all the exceeding groat and precious promises 
of the New Testament God provided for our benefit — "according
 as his divine power hath given unto us things that pertain 
unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that 
hath called us to glory and virtue; whereby are given unto us 
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these ye might 
be partakers of the divine nature." 

COMFOBTS, PROTECTS AND DELIVERS 

The Lord foreknew that the church would ha\e many trhN 
and sorrows, and that in these they would need comforting 
assurances; hence lie provided in his Word for all such need-*. 
And it is his will that we in turn use this same comfort which 
we receive to comfort and bless others who journey with us 
in the narrow way. St. Paul, having this in mind, exultantly 
exclaimed, "Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, who 
comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to 
comfort them which are in trouble, by the comfort wherewith 
vc ourselves are comforted of God." — -2 Corinthians 1:3, 4. 

In addition to till this, our dear Father protects us from 
the evil one; He gives us the assurance that thus he will do. 
"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that 
reverence him, and delivereth them." (Psalm 34:7) "There 
shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh 
thy dwelling." (Psalm 91:10) King David was a type of 
the Christ, head and body. David means "beloved, " and he 
prophetically expressed the sentiment of our hearts when he 
said, "I will love thee, O Jehovah, my Btrength; the Lord is 
my rock [solid foundation! and my fortress [invulnerable to 
any enemy's attack] and my deliverer; my God, my strength, 
in whom I will trust; my buckler and the power of my salvation
, and my high tower. [In this tower the Christian can see 
what others cannot see, because he is above them,] I will call 
upon Jehovah, who is worthy to be praised; so shall I be 
saved from mine enemies." (Psalm 18:1-3) Again says King 
David, "Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits
—the God of my salvation!" (Psalm 68:19) "Bless the 
Lord, my soul, and forget not all his benefits." — Psalm 103 : 2, 
WHY WE LOVE OtTR LORD JESUS 

In all that God has done for us, Jesus has been his honored 
instrument. In every purpose and work the Father and the Son 
are one. All things are of the Father; all things are by the 
Son. {1 Corinthians 8:6) If a man of great wealth should 
give one of us a million dollars that we might use it to the 
Lord's glory, we should feel very grateful to such an one. But 
if he would give us all of his millions, and in addition would 
devote his life, with ua, in proclaiming the Message of Messiah's 
glorious kingdom, surely our hearts would respond with gratitude
 and love to him! 

But Jesus did far greater things for us than this. "For ye 
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was 
rich, for your Bakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty 
might be rich." (2 Corinthians 8:9) He was rich in heavenly 
honor, glory and power. By him were all things made, and he 
enjoyed the glories and blessings of the heavenly realm. All 
this he left, and took upon himself the form and nature of 
man, and then surrendered his humanity to the most ignominious
 death known, in order that we might have life. 

It was Jesus himself who said: "Greater love hath no man 
than this, that a man lay down his' life for his friends; and 
ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you." (John 
15:13, 14) He shed his blood for us; and all who become his 
friends receive the benefit of the merit of that sacrifice, which 
leads to life everlasting in a state of supreme happiness. Man 
comes into the world with burdens; and as he journeys along 
life's Way his burdens increase until he finds the Lord, who 
graciously says: "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest/ 1 (Matthew 11:28) 
His love prompts him thus to do. 

HIS BRIBE AND JOINT-HBIB 

God instituted the relationship of bride and bridegroom. 
It is the sweetest relationship known to mankind. From the 
time of the betrothal contract between the bridegroom and 
bride, they both look forward with sweet anticipation to the 
full consummation of their agreement. The Prophet of the 
Lord foretold this beautiful relationship between Jesus and 
the church, and speaking to the prospective bride as the 
mouthpiece of the Bridegroom, said, "I will betroth thee unto 
me in righteousness [and since she has no righteousness or 
wedding garment of her own, Jesus provides it], and in justice 
and in loving-kindness and in mercies [suggestion of his own 
beautiful attributes of 'character, which she must also work 


[6134] 


SttFTKMBKR 1, 1917 


T H li WA T C H TOW E R 


(261-262) 


out in her character, while wearing and at the same time embroidering
 the wedding garment] ; I will even betroth thee unto 
me in faithfulness [suggesting that she as well as lie must be 
true and loyal to the end], and thou shalt know Jehovah. " 
(Hosea 2:19, 20) Thus the Bridegroom offers her the wonderful
 blessing of being associated with himself forever in unspeakable
 joy, and as an additional reward, that she shall 
know the great and mighty God of the universe, the One who 
inhabiteth eternity. 

AMBASSADORS FOR CHRIST 

To be an ambassador of a government, such as that of the 
United States, to foreign courts, is a position greatly desired 
by honorable men. To be an ambassador of the King of kings 
and Lord of lords in this world, to whom the message of reconciliation
 is committed to be delivered to the peoples of earth, 
is an honor not within the comprehension of the human mind, 
and is greatly to be desired above all honors that could be conferred
 by any official position upon this earth. Such an honor 
the Apostle Paul declares Jesus grants unto every one of his 
followers who love him and manifest their love for him. — 2 
Corinthians 5:20. 

THE PROOF OF OUR LOVE 

How may we know that we love God and love the Lord 
Jesus? It will not always do to rely upon our feelings, because
 feelings are deceptive. Sometimes we feel joyful and 
exuberant, and at other times exactly the reverse. We must 
have more certain proof than this. "Jesus said, If a man love 
me he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and 
we will come unto him and make our abode with him. He 
that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings." "If ye love me, 
keep my commandments." (John 14:23, 24, 15) "This proves 
our love to God — that we keep his commandments with joyful 
heart."— 1 John 5:3. 

The foregoing Scriptures approve of the element given in 
the definition of love as it applies Godward; namely, a worshipful
 adoration for God and the Master, a reverence for him, and 
gratitude to him for what he has done for us, bringing a joyful
 submission to his will. Wbo could know these precious 
things bestowed upon us by our Father and fail to love such 
a God and Father! 

LOVE FOR THE BRETHREN 

The more we understand the love of God and of Christ 
Jesus as manifested for us, and the more we increase in our 
love for them, the greater the necessity appears to us for 
loving the brethren, and the greater desire we have for the 
perfection of our love toward them. 

Love for the brethren may be defined as an unselfish desire 
to do them good, an affectionate and tender regard, and a 
kinship of spirit; and this in proportion as we see the manifestation
 of the spirit of the Master. If we possess this love, 
we shall desire to do good to the brethren, even to the degree 
of sacrificing our own interests, having in mind the one purpose
 of building up the brethren in the most holy faith, that 
they may grow more and more into the likeness of the Lord. 
The comprehensiveness of this heavenly love is shown in the 
words of the Apostle Paul in Ephesians 3:13-21. 

WHY SHOULD WE LOVE THE BRETHREN? 

Our love or lack of love for the brethren will prove the extent
 of our love for the Lord. When we have the proper appreciation
 of the fact that the brethren in Christ are really 
a part of the Christ, and when we appreciate what it means to 
love God and to love Jesus, our hearts will increase in love 
for the brethren. Jesus said that the proof of our love for 
him and for the Father would be made known by the manner 
in which we keep his commandments. Among his commandments
 is a very important one. He said to his disciples, "A 
new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another : 
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this 
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love 
one to another*" (John 13:34, 35) To what extent shall we 
love one another? Jesus answers: "This is my commandment, 
That ye love one another as I have loved you." (John 15:12) 
The love of Jesus for us was an unselfish love, a sacrificial love, 
a desire to do us good, with no thought of reward from us. 
And he did this at a great cost to himself. This is the kind 
of love he says we must have for the brethren — a sacrificial 
love. 

The Anostle Paul tells us that if any man be in Christ 
Jesus he is a new creature, and that henceforth "we know 
no man after the flesh," but know him as a new creature. (2 
Corinthians 5:16, 17) This would mean, then, that we should 
love each other as new creatures in the Lord. If we were required
 to love each other because of physical appearance, that 
might often be a great difficulty. But the new creature in 
Christ should love his brother because of the spirit of the Lord 
in him and manifested by him. And as we grow more in the 


likeness of our Lord, we thus cause the brethren to love us 
more. 

SOME OF OUR TESTS 

The Apostle Paul, giving an analysis of love in 1 Corinthians
 13, points out that it is the crown of all the fruits and 
graces of the spirit. He emphasizes the fact that we may 
possess all knowledge of the Scriptures and have the ability 
to present them to others, may make full sacrifice of all our 
time, strength and energy, even to the giving up of our lives, 
and yet if we have not love, we have profited nothing. In our 
text he points out that love is the bond of perfection. In the 
context he has called attention to other qualities of character 
that we must develop, and then adds that if we would be perfect
 we must put on love; and that if we do this, the peace of 
Cod which passeth all understanding shall keep our hearts-and 
minds through Christ Jesus. 

So, then, \i love is the chief of all the attributes of character
 to be developed, it follows that love must be put to the 
most severe tests. Tests are for the purpose of demonstrating 
that one possesses an approved character. 

Our love for Cod and for the Lord Jesus will be tested in 
the manner of our obeying the will of God — whether we do 
this in a joyful manner or not. In proportion as we have and 
maintain our love for the Lord, in that proportion will our 
joy increase in the performance of his will. We can see how 
many have fallen under this test. Once ambassadors of the 
Great King, they became ashamed of the Gospel of Christ 
Jesus and him crucified, and desired more the plaudits of men. 
They failed, therefore, in keeping the commandments of the 
Lord. The Apostle sets us an example, saying: "I am not 
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God 
unto salvation to every one that believeth." — Rom. 1:16. 

The Lord Jesus put to the test the love of the Apostle 
Peter. He said to him, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me 
more than these? He saith unto him, yea, Lord, thou knowest 
that I love thee. He [Jesus] saith unto him, Feed my lambs." 
Again a second and then the third time, Jesus said, "Simon, 
lovest thou me? And Simon answered, Lord, thou knowest all 
things. Thou knowest that I love thee! He saith unto him, 
Feed my sheep.'* (John 21:15, 17) What a wonderful lesson 
is in this for all the brethren who are elders in the various 
classes 1 If we see pride developing in our hearts, a disposition 
to put aside the food that the Lord has given with which to 
feed -the lambs and the sheep and Jo substitute something of 
our own, in order that we might shine before men, or a disposition
 to neglect the lambs and the sheep in helping them with 
the food, then this would prove that we were not standing the 
test being placed upon us. Addressing the elder?, the Apostle 
said, "Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves, and to all the 
flock over which the holy Spirit hath made you overseers, to 
feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with the blood 
of his own."— Acts 20:28. 

Upon what food should the elders and leaders feed the 
ecclesias? How did the teachers, as well as the ecclesias get 
their knowledge of God's plan? Did not Jesus declare that 
when he came at his second advent He would provide for the 
household of faith through his chosen servant the food which 
should be "meat in due season" for them? This being true 
{and all who accept present truth must admit that it is true), 
then any disposition to depart therefrom and to encourage the 
flock to look elsewhere for spiritual development would prove 
that the test of faithfulness to the Lord and his flock was 
not being properly met. We observe this test being put upon 
the classes everywhere. Let us, then, take heed to ourselves 
that we prove our love for the Lord and for his "little ones" 
by keeping his commandments with a joyful heart and in safeguarding
 the interests of the little ones of the Lord. 
A FINAL FIERY TEST 

More than a quarter of a century ago our attention was 
called to the fact through The Watch Tower that one of the 
final and crucial tests that would come to the church would be 
the test of our love for the brethren. Do we not see this test 
being applied? Jesus said, applying his words to the time 
of his second presence, in which time we are now living, "Because
 iniquity shall abound, the love of the many shall wax 
cold." (Matthew 24:12) The word "iniquity" is derived from 
the word "inequity," and literally means injustice. There can 
be no love without justice first. We must be just before we are 
generous; and any act of injustice toward a brother shows a 
lack of love. 

After we have been for some time in the narrow way our 
powers of discerning between justice and injustice are keener 
than, when we first helieved, and when we see injustice on the 
part of another, it has a tendency to dampen our love for such 
an one. How often do we hear one say, "I am surprised that 
& brother or sister would be guilty of thus and so! It seems 


[6135] 


(2«2-263) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


a strange thing that we should have such trials among us." To 
this the Apostle Peter answers: ''Beloved, be not surprised at 
the fire among you, occurring to you for a trial,- as though 
some strange thing was befalling you." — 1 Peter 4:12. 
THE REMEDY TO BE APPLIED 

We are sure that it ia the desire of all the truly consecrated 
to be overcomers, to grow in the likeness of our Lord and 
Master and to put on love, which is the bond of perfection. 
How, then, may we do this, and what shall we do when we see 
these imperfections in the brethren which bring such a fiery 
trial amongst us? The Lord directed St. Peter to answer thi~s 
question. "Above all things have fervent love among yourselves
 , because love covereth a multitude of defects." (I Pet. 
4:8) The word "fervent" here means overspreading or 'covering
 up. In other phrase, the Apostle Peter says: Your brother 
has defects, and so have you; do not be looking at these defects
, but look at him as you would desire to have him look 
at you — as a new creature in Christ. Have amongst you this 
overspreading love which covers these multitudes of defects. 

Sometimes we hear of a brother who has served a class as 
elder for a number of years, and the class drops him from 
eldership for a period of a few months, subsequently again 
electing him to the position of elder; and he, believing that 
they have done him an injustice by setting him aside for a 
season, refuses to serve. Thus is his love for the Lord and for 
the brethren put to the test His conduct shows that he is 
not standing the test as he should. The opportunity for service
 should be accepted and used as unto the Lord. The Apostle 
Paul shows us the proper attitude, saying, "And I will very 
gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly 
I love you the less I am loved." (2 Corinthians 12:15) By 
so doing we manifest a love for God and for Christ Jesus and 
an unselfish desire to serve the brethren, and thereby we prove 
our love for them also. Growing in this love we shall ultimately 
be united in the bond of perfection. As thus we develop the 
precious fruit of the spirit, the peace of God will keep our 
minds and hearts through Christ Jesus. 

LOVE FOR OUR ENEMIES 

The Lord Jesus commanded that we should love our enemies, 
(Matthew 5:44, 46; Luke 6:27-32) If every one loved his 
enemies, soon there would be no enemies, During the Millennial
 reign of Christ many enemies will be transformed by being
 gradually raised up to perfection of character, where love 
will take the place of hatred. Those who remain perverse will 


be destroyed utterly. The Lord commands that the Christian 
shall now develop in his heart this feeling of love toward his 
enemies. 

In what way shall we love our enemies? With a love of 
fellowship, a sympathetic love? We answer, No; we have no 
sympathy with those who do not love God, and who are pursuing
 a wrongful course. How, then, shall we love them ? We 
answer, With a pity-love. We are to have sympathy for them. 
"God commendeth his love toward us in that when we were yet 
sinners Christ died for us/' He pitied mankind in their fallen 
condition. So, we must have in our hearts a keen desire to do 
good even to our enemies, if the opportunity presents itself. 
And even though they persecute us and say all manner of evil 
against us falsely for Christ's sake, and defame the good name 
of the Lord Jesus and of the brethren, yet we should remember 
that in blindness and ignorance they do it. Pity them for it. 
and leave their judgment to the Lord. 

THE REWARD OF THE FAITHFUL 

As we journey along in the narrow way, walking by faith. 
hoping for the glory of God, let us keep in mind the words 
of the Apostle Paul: "And now abideth faith, hope, love. 
these three; but the greatest of these is love.' 5 And having 
this in mind let xis progress unto the point of perfection in 
Christ Jesus. Thus doing we have the blessed assurance of the 
reward which God has in store for those that love him. The 
tests are now severe. We should expect it to be thus. These 
tests will grow in severity; but if we keep in mind the great 
reward which God has offered us, they will seem as nothing. As 
St. Paul puts it, These are but light afflictions and endure only 
for a moment, and are working out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory. — 2 Cor, 4:17. 

"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heardj neither have entered 
into the heart of man the things that God hath prepared for 
them that love him!" How wonderful must be the glories of 
the kingdom of our God! How ^ranscendently beautiful thp 
things that he has in reservation for those who prove their 
loyalty even unto death, and who come off "more than conquerors
" through the merit of him that bought lis with his 
precious blood! To such the Lord says through the Apostle, 
"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation [tests], for 
when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the 
Lord hath promised to them that love him." "Hearken, my 
beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world, 
rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised 
to them that love him!" — .Tames 1:12; 2:5. 


THE SON ALONE SETS FREE 

( If the Son, therefore, shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. } '—John 8:36. 


Jesus was here addressing Jews. They had the impression 
that they were free; but Jesus told them to the contrary, that 
they were still slaves, still in bondage. The Apostle Paul states 
that the entire race of Adam are slaves, sold under sin, sold 
into bondage. He explains that father Adam was the original 
transgressor, and that the sentence passing on him became 
a disability upon all his race, upon all human rights. "For 
by one man's disobedience many were made sinners." (Romans
 5:19) If any of Adam's children had been able to live 
above sin, and could have said, "Lord, even though Adam gave 
me an imperfect organism, yet I have kept thy law," we understand
 that such an individual would have been granted life 
everlasting. But no human being" could do this. "There is 
none righteous, no, not one." (Romans 3:10) God's requirement
 is that his law shall be kept fully. Although a member 
of the fallen race might keep the law in his mind, he could 
not keep it in his flesh. 

The Son has not as yet fully set any free. There is neither 
a free man nor a free woman in the world, in the full sense 
of that term. Even God's children realize that they have imperfections
 in the flesh; but they hope for the time when they 
shall be fully released from them. The Bible tells us that 
this time will come at the moment of our perfection in the 
resurrection, when we shall be made like our Lord and have 
perfect bodies. The most that we can have at the present time 
is freedom of mind. Mankind has been in bondage to sin, 
shackled by the fallen nature inherited from their forefather, 
Adam. 

For nearly two thousand years God had a special arrangement
 with the one nation of Israel. He proposed that this 
disability, which was resting upon the whole world, should 
be removed from Israel, and that he would not treat them 
the same as the rest of the world, but that they might be freed 
from condemnation and come back into his family, upon certain
 conditions stipulated. They thought this was a favorable 
offer, and that they would get a great blessing from it. The 
Lord had in mind that he would teach them a very important 


lesson, and that he would teach the angels and all of us the 
same great lesson ; namely, that they who go into sin cannot
 get free except in the way God has provided — and this way 
is through the sacrifice of Christ. 

DISABILITY TYPICALLY REMOVED 

So God made this covenant with the Jews, and agreed with 
them that if they would thenceforth walk in his ways and keep 
his statutes he would be gracious to them and blesa them, and 
they should be his people'. He made this provision for them 
in a typical way through typical sacrifices. But we see that 
this provision for sins was not one which really canceled the 
sins. The typical cancelation of original sin for the Jews was 
merely for a year in advance. It did not remove the disability 
entirely but merely relieved the nation therefrom for another 
year. They were unable through the year to keep the law, 
and the Lord's arrangement each year was in order that they 
might have another year of trial. Their sins were typically 
canceled afresh. 

If any one should keep the law, then the blessing of life 
w 7 ould go to him. If he failed to keep the law, then he would 
fail to gain the blessing promised on that condition. Year by 
year the Israelites tried to prove themselves worthy of eternal 
life. But the sin was deeper than the surface. It was not 
merely a weakness of intention, but of character. They could 
not keep the Law; and God wished them to know it, and wished 
us to know it. They nevertheless had a great blessing in the 
law, so that, when Christ came, they were the most advanced 
nation in the world, head and shoulders above all others. 
Having the only true religion, they had the blessings which go 
with true religion, aa far as they had faithfully conformed 
their lives to it. 

When Jesus came to the Jews, he accomplished a great 
work, which the Father had given him to do. The Father 
had promised to bless the world, and he sent his Son that he 
might accomplish this work of blessing through sacrifice. The 
death of Christ was the basis of all the real setting -free of 
the Jews and of all mankind from the death sentence that was 


[6136] 


September 


19*7 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(264-258) 


upon them. It was the basis of setting the Jew free not only 
from the Adamic penalty, but from the Sinaitic law additionally
. As a part of the Adamic family, the curse of death 
was upon the Jew. The curse was not removed by Moses (for 
Moses was not able to remove it) , or by anything that anybody 
had done prior to the coming of Jesus, 

THE CURSE OF THE LAW 

But the work of Jesus was so broad as to clear everything 
against any and all. Ordinarily, it would have been sufficient 
that Jesus should die in any manner; for the penalty upon 
Adam was merely that he should die. Therefore Jesus, to become
 the Redeemer of man, would have needed only to die. 

But the Jew had a special curse, or penalty, in the taw, to 
bo visited upon extreme cases of criminality. It read: "Cursed 
is every one that hangeth on a tree." (Galatians 3:13) So 
in order to redeem every Jew, it was necessary that Christ 
should suffer the extreme penalty that would come upon any 
Jew. This is the reason, the Apostle assures us, that Christ 
must be made a curse by hanging on a tree. He was not made 
n curse for the Gentiles, but for the Jews only. 

PURCHASE PRICE FOR WORLD NOT YET PAID 

However, the death of Christ was the one great settlementprice
 necessary for the sins of the whole world. But when 
Jesus died, the Just for the unjust, it did not bring us to God. 
It was only after he rose and ascended into the presence of 
God — entering the Most Holy, even heaven itself — and appeared
 in God's presence on behalf of those who would be of the 
church class, that the sins of these could be covered. The world 
has not yet been brought to God. Christ's merit has not yet 
been applied for them. The time for bringing the world back 
to God will be the next age — now, thank God, almost here! 

God's provision is that for a thousand years Christ will 
reign to bring the world into harmony with Jehovah. Some 
Trill need great chastisement, many stripes. It will be the 
work of that thousand years to instruct, to correct and to bring 
back to God as many as shall be willing to return. Their wills 
must come into harmony. But the matter will be left to their 
own decision. Many may then desire to be in harmony with 
God who do not now have this desire. One very important feature
 of Jesus' work during the Millennium will be to make 
known the marvelous riches of God's grace, that all may know 
Jehovah God, from the least of them to the greatest. They will 
have an opportunity to come back into that condition of mind 
and body which was originally possessed by the perfect man, 
plus all the experience gained during the six thousand years' 
reign of Sin. 

ONLY THE LOYAL WILL BE RECEIVED 

The work of Christ will not be accomplished for the world 
when they are awa-kened from death; that will be only a 
preliminary step. It will be necessary for them to be instructed
, to be chastised for sinful character and to be blessed 
for any well-doing, etc., and thus brought back to God. But 
the race will not become wholly free until the end of the thousand
 years, because each degree of alienation is so much of 
bondage that came upon them through Adam's fall — they are 
weak mentally, morally and physically. Mankind needs to be 
lifted out of all this degradation. Separation from God, alienation
 of mind, through disobedience, brought about the original 
bondage. And so we read that at the end of the Millennial age 
Christ will present to the Father all who are worthy. 

But the Scriptures assure us that any who fail to come 
back into harmony during the Millennium will not be delivered 
over to the Father, but will be destroyed during the Millennial 
reign. The Father does not desire any such. At the close of 
the Millennium, the Father will give all of the perfected ones 
a final test. He will say, "I condemned these once to death. 
I will receive back into harmony with myself only those who 
love righteousness and hate iniquity — none others. Those who 
again yield to sin will be cut off in the second death." 

The Apostle tells us, in Romans 8:21, that "the creation 


itself shall be delivere4 from the bondage of corruption into 
the glorious liberty of the sons of God." This has reference 
to the human creation. It shall be delivered from death and 
from slavery to sin during the thoasand years, by the great 
Emancipator who has already begun the work of purchasing 
the race, and who will complete the work in the near future, 
and will thus have a full right to deliver his purchased possession
. 

This is the glorious liberty wherewith all who accept God's 
terms shall be made free. This is the freedom wherewith the 
Son shall make them free. But we should apply our text 
especially to the church, for it was to this class that the Lord 
addressed these words. "If the Son, therefore, shall make 
you free, ye shall be free indeed." However, the only ones 
of any class who will be made free will be those who accept 
the terms of salvation. 

JEWS FREED IN A DOUBLE SENSE 

The Jews will be made free in a double sense; first, free 
from the condemnation of the law — upon certain conditions, 
They must become dead to the old law, must recognize that 
they could never gain life under it. If they will not become 
dead to the law, any such cannot gain eternal life. They can 
have eternal life in no other way than by accepting Christ's 
sacrificial work on their behalf." Some Jews accepted Christ 
at the beginning of this age and some have accepted him since. 
These realized that the law could not make* them free, could not 
make thorn acceptable to God. And so they gave up hope of 
attaining anything through the law, and laid hold on Christ, 
asking what they must do to have everlasting life. Jesus told 
them that they must die to their own will — not only die to 
the law — and must take up their cross and follow him and 
thereby copy the pattern he set them in his own course. As 
many as did this became free. So far as their minds were concerned
, they became new creatures. They had this freedom 
of mind in an earthen vessel, however, and they could not do 
in the human body all that they wished to do. 

But the Lord said that it was a part of the test upon them 
that they fight a good fight against the sins of the mortal body. 
If they were faithful in fighting a good fight against the flesh, 
he would give them proportionate honors on the spirit plane. 
This is the requirement of all his disciples. And he promises 
that all those who shall overcome shall become associates with 
him in his kingdom for the uplifting and blessing of the world 
and shall be his peculiar treasure forevermore. All these 
were under bondage to sin; all were under the death sentence 
—both Jew and Gentile. All these needed to be set free from 
sin and death, and the Jew also from the Sinaitic law. It is 
the San who sets these free! 

GENTILES FREED, BUT NOT FROM THE LAW 

How did the Gentile need to be set free? They did not need 
to die to the Mosaic law, because they never were alive to 
the law, never having been placed under it. But they did need 
to accept by faith the fact that Christ had died for their sins, 
and they needed to die to sin, and to give up the earthly nature. 
To come under the present call, they needed also to present 
their bodies living sacrifices, and to take up their cross and 
follow Jesus. 

All 'true disciples who heed the Word of the great Master, 
and continue to be his faithful pupils, are set free, not only 
from superstition and ignorance, but also from the service of 
sin. They come to have a correct appreciation of their own 
natural infirmities and blemishes. They come into harmony 
with the divine mind, and love the truth. Hence their freedom 
is a great blessing instead of an injury. It brings humility instead
 of pride and boastf ulness ; patience and self-control instead
 of anger and strife; generosity, benevolence and love 
instead of spitef ulness and selfishness; joy and peace instead 
of discontent and bitterness of spirit. Truly, the Son alone 
can make us free, and he whom the Son makes free is free 
indeed! 


TO THE WORK 


We have received letters of inquiry from many sections of 
the field regarding the general condition of the work and the 
outlook for the future. The friends everywhere are naturally 
very much interested in knowing how the work haa been 
progressing since Brother Russell^s passing beyond. The Society
 is glad to advise that since January 1 every month has 
shown an increase over the corresponding month of the year 
1916 and that the eight months — November to June, inclusive
 — show a large increase in all of the branches of work 
over the same eight months of the previous year. * This seems 
to us very strong evidence that the blessing of the Lord has 
been resting upon the work centered here at Brooklyn. The 
inquiries from those becoming interested are also on the increase
, showing tli at there is a great desire on the part of 
many to understand the conditions as they exist in the world 
today. Ifoe work at the Bethel and Tabernacle is^in good 
order, and the laborers are very desirous of cooperating to 
the extent of their ability. The Society believes that the outlook
 for the future is very encouraging and trusts, by the 
Lord's grace, to see a great deal accomplished during the coming
 six months. It urges upon the friends everywhere to put 
forth every effort to "work while it is called day." Now is 
the opportune time for presenting to our inquiring neighbors 
and friends and acquaintances that which will satisfy them as 
nothing else could do — viz., the truth. Whether it be by tracts 
or Studies in the Scriptures— 4he latter, if possible-^-or the 


[6137] 


(267-268) 


T H 11 WATCH TOW E R 


Brooklyn, N, V. 


Scenarios, let each be diligent to the full extent of his or her 
ability. The Society especially recommends the presenting of 
the seventh volume to your neighbors— not to the ministers, 
because this would only arouse them to more bitter opposition
 — hut to those who might have ears to hear. In presenting 


the seventh volume it is urged that the other six be mentioned 
also that, if possible, the whole seven may be secured. The Society
 will be glad to hear from friends everywhere as to their 
opportunities. "Go ye also into the vineyard"; "He- that 
reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal." 


It is urged that those having business with the Pilgrim De 
partment, respecting meetings, conventions and funerals, should 
address the Society in care of the Pilgrim Dept., otherwise 
there is likely to be a delay. 

The sending out of the seventh volume has raised the number
 of letters received during the last three weeks to 30,000. 
This has taxed the office force to the utmost. The Society 
would like to make individual acknowledgment of the thouSOME
 TIMELY HINTS 

sands referring to this volume, but finds this impossible. We 
trust the dear friends will accept this as an acknowledgment 
of their letters and of the Society's expression of their appreciation
 and love. Several hundred volumes have come back 
to us due to damaged labels en route. If you have not received
 a copy this may be the cause. All orders will receive 
prompt attention. 


THE GOODNESS AND SEVERITY OF GOD 

September 30. — Daniel 9:3-19. 

DIVINE JUSTICE MANIFESTED — THEN DIVINE LOVE — THE GOSPEL AGE A PABEN THESIS IN THE DIVINE PLAN — THE BLESSINGS COMING 
UPON MANKIND DURING THE INCOMING AGE — LOVE TRIUMPHANT OVER JUSTICE — GOD'S SEVERITY ILLUSTRATED IN HIS DEALINGS 
WITH ISRAEL — WHY THE LAND OF PALESTINE LAY DESOLATE TOR SEVENTY YEARS — DANIEL \S PRAYER TOR DIVINE MERCY UPON HIS 
PEOPLE — KEY TO TIME PROPHECIES. 

"The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. M — Psalm 103:8 
God's severity consists in his insistence upon absolute knowledge of the Lord, and understanding of his gracious arrighteousness
 — his refusal to approve sin in any degree or 
sense. The very first statement of the divine law is that 
death, destruction, must be the wage, or penalty, for transgression
 against his righteous regulations. For six thousand years 
the Lord has maintained his original position — has refused 
to sanction sin or to permit sinners to live. At first such' an 
unchangeable attitude seems severe, especially when we consider
 that all mankind were born in sin and shapen in iniquity, 
infested with weakness and surrounded by evil influences. It 
seems severe on God's part to insist upon perfection when all 
our experiences teach us that it is impossible for fallen humanity
 to attain absolute righteousness in deed, word and thought. 
Indeed, the Scriptures confirm our experience; for the Apostle 
reminds us that "there is none righteous, no, not one."— Romans
 3:10. 

While the goodness of God is not seen in his severity, yet 
they stand side by side, although wholly separate. God's 
goodness— his generosity, his mercy, his kindness, his love— is 
not manifested in the sentence pronounced upon father Adam in 
ISden, nor in the execution of its penalties upon humanity, but 
in the ^reat gift of his love— our Lord Jesus Christ and the 
redemption provided in him — a redemption coextensive with the 
fall of man and the condemnation incurred by our first parents. 
The Apostle expresses the thought pointedly in the words: "In 
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that 


God sent his Only Begotten Son into the world, that we might 
live through him." (I.John 4:9) God's love was not previously
 manifested. For more than four thousand years only 
the severity, the justice, of the divine character was seen, 
although to Abraham and subsequently through the prophets 
of Israel a hint was given that God had kindly sentiments 
toward the fallen race, which in due time would bring blessings
 to all the families of the earth. 

THE GOSPEL AGE A PARENTHESIS 

The period between our Lord's first and second advents 
is in some respects a parenthesis in the divine plan, during 
which the church is especially dealt with. The redemption 
of the world and its reconciliation with God, based upon divine
 goodness expressed in the death of the Redeemer, wait 
for further expression to the world until the end of the Gospel 
age and the opening of the Millennial age — "the world to 
come." When the morning of that new day shall dawn, the 
goodness of God will be seen by mankind more distinctly than 
ever before. 

Indeed, it may be said that as yet the world has seen nothing
 of the goodness of God. It has seen merely his severity, 
his justice, executed against the entire human family for the 
last six thousand years. But a comparatively small proportion
 ofmankind has even heard of the grace of God in Christ, 
the only "name under heaven given among men, whereby we 
must be saved." (Acts 4:12) And even those who have 
heard to some extent have been measurably deceived by the 
great adversary in respect to the nature of the penalty for ain 
and the fullness and wideness of the mercy extended to men 
in the person of our Redeemer. 

In that new dispensation the facts will all be made clear. 
The blessings then coming to the world will be those of peace, 
righteous government, helpful influences, restraint of evil, 


rangements and purposes. All these blessings wdll be most 
convincing proofs of God's sympathy with mankind and of his 
mercy in Christ. The adversary who now deceives mankind 
will then be bound, that he should deceive the nations no more 
until the thousand years are finished. The Word of God, 
which in general is now a sealed book to the world, will then 
be opened; and as a result the knowledge of the Lord shall 
cover the whole earth as the waters cover the sea. 

Nevertheless, we are not to understand that this triumph 
of God's mercy and goodness then displayed will in any wise 
imply a change in his character or in his attitude towards sin. 
God never changes. (Malachi 3:6) Our Lord Je3us is "the 
same yesterday, today and forever." (Hebrews 13:8) When 
we come to understand the matter thoroughly, this unchangeablenees
 on God's part is a guarantee that the blessings to be 
bestowed under his arrangements will be everlasting, unending. 

Throughout the Millennial age the goodness and the severity 
of God will be displayed side by =dde to every creature. All 
must learn the lesson that God is kind, just, generous and full 
of blessing to all who are in harmony with him and with the 
principles of righteousness, but that he is and always will be 
like a consuming fire to all who are not in accord with his 
righteous arrangements for all his creatures. 
QCABTEELT EEVIEW 

In the studies of the paat quarter we have an exhibition of 
the severity of God's dealings with his covenant people when, 
notwithstanding his repeated expostulations, warnings and 
chastisements they wilfully pursued a course in violation of 
their national vows. Unlike any other nation in the world, 
Israel was brought into special relationship w T ith God, He 
chose them to be his people, and favored them above all other 
nations by giving them his law, by raising up for them judges 
and prophets, and by especially guarding and directing them 
in so far as they submitted to his will, as well as by warning, 
counseling and chastising them when they became disobedient. 

On the other hand, Israel as a nation entered into a solemn 
covenant with the Lord, saying, "All that the Lord hath spoken 
we will do." (Exodus 19:1-8) For the faithful keeping of this 
covenant God promised them all manner of earthly blessings 
and ample protection from all their national enemies. (Deu- 
(teronomy 28:1-14; . Leviticus 26:1-13) But corresponding 
curses were pronounced, to go into effect if the people disregarded
 their covenant. 

It was in fulfilment of this covenant on God's part that 
the downfall of Judah came to pass. Backsliding Israel, the 
ten-tribe kingdom, had previously been carried away captive. 
(2 Kings 17:1-24) Judah had not profited hy this example 
of the Lord's displeasure nor by the warnings of his prophets, 
but had outrivaled her sister kingdom in corruption. When 
her cup of iniquity was full, the Lord poured upon her the 
merited punishment, due alike to king and people; for "neither 
Zedekiah nor his servants nor the people of the land did 
hearken unto the words of the,. Lord which he spake by the 
Prophet Jeremiah." — Jeremiah 37:2. 

DANIEL'S PRAYER FOB HIS PEOPLE 

The seventy years which followed the overthrow of Judah 
are frequently referred to as the seventy years of captivity; 
but the Scriptures designate them the seventy years of desoia- 

[6138] 


SBmifBJtE 1 ( 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(268-269) 


tion of the land — a desolation which had been predicted by the 
Prophet Jeremiah. (Jeremiah 25:11, 12) The completeness 
of the desolation is shown in Jeremiah 39:8-10 and in 2 
Chronicles 36:17-21. Although the kin^ of Babylon permitted 
certain of the poor of the land to remain, and gave them vineyards
 and fields, yet it was the Lord's purpose that the land 
of Israel should be desolate for seventy years; and it was so. 
Later in the same year the governor whom the king of Babylon 
had appointed was slain, and the entire population speedily 
removed into Egypt for fear of the wrath of the king of 
Babylon.— 2 Kings 25:21-26; Jeremiah 41:1-3; 43:5, 6. 

The reason why the land must be desolate for exactly 
seventy years is a Very interesting study; and the Scriptures 
clearly state it to be "to fulfil the word of the Lord by the 
mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths; 
for as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath to fulfil three 
score and ten years." (2 Chronicles 36:21) Tor a detailed 
explanation see Studies isr the Scriptures, Vol. 2, Study VI. 

The Prophet Daniel was a close student of prophecy. Accordingly
 as the seventy years drew to a close he understood 
the matter. During this period he had been shown many 
visions, as recorded in Chapters 2, 4, 7 and 8 of his prophecy, 
all of which showed great prosperity and exaltation to heathen 
or Gentile kingdoms. But his special interest was in his own 
nation, and he had not been informed concerning Israel's future
. Knowing, however, that the period of Judea's desolation
 was nearly complete, he prayed earnestly for the return 
of God's favor to his people, and for the fulfilment of the 
promise made to the fathers — 'the Abrahamic covenant of blessing
 to all the families of the earth. 

Daniel saw not the scope of the divine plan as we may 
now behold it. Nevertheless his earnestness and his faith in 
the promise were pleasing to God, who therefore revealed to 
him something more concerning the vision related in Daniel 8^ 
an increase or further elaboration of it, in the features which 
especially pertained to natural Israel. In this former vision a 
period of 2300 days had been mentioned. Daniel had misunderstood
 this period to mean a prolonging of the seventy years 
desolation, and was praying over the matter, as recorded in 
today's study. 

THE KEY TO TIME PROPHECIES 

While he was thus praying, the angel Gabriel was sent 
to explain further the misunderstood vision. This explanation 
(Daniel 9:20-27) is of great importance for two reasons: (1} 
it marks the date of our Lord's first advent; (2) it furnishes 
a key to some other prophecies whioh have been hidden in 
like manner — a day for a year. This prophecy was so worded 
that Danied and other Jews might, if they chose, think it incredible
 and in due time forget it; or it might be remembered 
by those who "waited for the consolation of Israel," and who 
might infer the time to be symbolic. (Ezekiel 4:6) Certain 
it was that faithful Israelites knew to expect Messiah. It is 
even written that all men were in expectation of him (Luke 
3:15), although they were not all able to receive him in the 
way he came. 

The marked -off period of Jewish history was declared by 
Gabriel to be seventy weeks from the going forth of a decree 
to build Jerusalem — not the temple, but the city. During this 
period the city would be rebuilt under unfavorable circumstances
 in troublous times; sin would be finished by the making 
of a reconciliation for iniquity; and righteousness would be 
established — not like that justification accomplished year by 
year with the blood of bulls and goats, but the true and everlasting
 righteousness, brought about by the sacrifice of Christ. 
Daniel was also informed that he who would introduce the better
 sacrifices would thereby cause the typical sacrifices and 
oblations of the Law Covenant to cease. 

During this period Messiah, the long-expected Savior of 
Israel would come; and sixty-nine symbolic weeks are given 
as the measure of the time to his presence. After his coming 
there would remain one symbolic week, the last, the seventieth 
of this promised favor. In the midst of this week, it was 
foretold, he would cause the typical sacrifices to cease, by 
making "his soul an offering for sin." (Isaiah 53:10-12) These 
seventy weeks, or four hundred and ninety days, represented 
four hundred and ninety years, each symbolic day representing 
a year. And being so fulfilled in this, the only time-prophecy 
directly relating to the first advent, it furnishes a key to 
other prophecies which were also hidden in symbolic numbers 
— a day for a year — until their due time for solution. 

It should, be noticed that the sixty-nine symbolic weeks, 
or four hundred and eighty-three years, reach unto Messiah 
the Prince, and not to the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem. The 
Hebrew word .Messiah, corresponding to the Greek word Christ, 
signifies the Anointed, and is a title rather than a name. Our 
Lord was no? the Anointed, the Messiah, the Christ, until after 
his baptism. He was anointed with the holy Spirit immediately
 upon coming out of the water. This was when he attained
 manhood's estate, which under the law was at thirty 
years of age. Hence the sixty-nine weeks, or four hundred 
and eighty-three years, ended in the autumn of A. D. 29. Our 
Lord's ministry covered three and one-half years, ending with 
his crucifixion in the Spring of A. D. 33 — "in the middle of 
the week." The remainder of the seventieth week extended, to 
the Fall of A. D, 36, the date of the conversion of Cornelius, 
the first Gentile to receive the Gospel. 


OUR LIGHT AFFUCTION 

'We are troubled on every side yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast 
down, but not destroyed, always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus. " — 2 Corinthians 4:8-10. 

For others not Christians to be thus troubled would mean 
great distress; for these have no hope beyond this present life, 
But for Christians to be troubled does not mean that they experience
 it to the extent of despair, or of being unreconciled; 
for they take their troubles to the Lord in prayer. Jesus is 
the great Yoke-fellow of each of his followers, and he bears the 
weight of the burden. He has said to them: "Take my yoke 
upon you, and learn of me; ... . for my yoke is easy and my 
burden is light." (Matthew 11 ;29, 30) And those who have 
thus come under the yoke of discipleship have proven the verity 
of the Master's word's, and can sing with the spirit: 


In our text the Apostle Paul was evidently describing his 
own personal experiences, though in a broader sense he meant 
also those who were his particular companions. In a still 
broader sense, his w T ords would include all followers of Jesus; 
for the Master warned us in advance that whoever would live 
godly should suffer persecution. The Apostle was finding that 
these very sufferings which Jesus had foretold were his own experiences
. — .John 16:2, 3; 2 Timothy 3:12. 

All of the Lord's followers do 'not receive persecutions to 
the same extent. Some have more trouble, some have less. 
These variations seem to depend in some degree on our natural 
talents. For those who, like the Lord, are more prominent, 
the persecution will be greater. They will be the special 
targets at which the enemy will aim their darts. The Apostle 
expresses this thought in his Epistle to the Hebrews. There 
were some who suffered persecution in a more public way, and 
others who shared sympathetically with them, and who suffered 
also as their companions. — Hebrews 10:33, 34. 

Some may be troubled who are not the open targets of the 
enemy. Some may be persecuted and cast out who are not in 
the forefront of the battle. They might have avoided this suffering
 by disassociating themselves from those who are 
prominent in the service, and who are the special objects of 
attack and calumny. Thus they might have escaped the 
ignominy and contempt which they have received through 
espousing the Lord's truth and his" cause. In all these experiences
 mentioned by the Apostle the difference is seen 
between those who ere the Lord's faithful followers and those 
who are not, between those who endure joyfully and those who 
count their sufferings grievous tind undesirable. 


"His yoke is easy, his burden is light; 
Fve found it so, I've found it so; 
He leadeth me by day and by night, 
Where living waters flow!" 

A3 in the case of the Apoetle, we may be in great perplexity 
pt times; for in some of our experiences the adverse conditions
 are severe. But the Apostle never got into that mental 
condition where he was hopeless. The Lord is the captain of 
our salvation; thus reasoned St. Paul. And the Lord had 
promised that the afflictions should work out for him far 
greater glory. So he concluded that if these things were to 
work out the greater glory, then he would rejoice, instead of 
despairing. 

In our text St. Paul says, that, though sometimes cast 
down, he was not destroyed. He mentions in one of his Epistles 
(Romans 9:2) that he had great heaviness and continual sor- 


[61391 


(270-271) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


row in his heart for his kinsmen according to the flesh, the 
Jewish nation, because of their unfaithfulness to their covenant 
with God. He also telh us, in this same Epistle from which 
our text is taken, that out of much affliction and anguish of 
heart he wrote unto the church at Corinth, with many tears, 
because of his love for them, and because one of their number
 had by his wrong course caused grief to the Apostle. But 
when he thus sorrowed, it seemed to be because of his interest 
in and care for others, and not because of his own troubles. 
His was a brave, courageous heart, fully anchored in God. 
"WHY HAST THOTJ FOBSAKEN ME?" 

The child of God may be persecuted, but he will not be 
forsaken, even though the outward experiences may seem for 
the time to indicate that he is forsaken. It might be asked, 
If Jesus was the Son of God, why would the Father permit 
his being beaten, his having enemies spit in his face, buffet 
and persecute him? We reply, The Master knew that there 
was a reason for all this, else the Father would have hindered 
it; and he submitted fully to his every experience. The Father's 
love for him, which he could not doubt, upheld him in all his 
trials and sore afflictions. In the Garden of Gethsemane the 
Master suffered very great sorrow and anguish of soul ; but as 
soon as he had received from the Father the assurance of his 
continued favor, he was no more distressed. On the cross he 
was indeed forsaken for a very brief period, when he cried: 
"My God! My God! why hast thou forsaken me?" But this 
was a necessary experience of our Lord. It is not necessary 
for us, although some might have a similar feeling as death 
approaches. 

Jesus was the perfect One, and experienced to the full the 
penalty of father Adam's sin. As God withdrew himself entirely
 from Adam the sinner, so it was necessary that this 
One should experience the complete cutting oft from the 
Father, that he should be utterly forsaken by God, for a 
moment. And we see that this was just at the last moment 
of his life. Apparently it broke the Master's heart. He had 
not, perhaps, known that he would be utterly forsaken. To 
One who had been in such close and perfect fellowship with the 
Father, and was so dependent upon him, this was a most bitter
 experience, as his dying cry of anguish testified. We sometimes
 speak of heart-breaking experiences, yet we use this expression
 in a metaphorical sense. But in the case of Jesus, it 
seemed to be an actual breaking of the heart. When the 
soldier's spear was thrust into his side, water and blood came 
forth, thus indicating that the heart was literally ruptured. 

SUFFERING WITH OHBIST A CAUSE FOR REJOICING 

In many respects the Apostle's sufferings were along the 
same lines as those of our Lord. But like the Master he was 


of good courage. Summing up his experiences he saya : "Always 
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus." The 
dying of Jesus was manifested in the Apostle's sufferings. Our 
Ix>rd adopts the bodies of his disciples as part of his own; 
their flesh is counted as his flesh. Thus the sufferings of Jesus 
in the flesh have been going on for more than eighteen hundred 
years since he died. The though that any of our experiences 
would be counted in as a part of the sufferings of the Master 
should enable us to rejoice in such tribulation, knowing that 
these sufferings will unitedly "work out for us a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory/' — -2 Corinthians 4:17, 
18. 

If we joyfully endure afflictions for the sake of the Lord 
and his truth, if we gladly suffer shame, ignominy, persecution
 and trial, we shall thus have experiences most like our 
beloved Head and Exemplar; and we may be sure that in proportion
 to our patience, faithfulness and joy in these experiences
 will be our future reward when our place in the 
kingdom shall be assigned to us. "As star differeth from star 
in glory, so also is the resurrection of the dead." — 1 Corinthians 
15:41, 42. 

When it is remembered that our severe troubles and sufferings
, our chiselings and polishings, are but for a moment, as 
compared with the disciplines of those who will be dealt with 
in the incoming age, and especially in comparison with the 
ages of glory, blessing and unmingled joy of our eternal future 
if we are faithful — when it is remembered also that in proportion
 to our trials and difficulties we are granted more 
grace, according to the exceeding riches of our Lord's loving 
favor — then we can see that we, the Father's precious jewels, 
now being cut, ground and polished preparatory to mounting 
in his great diadem of glory, are truly highly favored above 
all men. Thus we may well take joyfully the spoiling of our 
goods — worldly reputation, etc. — knowing the glorious outcome
 when our God shall have fully made up his jewels, his 
loved and his own. 

Let us note the fact that it is only the strong, the seasoned 
and developed ones, who are able to bear the severest testings, 
the sharpest blows. It is a mark of special favor if our faithfulness
 shall bring us trials, buff e tings and adverse experiences. 
Remember that "rarest gems bear hardest grindings," and let 
this comfort and inspire us in every difficulty and trial. When 
the grinding and polishing process is over, the gem will shine 
the more resplendent because of the painful experiences endured 
in loving, patient submission and trust. 


THE AURORA CONVENTION 


This has been the best one yet, was the expression of many 
who attended the convention at Aurora, 111., August 8 to 12. 
Surely, it was good to be there, for the spirit of the Lord was 
manifest every day and at each session! There seemed to be 
a spirit of sacred seriousness and devotion more deep than at 
any previous convention, so far as we know. We presume that 
this, to a large extent, was due to the fact that we are drawing
 close to the end of our journey, causing everyone to watch 
and pray; and also to a feeling of deep thankfulness, as foretold
 by our Lord: "When ye see these things, lift up your 
heads and look up, for your redemption draweth nigh." Surely, 
with such a hope as that held before the church, everyone whose 
eyes have been anointed with the eyesalve of truth can rejoice 
greatly. The discourses were all helpful and encouraging, and 
the benediction of the Lord seemed to rest upon the speakers 
as they gave forth words of cheer, encouragement and admonition
. The program was carried out with but very little change, 
as follows: 

Wednesday, the opening day, wa3 designated "Fellowship 
Day," and the forenoon was devoted to an address of welcome 
and a response by the chairman, followed With praise and testimony
. In the afternoon there were discourses by Brother 
Bohnet, Brother Reimer and Brother Zink — all in harmony 
with the topic of the day. The topic for Thursday was "Our 
Sacrifices." In the morning, after the usual opening services, 
there were discourses by Brother Saphore and Brother Crist. 
It being impossible for Brother Martin to be present, Brother 
Hazlett filled the vacancy. The afternoon was devoted to discourses
 by Brother Barber and Brother Burgess. Friday was 
known as "Victory Day," and in the morning there were discourses
 by Brother Batter son and Brother Hooper ; in the afternoon
 by Brother Baeuerlein, Brother Robie and Brother Bowin. 


Saturday was "Harvesters' Day." Following the opening service
 was a praise and testimony meeting for the colporteurs and 
pastoral workers. It was refreshing to hear the m &ny testimonies
 indicating the Lord's blessing and guidance. This was 
followed by a discourse on baptism by Brother Van Amburgh, 
after which about seventy symbolized their consecration by 
water immersion. The afternoon was devoted to discourses by 
Brother Hudgings, Brother Rutherford and Brother Woodworth
. Sunday was known as "Kingdom Day." There were 
discourses in the morning by Brother Toole and Brother Graham
 and in the afternoon, for the public, by Brother Rutherford
. It was estimated that about twenty -five hundred were 
present. At 6 in the evening was the love feast for the 
brethren, at which thirteen or fourteen hundred were present. 

The zeal and earnestness evidenced on the part of the friends 
as they began to see their opportunities for heralding the coming
 of the kingdom by the distribution of the seventh volume 
was indicated by the disposal of nearly 1,000 in less than half 
an hour. Each seemed desirous of being found on the "firing 
line." 

Not least among the pleasures of the convention were the 
beautiful grounds at Fox River Park, which is about three 
miles outside of the city of Aurora. The location was ideal, 
quiet, retired, the auditorium good and the surroundings very 
suitable for convention purposes. The weather was delightful. 
The service and love of the Aurora friends were evidenced 
on every hand by their care in selecting places of entertainment
 for the visiting brethren. The attendance was larger 
than anticipated, starting with about 1,000 and closing with 
about 2,000. May the blessing of the Lord rest richly upon 
the dear Aurora friends and those who cooperated with them 
in making the convention so pleasant along temporal lines! 


[6140] 


LETTERS OF INTEREST 


HELPED BT OBITIOISM 
I>EAE BBETHBEN: — 

How I have awaited this opportunity to thank you for 
your service in passing upon my answers to V. D. M. Questions
! I not only received a rich blessing in trying to answer 
the questions, but what a wonderful help your criticism has 
been! For instance, question No. 12, "What will be the fate 
of the finally incorrigible?" I answered, "Second death." 
The criticism on the answer was, "Indefinite." At first I 
wondered how that could be. But since, some one has given 
me one of Haldeman's pamphlets criticizing Pastor Russell. 
He says, "After the first death there is a resurrection both 
of the just and unjust. After the second death there is no 
resurrection. As the soul survives, but has no resurrection 
body, then those who take part in the second death continue 
to exist as disembodied souls." I surely see why question No. 
12 needs a definite answer, for none but Bible Students know 
that death means complete destruction of being, which is everlasting
 in the ease of the second death, "Christ dieth ho more." 
I see, too, how answer to No. 4 was indefinite. In question 2 
I failed to refer to Studies, the wonderful books that helped 
me out of gross darkness into marvelous light. I assure you 
that I shall study to give more clear-cut answers to all who ask 
for a reason for our glorious hope. 

I was a Baptist Sunday School teacher once. I know well 
what they believed and taught. I have to laugh at Dr. Haldeman
 ; he is so hopelessly mixed up trying to discover some 
way out of the ridiculous plight his doctrine places him in, 
since Pastor Russell has turned the light on. Again thanking 
you, I am, 

Yours in his service, Mbs. James Wbight. — Ohio, 

NEVER BEAD ANYTHING SO GOOD 

Deab Bible House Bbetiiben: — 

I won't bother you but for just a moment. I can't keep 
from saying a few words of appreciation. But let me thank 
you for sending the seventh volume. It is grand I I have read 
since receiving it Revelation and I have never had anything 
do me so much good. I wish I could help you. But you 
have my prayers. I have vowed to put forth greater zeal, and 
to strive harder for the mark. My love is too great to put in 
words for all of God's gifts. So I will close, hoping soon to 
see you all. 

Through the merit of the dear Lord. 

WM. BlGGEBSTOFF.—lfan. 
GRATITUDE FOR PASSING A SUCCESSFUL EXAMINATION 
Deab Brethren ix Christ: — 

I have received your report on my answers to V. D. M. 
Questions. I cannot find words to express ray joy to you 
when I noted I had received the required 85% or more. I 
thought the best I could do was to lift my heart in humble 
gratitude to God and to our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the 
Great Examiner of the V. D. M?s I will very carefully search 
up the citations omitted and study the incomplete questions. 
Thanking you for your service and praying God's blessings 
on all your labors, 

I am yours in the Anointed, J. J, Lynch. 


READ THE VOLUME IN SIX DAYS 

Deab Bbetiiben : — 

The volume reached me 0. K. It was a most joyful surprise
. I was only six days reading it through, and today, 
the seventh day, I began canvassing for it; have taken some 
orders. 

It would be impossible to measure the worth of the seventh 
volume in dollars and cents; however if I were so fixed 
financially, I would take more pleasure in remitting $60 than 
60c, which you will find inclosed in stamps. 

Your brother in the service of the King of kings. 

Thos, Holden. — Mich. 

THINKS IT A WONDERFUL BOOK 
Deab Brethren: — 

I received the seventh volume a week or ten days ago, and 
it is a wonderful book, full of light as to how we should walk 
during the remainder of our pilgrimage. I cannot thank the 
Lord enough for this timely help. Find herewith sixty cents 
in payment for the book. I am hoping that the work will be 
issued in pocket size, aa I have the other six volumes so, but 
if not I am going to send for ten or a dozen copies soon as I 
am able. 
Yours in the Lord, D. D. Downing. — Kansas City, Mo, 

7TH VOLUME THE TOPIC OF CONVERSATION 
Deab Bbethben: — 

Herewith enclosed please find Post Office Money Order, covering
 cost of the seventh volume, "The Finished Mystery." It 
was the sweetest surprise of my life. "The Seventh volume" 
is now the topic of the day among the friends here. 

You evidently anticipated our anxiety to get this volume, 
and I want to thank you very kindly for your consideration in 
sending this wonderful book to me in the manner you did. 

With much Christian love to you, dear brethren, I remain, 

Your fellow servant, G. G. Nybeck. — Minn. 

7TH VOLUME CAME AS SWEET SURPRISE 

Deably Beloved Brethren in Chbist : — 

Not before, hut just when we needed it, came the seventh 
volume. Praise ye the Lord! God bless the memory of "'that 
servant!" How sweet to know that he has held high the banner
 of the Lord, faithful even unto death; and won an immortal
 crown of glory, and to he forever with the Lord, whom 
he loved and served so well! Find enclosed price of the volume. 
Thank you for sending it right along. Although I had been 
thinking incessantly of it the past few weeks, it came as a 
sweet surprise. I was sewing when it was laid in my lap, but 
when I looked in the end cover, I said with great joy: "Thank 
the Lord, for the finished mystery"! And now, dear one3 in 
him, it remains for us to make our calling and election sure. 
He has provided the whole armor, in the use of which we may 
conquer by his grace. So let us strive to keep the weeds out 
of the garden of our heart, that the flowers of love may have 
room to enlarge. I am your isolated sister in that blessed hope, 

Mbs. K, M. Reed. — Md. 


DANIEL IN THE LIONS' DEN 

[The first fifteen paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Daniel in the Den of Liona," published in issue 

of July 15, 1899. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled "Greater Is He That Is on Our Part." 

published in issue of October 1, 1905. Please see the articles named.] 


Vou XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y M SEPTEMBER 15, 1917 


No. 18 


THE FINAL CONFLICT 

'Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against 

flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 

against spiritual wickedness m high places." — Eph. 6:11, 12. 


Darkness hatea the light. "Ye are the light of the world," 
said the great Master concerning his people. The church is 
near the end of its earthly pilgrimage and the hour of the 
final conflict is at hand. To be forewarned is to be forearmed. 
The words of St. John now seem appropriate: "Look to yourselves
, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, 
but that we receive the full reward." — 2 John 8. 

For more than Bix thousand years a great battle has been 
waged between good and evil — light and darkness. The fight 
has involved the entire human family. God in his wisdom has 
permitted the forces of evil to prevail for a time, but the 
time is near at hand when the tide of battle shall turn. The 
conflict has resulted in great carnage, thousands of millions 


having succumbed to the agencies of darkness. It has been 
attended with untold sorrow. The fight had its beginning when 
our first parents were driven from Eden. It will end only at 
the end of the Millennial age. 

When Jesug was on earth he fought the same good fight 
of faith, and for a time it seemed that the enemy had van* 
quished him, but shortly he proved that he had triumphed 
over death and the grave. His victory was complete — -his reward
 the highest of all. Through him God brought life and 
immortality to light, and has made known his purposes to all 
who have imbibed his spirit and sought to follow in his footsteps
. 

Since Pentecost God has been selecting the church, the 


VII— 21 


[6141] 


(271-265) 


(275-276) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BCOOKLYN, N. Y. 


members of which are called to follow in the footsteps of the 
great Master, fighting as he fought, and they must gain the 
victory before receiving the "crown of life." 
THE GREAT ARMIES 

There are two great armies engaged in this conflict. On 
the side of evil is the army of darkness, marshaled by 
Satan, the prince of darkness. On the other side is 
the army of light with Jesus Christ as its Field-Marshal, leading
 his host on to certain victory. 

Every man and woman on earth is doing service this day 
for one or the other of these armies. There is no middle 
ground; as St. Paul clearly puts it, "Know ye not that to 
whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are 
to whom you obey; whether of sin unto death or of obedience 
unto righteousness?" — Romans 6:16. 

The Lord's army on earth is composed of those who have 
turned away from the world of sin and darkness and are 
following the Master whithersoever he goeth because of their 
full consecration and love for him. All such manifest the 
spirit of Christ; all others are in the army of Satan. Who 
is on the Lord's side? On which side are you? 

The church this side of the veil is the church militant, 
meaning the church at war. It is both an individual and a 
collective warfare. Each one must fight the good fight of 
faith and be victorious before he can attain to the position of 
joint-heirship with the Lord, and each one having the Master's 
spirit will fight together with all the other members of the 
body to maintain the spirit of unity in the body. All Buch 
must fight under the leadership of their Captain. The same 
admonition St. Paul gave to Timothy applies to each member
 of the body: "This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy
, according to the prophecies which went before on thee, 
that thou by them mightest war a good warfare." "Fight 
the good fight of faith; lay hold on eternal life, whereunto 
thou wast called, and hast professed a good profession before 
many witnesses." (1 Timothy 1:18; 6:12) Again St. Paul 
said, "Only let the lives you live be worthy of the Gospel, that 
we may know who are standing fast in one spirit and one 
mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith and good 
news. Never for a moment quail before your enemies." — 
Phil. 1:27, 28. Weymouth. 

To a soldier* who engages in war it is of the greatest 
importance that he should know who his enemies are, their 
number and force. A good soldier will study to know what 
will be the method of attack by the enemy, and seek to 
strengthen his, position of defense that he may repel every 
assault. In the Christian warfare this is even more vital. Before
 we can successfully engage in the great and final conflict, 
the battle that must be decisive with us, it is of the utmost 
importance that we carefully consider the number, force and 
strength of the enemy, and his me£hod of attack. 
ENEMIES FOBESEADOWBD 

Gdliath pictured Satan and his cohorts. None of the host 
of Israel would attempt to fight him until David came upon 
the scene. Satan found none willing and able to cope with 
him until the antitypical David — Christ Jesus — championed 
the cause of righteousness on behalf of mankind. David represents
 the entire Christ, Head and body. Hie experiences 
foreshadowed the fight in which they must engage. 

In out text the Apostle Paul particularly warns the church 
concerning our enemies. Another translation renders it thus: 
"For ours is not a conflict with mere flesh and blood, but 
with spiritual beings in unseen places, despotisms, empires, 
the forces that control and govern this dark world, the spiritual
 host of evil [host of evil spirits] arrayed against us in the 
heavenly warfare." (Weymouth.) Our enemies or adversaries
 may be divided into four divisions, designated as the 
flesh, the world, the devil and the evil spirits. 
HOW JESUS OVSBOAMB 

That all the members of the new creation must fight these 
enemies is clearly shown from the fact that our Master was 
subjected to such trials, and further evidence thereof H the 
positive statements of the Apostle, It is important that we 
take heed to the Master's method of meeting these attacks. 

Alter our Lord had been fasting for 40 days and nights and 
was weak and emaciated, Satan approached him, first suggesting
 that he change stones into bread for the gratification of 
his own flesh. Jesus met this attack with the sword of the 
spirit, saying, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by 
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." Then 
Satan suggested to him that while it was true he was to be 
the King, it would require a long time for hfrn to convince 
the people, therefore he should go up on the Temple and 
jump into the valley, that Jehovah would save him and thus 
he would demonstrate to the people that he was more than 
an ordinary creature. In the same manner Jesus met this 


attack, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." Then 
Satan made a direct attack upon the Master, suggesting that 
if Jesus would join him, he (Satan) would turn over to him 
all the kingdoms of earth, only Jesus must recognize and 
give proper honor to Satan. Yielding to either one of these 
temptations would have been a violation of his covenant. 
Jesus met this attack with the words, "Thou shalt worship 
the Lord thy God and him only shalt thou serve." 
PEINCIPLE VEBSTTS PASSION 

God governs the entire universe by fixed principles, and 
everyone who is governed contrary thereto is governed by passion
. This is clearly demonstrated in Jesus' method of defense
 against the adversary. Many seem not to he able to 
understand what is meant by "PRINCIPLE." Seemingly 
they think it is whatever they themselves may consider to be 
right when guided by their conscience, or by the argument 
of someone else. "Principle" means, a settled rule of action
; the governing law of conduct. This rule of action, or 
governing law of conduct, is set forth in the Bible, God's 
Word, and all who are governed by the Word of God are 
governed by principle. "Passion" means the capacity of being
 affected by external agencies; to be controlled by outside 
influence; susceptible to control from external influences. The 
new creature must avoid passion and be governed always by 
principle. If we are influenced or swayed in our judgment, or 
conclusion about anything, by reason of what others may say 
or do, we are governed to that extent by passion. If we 
prayerfully and diligently seek to know what is the Lord's 
will and what his Word says on the matter, and are governed
 by that, then we are governed by principle. 

Attack and temptation, within the meaning of the Scriptures
, are one and the same thing. We have no power to 
turn stones into bread, but have received spiritual powers 
which may be used for selfish purposes contrary to God's will. 
For example, making merchandise of the Gospel; preaching 
for the applause of men or using our spiritual powers for any 
other selfish purpose. Concerning such, the Apostle Peter 
says, "Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking 
oversight thereof, not by constraint but willingly; not for 
filthy lucre's sake, but of a ready mind." — 1 Peter 5:2. 

The "spirit of the world" is to follow methods that make 
outward show of great piety to attract attention. Any attempt
 on the part of a Christian to attract attention to himself
 is a manifestation of the spirit of the world, and a violation
 of principle and out of harmony with God's methods. 

All temptations are the effects of the adversary's influence
. He employs various methods in order ^hat he may deceive
. He makes some believe that they are not receiving the 
proper consideration, notice, and honor to which they are 
entitled. This leads into a wrong course. 

METHOD OF ATTACK 

St. Paul emphasizes the fact that the conflict of the church 
in the end of the age will be particularly with the evil spirits. 
These evil spirits have been restrained since the great deluge
, and their day of judgment is at hand. We therefore 
should expect that they would be able to exercise greater 
power over the human race now than at any time since their 
restraint. Many Scriptures clearly indicate that the real battle
 ground of the Christian is in the mind, therefore the attack
 of the evil spirit will be expected along this line. We 
learn from one who was long subject to the influence of 
these demons that their method of attack is as follows: 
First, by 

"Suggestion" : By this is meant that the demons intrude 
evil thoughts upon the mind. All Christians realize that 
they have a conflict in keeping out of the mind thoughts 
that are improper, and that it is a constant warfare to keep 
them out. But where one indulges in evil surmising, judging 
another, he is filling his mind with evil thoughts. Such are 
yielding to suggestions which, if persisted in, lead to the 
second stage, which is designated as 

"Abbreviation" : The word abbreviation means to cut 
short. It here means lack of continuity of thought, or lack 
of concentration of thought upon the Lord's Word. One 
who finds himself given over to evil surmising and evil 
thoughts will find great difficulty in concentration of mind 
upon the study of the Lord's Word, the "Sceiptttbe Sttjdies," 
or in prayer. Attempting either study or prayer, the one 
finds his mind suddenly turned away from his subject and 
turned to or set upon evil things. Thus continuing li« loses 
sight of principle, namely, the great truths of God's Word, 
and this leads to the third stage, designated as 

"Impression" which means that one is moved to act from 
sources other than the Word of God. The word "Impression" 
means sensible result of influence exerted from without; in 
other words, to be controlled by passion, not by the Word of 


[6142] 


SSPTKKBBH IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(277-278) 


God. For instance, one says, "I am moved to take this 
course because of what I have heard, or what influence another
 has brought to bear upon me," at the same time entirely 
ignoring the Word of the Lord covering the subject. This persisted
 in leads to the fourth stage, namely 

"Possession," whereby it i3 understood that the evil spirits 
take possession of the mind of the person and control his 
conduct. 

The Apostle tells us, "God resisteth the proud but giveth 
grace to the humble-minded." From this we would understand
 that humility of mind and heart would be a special 
protection provided by the Lord; and that any one manifesting
 spiritual pride or ambition, the Lord would remove from 
such one this protection, and the evil spirits would have 
special power over him. Time and again through the columns 
of The Watch Toweb the Lord's servant to the Laodicean 
church gave warnings of these enemies. We quote here a few 
of hi3 sayings: 

WHAT WE MAT SHOETLT EXPECT 

"The letting loose of these winds, or air powers (evil 
spirits), would seem to show that God will let go his^ hand 
of restraint; that be will have to do with the permission of 
the terrible trouble that will come. This outside influence 
will exercise a baneful effect upon men, when finally granted 
the liberty. These fallen spirits have been under restraint for 
these many centuries, but they have exercised their influence 
to whatever extent they have had permission. If they had 
had unlimited power they would have wrecked the world long 
ago; but they have been restrained. Apparently God will 
soon cease to restrain the fallen angels, and they will then 
proceed to vent their fury upon humanity, so that the whole 
eartli will be full of violence, the same as in the days of 
Noah. The power manifested by the demons when loosed, will, 
we believe, be with a view to the injury of mankind. We do 
not know but that many of our readers will have a share 
in that . injury. We have every reason to suppose that if 
these fallen angels shall get loose, they will vent their first 
anger upon the Lord's people. 

"As soon as the power that is now controlling them shall 
be removed, we shall have a reign of evil all over the earth. 
The evil spirits will do all the evil that is in their power* and 
this will constitute the trial of all the fallen angels — the 
lifting of the restraints to see whether they will go. contrary
 to the divine will. All who thus manifest their alliance 
with evil . in any way will become subjects of the second 
death; while others who -show their loyalty to God will 
mark themselves ad worthy, presumably, of everlasting life. 
It may be something in connection with the saints that will 
constitute the test of these angels. This will be the key, the 
secret connected with the awful time of trouble which the 
Bible tells us will mark the conclusion of this age and whjch 
will constitute the forerunner or beginning of the new dispensation
." 

THE TEST IS HOW OK 

"Symbolically, the earth represents organized society; the 
sea represents the disorganized masses (Daniel 7 :2 ; Luke 
21:25; Revelation 17:1,5) ; and the trees represent the household
 of faith. The letting loose suddenly of the fallen angels 
will account well for the suddenness of the coming trouble, 
which is mentioned everywhere in the Scriptures as one of its 
particular features — 'in one hour', 'suddenly, as travail upon 
a woman,' 'as in the days of Noah,' and 'as it was in the days 
of Lot/ There is only one way, so far as we can see, in which 
these fallen angels can have a trial, their trial consisting in 
having a fuller opportunity to sin, if they so desire, or in an 
opportunity to show, if they wish, that they are sick of sin and 
desire to return to harmony with God. We cannot think 
that God will allow this trial of the angels during the Millennial
 reign, for then nothing Bhall hurt, nothing shall destroy; 
Satan will be bound and all evil influences will be restrained. 
No; it cannot be then. And in order to be tried at all, tfcese 
fallen angels must have certain liberties granted, to prove 
them. Otherwise, where would be their trial? Consequently, 
reasoning along this basis (2 Peter 3:7), we reach the conclusion
 that the trial of these fallen angels is in the near future
 — perhaps to some extent already begun. In what way? 
'He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.' " 

Another says: "It is evidently God's purpose soon to allow 
the minds of many of his little ones to become an open battle 
ground, upon which the fallen angels shall be judged, and the 
manner in which we meet the tests will prove our worthiness 
bf crowns at the same time that it proves these disobedient 
spirits unworthy of life on any plane. This is something with 
which some, but not many, are yet familiar. Truly, we know 
the Apostle in writing of this evil day says, *We wrestle not 
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against 


powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against spiritual wickedness in heavenly places.' Truly 
we know the Lord Je«3U3 at the first advent began his ministry
 with forty days of conflict with the adversary, who 
all that time sought to sway his mind. Truly we have 
reason to believe he must have had other terrible battles 
when he spent 'all night in prayer, and especially when he 
was so depressed in the Garden of Gethsemane. But without
 actual experience it is quite impossible to conceive 
of the intensity of such struggles as are here indicated. 
{ Eph. 6:12) The base of the brain is seized as in a 
vise. Interpretations of Scripture, ingenious but misleading 
beyond description, are projected into the mind as water might 
be projected through a hose. Visions may be tried, wonderful 
illuminations of the mind as by a soft but glorious greenish or 
yellowish haze. Seductive suggestions may be made, based 
on circumstances of the environment. Offers of inspiration 
may be made. The privilege of sleep may be taken away for 
days at a stretch. All this is with the object of forcing the 
unfortunate into at least temporary insanity so as to destroy 
his influence and, if possible, his faith in God. Failing in all 
other attempts, the mind may be flooded with thoughts that 
are vile beyond description. Then remember the Vow." — 
Scbiptttbe Studies. Vol. VII. 

WICKED SPIRITS USE HITMAN AGENTS 

The evil ones use human agencies to attack members of the 
body. We may reasonably expect that all of the Lord's servants
 who are actively engaged in the closing hours of the 
harvest will he attacked through human agencies by these 
evil spirits. Time and again the enemy assaulted the reputation
 of our dear Brother Russell. He was taken away, however
 before the evil spirits were permitted to exercise their full 
power. Now we may expect that all manner of charges and 
attacks will be made by them through human agencies against 
the reputation, character and standing of others who are engaged
 in the harvest work, which will constitute a test to 
all the brethren, as to whether they will be governed by "pas* 
sion" [outside influence], or whether they will be governed by 
the "principle" of God's Word. The more prominent position 
occupied by one in the harvest work, the more venomous will 
be the attacks. Let each one examine his own heart carefully
 and see to it that his own conclusions are based upon 
right principles, namely, the Word of God, and not upon outside
 influences. No other course is safe. 

As an example of the methods of the evil ones and as a 
warning to the brethren, we deem it proper to here call attention
 to the fact that we have just learned that a man living 
in Enterprise, Alabama, who was once actively engaged in 
the truth but now seems to be the victim of evil spirits, is organizing
 and vigorously conducting a definite campaign against 
the International Bible Students Association and its officers
, particularly its president. We learn that he is publishing
 and proposes to send out a pamphlet charging many 
criminal things against the president of our Society, all of 
which are without foundation in truth. A brother in the 
truth who is firm and steadfast and who recently came in 
contact with the one who is now fomenting this trouble, writes 
us concerning him as follows: 

"I judge from statements he himself has made to me, he 
has made the Bible House no end of trouble in the past. He 
ia, by nature, a trouble-maker. He has made it his cnief business
 for eight years to fight the ecclesia of Enterprise. Now 
he is engaged in circularizing the friends far and near, drawing
 as many as possible to his notions. He was' once in harmony
 with present truth and very zealous and effective in its 
ministry, but has become sour because the friends did not 
endorse some of his unloveliness; and he has allowed this sourness
 to wreck his Christian character. He has practically 
abandoned his business and is putting in all of his time carrying
 on a voluminous, seditionary correspondence. He denounces
 the 7th volume as a humbug, both in the streets of his 
town and in his letters. He is shrewd enough to correspond 
with pilgrims, then to use their letters to his own advantage. 
When I first came South he wrote me that he felt called of the 
Lord to write the 7th volume himself (or words to that effect, 
and calculated to ^ive that impression) ; but that because of 
his lack of education and ignorance, he felt that a smarter 
brother ought to do it, and he therefore welcomed my coming. 
He would give me the ideas and let me frame them into choice 
language. I held a service in his neighborhood one Sunday, 
under his direction, hoping to be able to influence him against 
the evil of his course; but soon I saw it was no use — that he 
was determined to influence my course rather than allow me in 
the slightest to influence him. So I called off all further 
intercourse, and he regards me as a hopeless child of the 
devil. He is in very poor health, almost a nervous wreck, and 


[6143] 


(278-279) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


1 think that in this unfortunate condition the evil spirits 
have obsessed his mind and are in full possession of him. He 
has avoided fellowship so long, constantly studying and 
meditating and brooding by himself, that he has become the 
most self -centered man I ever met. He seems to be unconscious
 of this and not guilty of deliberate selfishness, but irrationally
 so. He states in a letter I read last night, that he 
is organizing a definite rebellion against the I. B. S. A.; that 
thousands throughout the land are joining his cause, as 
he can prove by letters in hand, and that he will be the 
Moses of these poor, oppressed people." 

The Lord Jesus laid down the only method of procedure 
against a brother who has done wrong. (Matt. 18:15-18) 
Any other course pursued against a brother is out of harmony
 with the fixed principles of God's Word* We deem it 
only necessary to call attention to these things that the dear 
brethren everywhere may be warned against the wily methods 
of attack by the adversary and his coadjutors against the 
work of the harvest and those who are engaged in it. 

HOW TO REPEL ATTACKS 

All the Scriptures bearing upon the point indicate that 
the conflict will be more severe as we near the end. Referring
 to this time St. Paul says, "Finally, my brethren, be 
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might" — Ephesians 
6:10. 

The clear inference here is that each soldier of the cross 
must have special strength in order to stand at this time, and 
to repel the combined attack of Satan and his coadjutors. If 
we look at it from one standpoint, we would become dismayed 
and despair of winning, but looking at it from another viewpoint
, we know that he who is for us is greater than all who 
can be against us; and he being for us, none can prevail 
against us. We are now in the evil* day. How then may we 
have the strength needed? The Apostle tells us of the armor 
of God provided for us, which will prove invulnerable to all 
attacks of the adversary. "Wherefore, take unto you the 
whole armor of God that ye may be able to withstand [resist
] in the evil day, and having" done all, to stand [remain 
a victor]." (-Ephesians 6:13) The assurance here is that 
he who has this armor on, keeps it on and learns to use it 
properly, will be able to stand. 

While the Apostle used as an illustration the human warrior
, clothed in the proper and complete accoutrements of war, 
yet he did not mean that the Christian needs this kind of armor
. The armor of the Lord is for the new creature because 
his warfare is not a carnal warfare, but a spiritual warfare. — 

2 Corinthians 10:4,5. 

WHAT IS THE ABHOR? 

God is the maker of this armor through human instrumentalities
. The armor consists of his Wtfrd, the message of 
truth, put into proper Bhape to be used for the benefit of the 
new creation. Describing this armor in detail, the Apostle 


"Having your loins girt about with the truth." The girdle 
is a symbol of servitude, and suggests that no one is safe at 
this time unless he is a servant of the truth. Those engaged 
in evil surmising, faultfinding, backbiting, slander, libel or 
other works of darkness are not servants of the truth. On 
the contrary, let each one of us see to it that he guards himself
 against such wiles of the adversary, and that he possesses 
the zeal peculiar to the house of the Lord and earnestly and 
zealously follows in the Master's footsteps by serving his 
cause at this time. 

"And having on the breastplate of righteousness." The 
breastplate was used to cover the vital organs of the body, par* 
ticularly the heart. A proper condition of heart is vital to 
the new creature. A righteous heart indicates purity, righteous
 motives, righteousness of character. "Keep thine heart 
with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life." (Prov. 
4:23) "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see 
God." (Matt. 5:8) "The eyes of the Lord run to and fro 
throxighout the whole earth to show his strength in behalf of 
him whose heart is pure." — 2 Chronicles 16:9. 

"And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of 
peace." The soldier who engages in warfare must keep well 
his feet. If they are not shod they become sore, and his attention
 is directed more to the soreness than to his duties. The 
new creature has now many rough roads to travel. Therefore 
the feet members should be clothed with the message of peace 
and see to it that all anger, malice, hatred and strife, ill will, 
backbiting, faultfinding, accusations of the brethren, be put 
aside. None other will be able to stand. "Follow peace with 
all, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." 
(Heb. 12:14} Those who hunt trouble now will surely find 
it; they will find little else. Those who avoid trouble find it 


necessary to be diligent in keeping themselves in the^eace and 
love of God. 

"Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall 
be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked." The 
enemy is constantly firing wicked darts at the soldiers of the 
cross. These darts are liable to stir up in your mind doubts, 
fears, skepticism. The shield of faith is the protection. Faith 
means the intellectual understanding and appreciation of the 
Word of God' — true principles — and a confident reliance upon 
that Word. Without faith it is impossible to please God." 
'This is the victory that overcometh the world, even your 
faith." 

"And take the helmet of salvation." The helmet is fitted 
over the head and represents the intellectual understanding 
and appreciation of the divine plan. This knowledge of God's 
Word, and his methods and his information concerning the 
methods of the adversary, is absolutely essential in order to 
protect ourselves against the evil ones of this day. If we 
had no knowledge of the demons and their methods of attack
, we could not be forearmed against them. 

"And the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God." 
This is both an offensive and a defensive weapon. We must 
have it and know how to use it. Jesus wielded it successfully
 to each attack made upon him. He said, "It is written," 
and such must be our battle cry. We are not to use carnal 
weapons, nor such weapons as Satan uses. We are to use the 
truth and let the truth do the cutting. 

It is noticed that the Apostle names only six parts of 
the armor, whereas the armor of the ancient soldier was in 
seven parts. Seven is also a symbol of perfection. The 
seventh part, the one not named by the Apostle, was the 
greaves, and was a metal shield fitting over the front part of 
the foot to protect it from the darts of the adversary. The 
feet members of the church are now engaged in the fight. 
The greaves, therefore, would properly and fittingly represent 
the Vow. When it was promulgated our attention was called 
to this Scripture: "When the enemy shall come in like a 
flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against 
him."— Isaiah 59:19. 

HOW TO PUT OK THE ABM OR 

The words of the Apostle assume that the persons addressed
 have renounced the world and enlisted under the banner
 of the Lord! by making a full surrender of their will to do 
God's will. Hence he says by illustration: — 

{ 1 . ) Girdle — Servitude, Be a zealous and faithful servant
 of the truth. Let there be but one motive for service — 
love for God and his righteous cause. "By love serve." 

(2.) Breastplate — Righteousness. Having on the robe of 
Christ's righteousness now, study to be approved of God. 
Learn the great and vital ^principles of his Word and apply 
the,m to daily living; be controlled by these and let them 
work out in you a righteous character. Keep a pure heart. 

(3.) Sanaa Is—Peace. Do not hunt trouble. Live in peace 
with all so long as God's law is not sacrificed. Accept your 
part of suffering with joy. 

(4.) Shield — Faith. Maintain an abiding faith in God 
and in his sure Word of promise. Rely upon his Word and 
not upon the advice or influence of others. Stand, leaning 
only on the Lord. 

(5.) Helmet — Salvation. Strive to increase in heart appreciation
 of God and the Lord Jesus. Continue in the study 
of the Word. Feed upon the food provided. Keep always before
 your mind the- strong hope of salvation and the high position
 to which you have been called. 

(6.) Sword — Word of ^ God, Know God's Word, in letter 
and spirit. Be able to give a reason for the hope you have. 
Use it deftly in repelling the adversaries. Let your battle cry 
be, "It is written." 

(7.) Vow. Daily put in practise the Vow in letter and 
spirit. Take the Lord Jesus with you in all things. Be filled 
with his Spirit. 

If you do these things you shall be strong in the Lord 
and have the power which his supreme strength imparts and 
shall be a certain victor. 

THE ITNAIi OOKFUOT OT THE "EVIL DAY" 

This is the evil day; the time when every man's work is 
being tried in the fiery furnace; these are perilous times of 
which we have been warned; it is the last battle, the great 
and final conflict. The enemy is advancing from every quarter
. Shall we quail before our adversaries? No, thank God, 
for he has made ample provision for his people. The whole 
armor of God is now supplied. It was never so much needed 
as now. Those who have it on and keep it on will stand. 
Others will not. 

Let us not be discouraged, dear soldiers of the cross; let 
us arise to the importance of the time and face the perils 


[6144] 


SSpr«MBi£R 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(280-283) 


of the hour with confidence in our Commander and Lord. The 
history' of ages is looking down upon us. The holy angels 
of heaven are beholding the final conflict. Jesus and the 
members of the bride who have passed beyond the veil are 
watching our course, how we are quitting ourselves. It is 
the greatest battle of the ages, and the enemy is making his 
final' onslaught. God's little band of soldiers, now clothed 
with the complete armor of the Lord, are marshalled for the 
last time upon the battle field. We hear the encouraging 
words of our Captain, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee the crown of life!'* Soon this army will emerge 
from the smoke of battle, clothed in wreaths of victory. Soon 
it will be asked, "Who is she that looketh forth as the morning
, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an 
army with banners?" (Canticles 6:10) Soon the answer from 


heaven shall ring out, "This is triumphant Zion, whose great 
Leader has forever put to flight the armv of darkness." She 
is pure, just, holy, good, and now stands in the glorious light 
of heaven with her glorious Captain. Terrible has been The 
Christ, and will continue to be, in the conquest of evil. The 
dawn of his glorious reign is here, the new government is now 
to be put in operation. Soon all men will have full opportunity
 to stand in the light of truth and be able by the grace 
of the Lord to free themselves from all the influences of evil 
and darkness. Be brave, be valiant soldiers, now! 

"Hear the call, gird your armor on, 
Grasp the Spirit's mighty Sword. 

Take the helmet of salvation, 

Pressing on to battle for the Lord ! " 


BLESSING GOD AND CURSING MEN 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of April 1, 1899, which please see.] 


PSALMS OF DELIVERANCE 


October 7. — Psalms 85, 126. 

ISRAEL'S DELIVERANCE FROM CAPTIVITY TO LITERAL BABYLON — THE APPROACHING DELIVERANCE FROM MYSTIC BABYLON THE GREAT — 
CHRIST THE ANTITYPICAL CYRUS — WIIY THE CHURCH CAN SING " SONGS IN THE NIGHT " OT EARTHLY SORROW — THE TRUE 
SOURCE OF THEIR REST OF HEART — THEIR JOY IN THE FULFILMENT OF THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT— THE LONG-PROMISED BLESSING
 OF ALL THE FAMILIES OF THE EARTH. 

"They that sow in tears shall reap in jsy. M — Psalm. 126: 5. 


Psalm 85 may properly have several applications. The 
first of these would be to Israel's deliverance from the Babylonian
 captivity, when Cyrus, king of Persia, gave permission
 that all who desired to return to Palestine might do so. 
About fifty-three thousand availed themselves of this privilege
 and of his assistance. The Israelites rejoiced in this 
manifestation of the turning away of divine disfavor and the 
return to them of divine blessing. The pardon of their transgressions
 as a nation was evidenced in this privilege of returning
 to God's favor. 

A secondary application of this song of deliverance is 
just before us. During the past eighteen centuries Israel has 
been in a far greater captivity to Christendom. She has the 
promise, nevertheless, of a mightier deliverance. The Cyrus 
who gave them permission to return from literal Babylon was 
a type of the great Messiah who is about to give full liberty
 for the return of God's ancient people to divine favor — 
to Palestine. In Romans 11:25-29 the Apostle Paul refers 
to this coming deliverance. The great Deliverer will do more 
than merely regather Israel. He will do that which is predicted
 in Psalm 85; for, as the Apostle says, "This is my covenant
 with them when I shall take away their sins." See also 
Jeremiah 31:31-34; Hebrews 8:8-11. 

Israel's sins have not yet been taken away, even as the 
world's sins have not been taken away. The great Redeemer 
has indeed died for sin, and he is the sinner's friend. But as 
yet he has appeared in the presence of God only for the 
church— not for the world. (Hebrews 9:24) He is the Advocate
 for the church alone. He advocates for none except 
those who desire to approach to God; and these are the saintly 
only — those who love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

The world is enslaved by Sin and Death, the twin monarchs
 which are now reigning and which are causing mankind 
to groan. The Adamic race was born in this enslaved condition
, as the Scriptures declare. {Genesis 3:20; Psalm 51:5) 
Groaning under the weaknesses and imperfections thus inherited
 — mentnl, moral and physical — mankind long for the promised
 deliverance from the bondage of Sin and Death. Undoubtedly
 the majority of the race feel the gall of their slavery, 
and will rejoice to be set free. 

"HE GIVETH SONGS IN THE NIGHT" 

The great Deliverer of mankind is the antitypical Cyrus. 
Soon he will be victorious and will establish his kingdom 
under the whole heaven. (Daniel 7:27) Soon the church 
class, the saintly, the elect, will be glorified; and then the 
time will come for the blessing of the non-elect — for their 
restitution to human perfection and to a world-wide paradise
, which Messiah's power will produce. "He must reign 
until he hath put all enemies under his feet; the last enemy 
that shall be destroyed is death." (1 Corinthians 15:25-27) 
Death will be destroyed. Sheol, hades, the grave, will be 
destroyed, by the resurrection of the dead therefrom — "every 
man in his own order." 

While the whole creation groans under its load of sin and 
sorrow, the saintly few may sing, may rejoice, even in the 
midst of all the sorrows of life, and even though they share 
the results of sin as fully or more fully than do others. 


The secret of their joy is twofold : ( 1 ) They have experienced 
reconciliation to God; (2) they have submitted their wills 
to his will. They obtained this new relationship by the way 
of faith in the fcedeemer— faith in his blood of atonement. 
They entered by the "strait gate" and the "narrow way" of 
consecration to God — surrendering their own wills, and covenanting
 to do the divine will to the best of their ability. This 
submission to the divine will and the realization that all of 
their life's affairs are in God's keeping and under his 
supervision give rest to the heart. In this surrendered condition
 they have a rest and peace which they never knew when 
they sought to gratify self-will and ignored the right of their 
Creator to the homage of their hearts and the obedience of 
their lives. 

Similarly, these .have joy, peace and songs of thankfulness 
to God because to them he grants a knowledge of his divine 
purposes, and shows them things to come. These see, beyond 
the trials and tribulations of the present time, the glories 
which will follow the sufferings of the present. These see that 
the church, the saintly few of all denominations and of all 
nationalities, are prospective heirs of God — heirs of glory, 
honor, immortality and association with the Redeemer in his 
glorious kingdom. This prospect encourages them. They also 
see the outlines of the divine program for the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. When they thus perceive that God is 
interested in their dear ones who are not saintly and in the 
whole human family, very few of whom are saints, it causes 
them rejoicing. When they perceive that God has arranged 
that through Christ and the glorified church all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed, it makes them "joyful in the 
house of their pilgrimage" — while waiting for their own change 
from human to divine nature. 

"YE SHALL GO FdBTH WITH SINGING" 

The second part of today's study is Psalm 126. This Psalm 
seems to picture the return of the Jewish exiles from the 
Babylonian captivity. A writer thus describes the scene of 
their departure from Babylon: 

"Forth from the gates of Babylon they rode, to the 
sound of joyous music — a band of horsemen playing on flutes 
and tabrets, accompanied by their own two hundred minstrels 
and one hundred and twenty-eight singers of the Temple (Ezra 
2:41-65), responding to the Prophet's voice as they quitted 
the shade of the gigantic walls and found themselves in the 
open desert beyond: ^'Go ye out of Babylon, flee ye from the 
Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, telJ this, ntter 
it even unto the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath redeemed
 his servant Jacob.'" — Isaiah 48:20. 

We are interested in this narrative sympathetically, and 
also because we realize that the Lord's providences control 
in respect to all the affairs of his chosen people, Israel. But 
we have a greater and more profound interest in the events 
here related now that our eyes have been opened to see that 
the seventy years of desolation of the promised land represent
 the seventv jubilee cycles appointed to them, in the 
time of the fulfilment of which we are now living. (Jeremiah 
25:11, 12; 2 Chronicles 38:21; Leviticus 26:14-34) Our interest
 is still further awakened when we remember that during 


[6145] 


(284 287) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


B*OOM,YH, N. Y. 


this long interim of "seven times more" — 2520 years — God's 
favor was transferred from the Jewish house of servants to 
the Gospel house of sons; and that an antitypical Babylon has 
carried away captive the Lord's people and all the golden 
vessels of truth. See Studies in the Sckiptures, Vol. 2, 
Studies 4, 6. 

Spiritual Israel in captivity to mystic Babylon has long 
waited for the glorious deliverance to be brought about by 
Immatouel, the Deliverer greater than Cyrus the Persian king. 
Since our Lord's return in 1874 the cry has gone forth, "BabyIon
 the Great is fallen, is fallen!" and again, "Home out of 


her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that 
ye receive not of her plagues." (Revelation 18:1-5) A comparatively
 small number of them have had such love for the 
Lord, such reverence for his promises, such desires to be inheritors
 of those promises as to lead them to sever the earthly 
ties and the bonds which hold them satisfied in Babylon. But 
some have heard, some have rejoiced, some have stepped out 
and some are still leaving. Our antitypical Cyrus, our present
 Lord, has permitted us to bring back the golden vessels, 
the golden truths which for so long have been misappropriated
, misapplied, misunderstood, misused in Babylon. 


RETURNING FROM CAPTIVITY 

i This article "as a reprint of that published in issue of August 1, 1899, which please see.] 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


ENGLISH PRISON AS NEAB HEAVEN AS ANY OTHEE PLACE 
Dear Brethren: — 

Loving greetings in our dear Redeemer's name! You are 
aware that the younger brethren in Great Britain have been 
called upon to endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus 
Christ. 

The largest work center for the employment of Conscientious
 Objectors to military service in this country is at Princetown
, S. Devon, where v the Conscientious Objectors are housed 
in Dartmoor Convict Prison — the most famous of British 
Prisons — which was built more than 100 years ago for the 
accommodation of prisoners of war in the time of Napoleon. 
It is also interesting to recall that American prisoners taken 
during the War of Independence were confined here, and the 
cemetery where some of them were buried is still preserved. 

At the present time there are between sixty and seventy 
brethren here. The number is constantly varying, as some 
are sent to work in other parts of the country, and others 
are arriving from Wormwood Scrubs Prison, London, where 
they have been serving terms of imprisonment for refusing to 
bear arms. 

I am sure you will be glad to know that 51 of us met together
 on April 5 to celebrate the "Memorial." We assembled
 in the Koncon for mist Chapel for the occasion. The Baptists
, who had the use of the room for that evening, very 
kindly curtailed their meeting so that we were enabled to 
commence our service at 8 o'clock. The wine we obtained at 
a local store. The proprietress manifested some curiosity as 
to who we were, and the brother making the purchase apparently
 answered to her satisfaction; for she kindly loaned 
us cloths and vessels. In return, our brother gave her a copy 
of Volume I. 

It seemed, dear brethren, as if the dear' Lord had arranged
 everything to enable us to concentrate our minds on 
the purpose for which we had assembled. Over the head of 
the brother who conducted the meeting was the picture of our 
Lord on the cross. On his left were pictures of Jesus before 
Pilate and the Institution of the Memorial; and on his right 
were two pictures of the Lord's resurrection. 

The meeting opened with Hymn 62, the Lord's blessing 
being then invoked upon up. We especially remembered our 
dear brethren who were still in prison, and unable to partake 
of the Memorial. Hymn 28 was then sung, followed by a 
short discourse based "upon Luke 22:1-30. We then joined in 
singing Hymn Ko. 2, after which we partook of the emblems, 
a blessing being asked upon each; the service closing with 
Hymn 277. The service was very impressive. We felt keenly 
the fact that we were not able 'to meet with our loved one3 
in the classes from which we have been drawn; but we remembered
 that Dartmoor is as near heaven as London, or 
any other place of our earthly pilgrimage. 

We" are thankful that we have been accounted worthy to 
suffer for Christ's sake. It is a proof that our sacrifice is 
being consumed, and that we are making our calling and 
election sure. We realize that under these conditions it is 
very difficult indeed to maintain that high moral standard 
which is set before us, it being so easy to get loose in our 
ways and actions. 

A thought which has been expressed, and which has proved 
very helpful to us, is that when St. Stephen was stoned for 
his fidelity to the truth, he cried with a loud voice, "Lord 
Jesus, receive my spirit"; or, as a footnote in the Diaglott 
expresses it, <f Lord Jesus, assist me to suffer." How this is 
in harmony with the context, and the circumstances in which 
he was then placed! Stephen was the first martyr; it may be 
that we younger brethren will be some of the last, and we 
pray that we may always be in that condition of heart where 
we can call upon our Savior, and say, "Lord Jesus, assist us to 
suffer," 


And naw, dear brethren, I commend you to God, praying 
fervently to the Father for you, that you may have an abundant
 entrance into that glorious kingdom which we believe 
is very soon to be ours. 

Your loving brother in the Beloved, 

Robert Edwin Dabby. — Eng. 
REJOICING IN THE TRUTH AT 68 
Deab Brethren: — 

I desire to express my joy and feeling to you for the 
unspeakable grace our heavenly Father has been pleased to 
bestow upon me. He pulled me out of that state of ignorance, 
darkness and superstition, in which I had been unfortunately 
plunged, first by having spent the first twenty years of my 
life as a Roman Catholic, afterward as a member of the 
Presbyterian church for some time, and finally as an unbeliever
 for a number of years. 

The blessedness I have experienced since I came to the 
knowledge of God's wonderful present truth is due absolutely 
to the efforts of that "faithful servant" of our Lord, the late 
Pastor Russell. Blessed be his memory; for the "crown of 
life" promised to every overcomcr on this side the veil must 
have been his reward. 

By the grace of God, I have had the privilege and opportunity
 to read and study lately the six volumes of Studies 
from his pen, and also 'The Watch Tower you have been 
kind enough to send me since November, 1916. Being willing 
to learn, I prayed the Almighty God to help me, and, 
blessed be the Lord, the result was that I was brought down 
to the feet of our Master and Savior Jesus Christ. Brother 
Nettletori, the elder of our Union Avenue ecclesia, always 
stood by me, assisting me in all my wants most generously. 

I am an old man, 68 years of age, a widower without children
. I am poor and afflicted with bodily pains and infirmities
 to such extent that, being unable to earn my living by 
ordinary work, I have been compelled, Bince a few years, to 
become an inmate of a benevolent institution. But although 
poor and afflicted in the -flesh, I feel like singing God's praises 
constantly. Being a French-Canadian, I am thoroughly well 
educated in the French language, besides being familiar with 
the English and Italian languages. 

Dear Brethren of the Editorial Committee, my prayers go 
up to the throne of grace for you, and may our heavenly 
Father help us all to carry on to the end the good work of 
spreading the glorious Gospel truth, "while it is yet day 
light, for the night will soon come when no man shall be able 
to work." 

Your brother in Christ, Joseph Daoust. — Can. 

DOES SOCIETY SUPERVISE CONVENTION EEPORTS7 
My Dearly Beloved Brethren in Christ: — 

Your very encouraging letter of the 20th received with 
great joy and I thank you for your words of comfort and 
counsel. Permit me, dear brethren, te ask you for a little information
 in regard to the Convention Beports published by 
Brother Jones in the past, and I notice that he is going to get 
them out this year also. Since a few things have happened 
this paBt year some of the friends would not order the Souvenirs
 until they hear from Headquarters. So please give us 
your opinion about it. Is it under the supervision of the Society
? or will the Society publish these Souvenirs? Will the 
seventh volume be published in any other language? 

Yours in Christian love, Geo. E. Kafoory. — Pa. 

Our R«ply 
With reference to the Convention Reports, or Souvenirs, 
we beg to say that the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
 has nothing whatsoever to do with them. They are 
puhlished by Brother Jones on his own volition and responsibility
. It has never been the policy of the Society to publish 
the pilgrim brethren's discourses delivered at conventions. 
The Society has proceeded upon the theory that if anyone 


[6146] 


September 15. 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(2S7-274) 


else desired to publish what was delivered at the conventions, 
the Society would not interfere, granting to everyone the 
liberty of doing what he thinks is best. 

Our own opinion is that the Convention Reports, or Souvenirs
, are not particularly helpful or beneficial. We believe 
the time could be better occupied by reading the volumes of 
Studies in the Scriptures and The Watch Tower. 

"LOST IN WONDER, LO VB AND PRAISE " 

Dear Ones in Christ: — 

Truly, we are "lost in wonder, love and praise"! Wards 
are lacking in which to utter grateful thanks unto our dear 
loving Father and his dear Son for giving us the seventh 
volume. At first we were afraid to open it, lest some one 
not of our Lord's chosen channel had attempted to write it. 
But oh, how our hearts swell up with love and praise as we 
read it! 

Your sister in Christ, Mrs. Alice A. Dobbixs. — Ark. 
BELIEVES 7TH VOLUME SUFFICIENT TO OVERCOME 
Dear Friends and Colaborhrs: — 

Loving greetings! Such a wondrous gift was placed in 


my waiting, eager hands a few days ago, when the seventh 
volume came ! My joy and gratitude seem boundless, for 
this which came in a time of direst need: when nothing else 
seemed to satisfy. 

0) how adorable i3 our God to provide this just now, when 
the crucial test for the church is on! Trials and tests are 
rapidly increasing, but within the covers of this blessed book, 
I believe, is sufficient, by his grace, to overcome. 

Please find payment inclosed. 

Kindly thanking you for so graciously sending this, I remain
 with prayers and best wishes, 

Yours in Christ, Opal Sargent. — Neb. 

OVEBWHELMED IN BEADING IT 
Dear Fellow Servants: — 

I am sending you sixty cents for the seventh volume of 
Scripture Studies. Please pardon me for not sending it 
sooner. I have been so overwhelmed in reading it, and it 
has been so interesting, that I just could not spare the time 
to write you a little letter until now. 

Your brother in Christ, J. A. Heudspeth. — Texas. 


VOLUME VII 

We have been receiving many inquiries as to whether we 
shall bring forth Volume VII in the German language. The 
cost would be considerable and the time necessary for translation
 and printing would probably reach at least until January
 1st. In order that we may know whether it will be 
feasible to undertake the work or not. we would like to hear 


IN GERMAN 

from German friends who would care to have Volun/e VII in 
the German language. Do not order any but advise us by postcard
 how many volumes you would care for at the same price 
of the English Volume if it were published. An early reply 
from the German friends will be appreciated. 


PASTOR RUSSELL'S SERMONS IN BOOK FORM 


We are pleased to announce that arrangements are under 
way for the compilation of a book containing the principal 
sermons by Brother Russell. 

This will meet a long felt want on the part of the friends. 
As many of his sermons were to some extent more or less 
repetitions of other sermons the arrangement will contain all 
of his principal sermons covering all points of the plan as outlined
 in the various volumes of the Scripture Studies. Our 
thought is to eliminate any duplication of statements in 
order that it may be as convenient and complete as possible. 
We are glad to announce, also, that the book will contain additionally
 some special matter arranged by Brother Russell 
and never before printed. He had in mind' to publish it, but 
did not reach it before his death; and we feel sure the friends 
will take great delight in reading it. The binding will be uniform
 with the other volumes of the Scripture Studies and 
will contain from six to eight hundred pages. The price will 
be: Cloth, $1.00, postpaid; Leather Bound, $1.50, postpaid. 
We hope to have it ready by November 1st. Orders will be received
 at once, but we do not expect to make delivery bciore 
date named. 


NEW VOLUNTEER MATTER 


The output of volunteer matter this year so far has been 
something quite phenomenal. The friends have entered into 
the work with extraordinary zeal, and the result has been that 
in many cities work that has heretofore taken from four to 
eight months has been cleared up in from one month to six 
weeks. As the first number of volunteer matter, The World 
on Fire, was ready early in the year, the friends everywhere 
entered into the distribution with keen zest. Over seven and 
a half million were distributed within a short time, and the 
friends were ready for more. The second number, Why Do the 
Nations War? has already; passed the six and a half million 
mark j and the orders are still coming in, although many of the 
classes have completed the work and are anxiously waiting for 
more. We are surely glad to know this. 

The Lord has been so arranging to meet the increased cost 
of paper and other expenses through the means of the Tract 
Fund contributions that we are now arranging for a third 
number which we trust will be the best one yet, entitled 
The Fall of Babylon. 

We trust to have this Volunteer Edition ready by the 1st 
of October. Orders may be placed at any time and shipment 
-will begin as soon as ready. This issue will contain a number
 of articles from Brother Russell, calling attention to the 


long-promised kingdom and the joys which shall result therefrom
 and of the fact that we are now at its very door. When 
ordering please specify B. S. M. No. 99. 

We feel sure that the friends everywhere will be very much 
pleased with this forthcoming number, and suggest that all 
classes who have not finished distributing the last issue push 
the matter rapidly in order that the new work may be taken 
up at once and with full vigor. 

The blessing of the Lord has rested richly upon the work 
during the year thus far, and indications are increasing that 
he has some great work for us in the near future. Let us all 
unite our nrayers and our efforts to the end that he may 
grant us wisdom and strength to carry forward whatever he 
may open for us! 

The orders for the seventh volume are also coming in by 
the hundreds, and the friends everywhere are greatly enthused 
and encouraged. We believe there is a great work in the near 
future for every earnest worker, and that the Lord has a rich 
blessing for everyone who will enter therein. 

We are also glad to report that applications for territory
 from over one hundred new colporteurs have been received
 within the last few weeks, indicating a greatly increased
 activity on the part of the friends everywhere. 


THE WATCH TOWER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

*This Journal is published under the supervision of an Edi- The names of the editorial Committee are : j. f. Rutherford, 
torial Committee, at least three of whom have read and ap- w. E. van amburgh, g. h. fisher, f. h. robison, fi. H. 
proved each and every article appearing in these columns. hirsh. 

I. B. S. A. INCORPORATION 


Many of our younger students and recent subscribers to der 
The Watch Tower seem not to have noticed statement on the low: 
second page setting forth the mission of the Society and the 
journal to the thousands of Bible Students. We suggest a 
careful re-reading of this entire second page. In order that 
all may be conversant with the legal standing of the Association
 we append hereto a statement of the Assistant Registrar 
of Joint Stock Companies, London. The International Bible 
Students Association aa an organization has been in existence
 many years, but was duly incorporated in London, England
, under the above name on the 30th day of June, 1914, un- 

* First appearance of this paragraph in this form. 

[6147] 


the COMPANIES ACTS 1908 AND 1913, as shown heNo
. 136,776. UNLIMITED COMPANY 

CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION 
I HEREBY CERTIFY that INTERNATIONAL BIBLE
 STUDENTS ASSOCIATION is this day Incorporated
 under the Companies Acts 1908 and 1913. 

Given under my hand, at London, this Thirtieth day 
of June, One thousand nine hundred and fourteen-. 

GEO. J. SARGENT, 
Assistant Registrar of Joint Stock Companies. 


Vou XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., OCTOBER 1, 1917 


No. 19 


THE CONCLUDING WORK OF THE HARVEST 

And another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire, and cried with a loud voice to him that had a 
sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sickle and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for her grapes 
are fully ripe. And the angel thrust in his sickle upon the earth and gathered the vine of 
the earth and cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God." — Rev. 14:18, 19. 
It is the new creation that is gathered into the garner of Isaac, she became his wife, thus foreshadowing how Jehovah 


the Lord. It is the vine of the earth, composed of the tare 
systems of the earth, that must be gathered for destruction. 
Such were the words of the Master. 

For nineteen centuries God has been preparing the new 
creation. That work is now reaching a climax. Jehovah is 
a strict economist. He wastes neither time nor effort. The 
length of time and the expenditure of treasure is evidence 
all-sufficient of the great importance of the work of completing
 the new creation. This work has consisted of the 
purchasing, calling, begetting and transformation of poor, sad, 
dying human beings into perfect, joyful, spirit beings of 
superlative beauty and glory, possessing life immortal and 
powers for usefulness without limitation. 

Long ago, at great cost to himself — yea, at the cost of the 
dearest treasure to his own heart — Jehovah provided for the 
purchase of the entire human race. The purchase-price has 
been used for those who will compose the new creation, and 
they have been brought to a knowledge of that fact and joyfully
 accepted the benefits thereof. 

PICTURES FORESHADOWING DEVELOPMENT 

Long, long before the beginning of the actual development 
of the new creation, God caused many wonderful pictures to 
be made, foreshadowing the preparation for and the process 
of bringing to completion the great work in behalf of the 
new creation. To Abraham he made a promise concerning 
the same, designating that class as "the seed" from which shall 
go forth the blessings to all humankind. Abraham offered 
up his son in the mountain and received him as from the 
dead, picturing the death and resurrection of the antitypical 
Isaac, the Lord Jesus. (Hebrews 11:17-19} For many centuries
 God's typical people offered yearly sacrifices foreshadowing
 the great sin-offering on behalf of the church and the 
world. David in his experiences typified the church at war, 
while Solomon pictured the new creation in glory. 

The sin-offering on behalf of the church being finished, 
God issued a call for the election of the new creation. Mark, 
that this call began at Pentecost and not before; there the 
heavenly way was opened. 

God designates this class as his elect, as distinguished from 
the non-elect. Selected from amongst men, favored with a 
knowledge of his great plan and furnished with the rules 
governing the election, the catted ones have the assurance that 
if they conform themselves to these rules they will be elected 
judges and blessers of mankind, and thereafter forever be the 
recipients of Jehovah's favor. 

Again, Jehovah likens this class unto a glorious temple, 
of which Solomon's Temple was a type or picture. The material
 for Solomon's Temple was prepared in advance, and 
when the time came it was put together without noise or 
confusion. (1 ICings 6:7) So the new creation has been long 
in the course of preparation. Now it is being put in order 
and the glorious temple is being erected, without noise or 
confusion, and without the knowledge of the world. 

Long centuries ago God caused to be erected in Egypt a 
mighty pillar of stone, composed of many stones, all dressed 
and nicely shaped and fitted to the one chief corner stone. 
The entire structure constituted a grand building in the form 
of a pyramid, picturing the new creation in the likeness of 
God. 

St. Peter speaks of the new creation as living stones 
built up into a spiritual house. {1 Peter 2:4-9) The Lord's 
Prophet refers to the same as the ''jewel class," constituting 
the precious jewels of Jehovah. He divides the new creation 
into twelve tribes or companies, and then selects twelve of 
the most precious or rare jewels of all material creation to 
picture the respective tribes. (Rev, 21:19, 20) Another of his 
prophets speaks of this class as a crown of glory in the hand 
of Jehovah, a royal diadem in the hand of God. (Isaiah 62:3) 
Again, this class is pictured as a royal priesthood, meaning 
that they shall both reign with Christ and minister blessings 
unto the world. They were pictured by Melchisedec, whose 
priesthood had neither predecessor nor successor, signifying 
that the new creation will be in a class distinctive and alone 
in Jehovah's great realm. 

Many centuries ago Jehovah made another picture by 
causing Abraham to send his servant into a distant country 
to select a wife for Isaac, When Rebecca was brought to 


sent his Spirit into the earth to select from amongst men the 
antitypical Rebecca as the bride for the antitypical Isaac. 
The Lord has made the relationship of husband and wife 
picture the relationship between Jesus and his bride, — Ephesians
 5:25-32. 

It is a recognized rule that the antitype is greater than 
the sum total of all the types. The marriage of Jesu3 and 
his bride, which soon will be completed, will therefore, as the 
antitype, be far greater than all the marriages of earth. Call 
to mind all the happiness and joy manifested at all the weddings
 of all the ages that have occurred on earth, an,d then 
know that the sum total of these marriages is nothing as compared
 to the unspeakable joy that will pervade the universe 
on the festal day when Jesus and his bride shall be made one. 

WHO WIZiI. SHARE IN THIS FAVOR 

The elaborate program arranged by Jehovah, and the time 
and the treasure consumed in carrying it out, enable us to 
grasp in a measure the great importance of this work and 
the marvelous blessings that shall follow its completion. With 
his heart fired with a burning desire to attain unto the position
 offered, the Apostle said, "That I may know him, and 
the power of hi& resurrection, and the fellowship of his 
sufferings, and -be made conformable to his death: if by any 

means I might attain unto the .resurrection of the dead 

This one thing I do, forgetting the things that are behind 
and reaching forth unto those things which are before I press 
forward along the mark for the prize." (Philippians 3:10-14) 
Those who attain to this exalted position will be they who love 
the Lord supremely, who keep his commandments with a joyful
 heart and with delight submit to his holy will. The 
special commandments to the new creation are, That ye love 
one another, even as I have loved you"; "Thrust in the sickle 
and reap"; "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee 
the crown of life." To the faithful he says, "He that reapeth 
receiveth wages." — John 13:34, 35; Revelation 14:15; 2:10; 
John 4:36. 

It follows that the harvest work is of the greatest importance
. It may properly be divided into three parts: (1) the 
bride making herself ready for the marriage; (2) the bride 
class declaring the message of the kingdom to others, that 
they might be invited to the marriage feast; (3) the gathering 
of the grapes of "the vine of the earth." It is difficult to see 
how the bride could make herself ready if she failed or refused
 to declare the message to others; and particularly is 
this true if the opportunity to do the work of the harvest 
is granted and she fails to avail herself of such opportunity. 
Those who reap receive the wages. It follows that those who 
fail to reap in the manner prescribed could not expect to 
receive the wage. 

PERIOD OF THE HARVEST 

It is important for us to know when the harvest began 
and when it will end. We feel sure it is pleasing to the Lord 
that we make an effort to know. The Jewish and Gospel 
ages parallel each other, both in time and in events. Our 
thought once was that the Jewish harvest began with the 
eonsecration of our Lord, in A. D, 30, and ended with the 
destruction of Jerusalem, in A. D, 70 — a period of forty years. 
But, as pointed out by Brother Russell in The Watoh Tower 
last year (page 264), this view does not seem to be supported 
by the Scriptures. Jesus was not one who was harvested ; for 
he was always in harmony with Jehovah. During the three 
and a- half years of his ministry he recognized the law arrangement
 in force (Matt 23: 1-3) —that three and a half years 
was the period of preparation, the gathering of the loyal 
Jews together, and especially of preparing the apostles a3 
his instruments for the work of harvest that was to follow. 
The heavenly garner could not possibly be opened until Jesus 
had provided the ransom-pTice, and had ascended on high 
and presented it to the Father. — 2 Thn. 1:10. 

It was at Pentecost that the apostles received the holy 
•Spirit. Then it was that St. Peter stood up and spoke with 
authority to the Jews, and told them how that Jesus was the 
great Redeemer whom they had wickedly slain, but whom God 
raised up. "Now when they heard this, they were pricked 
in their hearts and said unto Peter and to the rest of the 
Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter 
said unto them, Repent and be baptized, every one of you, 


(291-292) 


[6148] 


Octobse 1, 1917 


T H E WA TCH TOWER 


(292-293) 


in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins; and 
ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit. For the promise 
is unto you and to your children and to all that are afar 
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." — Acts 
2:37-39. 

Here, for the first time, the call went forth to enter the 
race for the prize of heavenly glory, and on that same day 
about three thousand responded to the call. Prior thereto 
there was no garner. Not even the Apostles could receive the 
holy Spirit until that day. This would seem to establish 
beyond question of doubt that the Jewish harvest began at 
Pentecost. 

This conclusion in no wise interferes with our chronology, 
but instead confirms it. The year 1914 marked the end of the 
Gentile times, but did not mark the end of the harvest of 
the Gospel age. Many have consecrated and given evidence 
of spirit-begetting since 1914, which is the best evidence that 
the harvest is not yet closed. 

END OF JEWISH HAEVEST 

Just before his crucifixion Jesus was asked by his disciples 
three questions in one, namely: (1) When shall the temple 
be destroyed? (2) What would be the proof of his presence 
and (3) of the end of the age? These questions he answered. 
(Matthew 24 : 3-35) The historical facts show: ( 1 ) the 
destruction of Jerusalem, A. D. 70; (2) the complete subjugation
 of Judea, A. D. 73, and (3) the depopulation of Palestine, 
A. D. 135. Thus it follows that there were three different 
endings relative to the Jewish polity. Which one of these did 
the Lord intend should be our guide in the' harvest parallels? 
Jesus declared, "The harvest is the end of the age." 
(Matthew 13:39) Therefore we must find that when the 
harvest ended, the age is ended. He could not have meant 
A. D. 70 and its parallel date, 1915, as marking the end of 
the harvest, because the harvest did not end there. It is still 
going on. He could not have meant A. D. 135 and the parallel 
date, 1980, for the reason that such a conclusion would entirely 
destroy the parallel with reference to the harvest. 

In giving his answer with reference to the end of the 
age, Jesus said, "Let them which are in Judea flee to the 
mountains." Judea more particularly types Babylon. The 
date of the fall of Judea, therefore, is of great importance. 
In Volume 7, Studies in the Sckiptures, pages 23 and 24, 
we have collected seven historical authorities definitely establishing
 the fact that Judea's fall occurred on the first 
day of the Feast of the Passover (April 15) A. D. 73, which 
was exactly forty years after Pentecost, the beginning of the 
Jewish harvest, therefore marking the close of the Jewish 
harvest in A. D. 73. 

GOSPEL AGE HAEVEST 

The proof heretofore published in Studies in the Scriptures
 definitely establishes the second presence of our Lord 
since 1874. Correspondingly, the three and a half years 
following would be a period of preparation for the harvest 
of the Gospel age, exactly as such preparation was made for 
the harvest of the Jewish age, and would consequently mark 
the beginning of the harvest of the Gospel age in 1878. 

Likewise, the proof heretofore published definitely establishes
 the resurrection of the sleeping saints in A, D. 1878. 
(See Rev. 14:13 comments in Vol, 7) St. Paul clearly establishes
 the fact that none could be gathered into the 
heavenly garner of the Lord in the harvest of the Gospel age 
until after the awakening of the saints, saying, "For this we 
say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which are 
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not precede
 them which are asleep ; for the Lord himself shall descend 
from heaven with a shout and with the voice of the archangel 
and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise 
first."—l Thessalonians 4:16, 16. 

Immediately following the announcement in Rev. 14:13, 
''Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth," 
we read (Verse 14) "and behold a white cloud, and upon 
the cloud I saw one sitting like unto the Son of Man, having 
on his head a golden crown and in his hand a sharp sickle." 
Thus is described the second presence of our Lord as the 
great Chief Reaper, at the beginning of the harvest in 1878. 
The 15th verse of that same chapter refers to the Great Pyramid
, the measurements of which confirm the Bible teaching 
that 1878 marked the beginning of the harvest of the Gospel 
age. The parallel, therefore, would establish definitely that 
the harvest would close forty years thereafter; to wit, in the 
spring of A. D. 1918. If this be true, and the evidence is 
very conclusive that it is true, then we have only a few months 
in which to labor before the great night settles down when no 
man can work. 


Now we have come to another step in* the pathway of 
present truth j and the question that confronts the people 
of God is, Are we ready for it? In 1875, when Brother Russell 
learned of the presence of our Lord, he immediately saw from 
Revelation 14:14, 16 that the work which the Lord would have 
his people to do is to reap the harvest of ripened wheat. 
(Matt. 13:39) The Lord has been pleased to remove Brother 
Russell from the earthly stage of action; and now the great 
Shepherd of the sheep" has called our attention in unmistakable
 terms to the fact that he has a work for the church 
yet in the flesh, following the harvesting of the wheat, a work 
which is described in detail in Rev. 14:17, 19, as the harvesting
 of the vine of the earth. This work is doubtless the same 
as that described in Matt. 13:40, 43. It is a work of exposing 
to all the world the unrighteousness of the ecclesiastical systems
, their acts and their unholy alliances with the beastly 
governments of the present evil order of things. It also seems 
to relate to the gathering out from amongst God's professed 
consecrated people of all offending ones. — Matthew 13:41. 

THE LAST WOBK OF THE CHTJBOH 

If any of us have come to this hour expecting that the 
last work of the church in the flesh would be one of quiet, 
pleasing, easy triumph, void of severe and fiery trials, then 
surely we have misread our Bibles and Studies in the Scriptures
 and the pages of history. Never before were there so 
many indications as now that the church is in the great 
enemy's territory undergoing final and crucial testing, with 
still more in front of her. She must continue her fight to 
the end, amidst graver perils than any she has encountered 
for a long time. 

To accomplish the work now at hand the Lord will use such 
instruments as he has provided. He has placed an instrument 
within the reach of every one of the Elijah class who desires 
to have a part in setting the nominal heavens on fire. The 
instrument is the Seventh Volume of Scripture Studies, and 
other kindred truths which the Lord has been providing for 
the church. In Revelation 22:10 he tells us, "Make no secret 
of the predictions contained in this book; for the time for their 
fulfilment is now close at hand." 

The church is now in a time of severe trial and testing. 
Many things are arising that have a tendency to cause doubt. 
The church needs comfort and encouragement. There is 
nothing that will give her so much encouragement and comfort 
as to engage intelligently and enthusiastically in the harvest 
work, with the instruments which the Lord has provided for 
that work at .this time. Concerning the Seventh Volume, 
Brother Russell said: "It will probably be given to the church 
in a time of direst need, for her comfort and encouragement," 
Again he said, "It will be for the purpose of enabling the 
church to stand after first having been developed." He 
pointed out that the book would be an explanation of Revelation
 and Ezekiel. Can we ever look for another explanation 
of Revelation such as we now possess, with 743 extracts from 
Brother Russell's pen and thousands of Scripture references 
confirming the same? Brother Russell replied to a question 
concerning the Seventh Volume, "If the Lord shows me the 
key, I will Write the Seventh Volume; if he shows the key 
to someone else, he can write it." Brother Russell himself is 
the key, and his modesty and humility prevented him from 
seeing it. He is the prominent figure foreshadowed both in 
Revelation and Ezekiel. 

THE PEHHT 

Explaining the parable of the Penny (Matthew 20:1-16), 
Brother Russell set forth in Scbiptube Studies, Vol. Ill, page 
223, that the penny is "Kingdom honors." In Psalm 149:5-9 
we read, "Let the saints be joyful in glory; let them sing 
aloud upon their beds; let the high praises of God be in their 
mouths and a two-edged sword in their hand; to execute 
vengeance upon the heathen and punishment upon the people; 
to bind their kings with chains and their nobles with fetters 
of iron; to execute upon them the judgment written; this 
honor have all the saints." Commenting upon this Psalm, 
Brother Russell stated that the "honor" here referred to would 
be conferred upon the saints on this side of the veil; that the 
sword, likewise, would be used by the saints on this side the 
veil. It is a great and wonderful honor to have part in wielding
 the sword now (the message of truth) that is binding 
the kings, rulers, nobles and systems of this world. Everyone 
who joyfully receives and uses the "point" of the sword, to 
wit, the Seventh Volume (Ezek. 21:14, 15), thus receives 
"Kingdom Honors" — The Penny. 

For many years we have been promised the Seventh Volume. 
All have looked for it, expecting the last coming into the 
truth would be classed equally with the first in receiving it. 


[6149] 


(294-295) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooki,yw» N. Y. 


The parable shows that some would murmur and complain. 
In harmony with this parable we see some murmuring and rejecting
 Volume Seven. Hence they are not satisfied with the 
penny — the honor that the Lord has offered them of having 
part in this wonderful closing work of the harvest. Such are 
not engaged now in the harvest, but are more particularly 
engaged in murmuring, in finding fault and in trying to hinder 
the work. 

THE ANGEL WITH THE SICKLE 

"And another angel came out from the altar, which had 
power over fire, and cried with a loud voice to him that had 
the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sickle and gather the 
cluster of the vine of the earth, for her grapes are fully rrpe." 
(Rev. 14:17, 18) Clearly, the angel here mentioned is the 
Watch Tower Biblb: a^d Tract Society, The altar represents
 the place of sacrifice, and the Society is maintained by 
the sacrifices of saints. The Lord has used the Society since 
its organization, and is still using it. There would be no 
reason why he would change his channel, or chariot, or method 
of hearing the message to his people until the work is finished. 

The sacrifice of the saints has wonderfully increased the 
work during the present year. The contributions for the year 
1917 are already far in excess of the entire year 1916, and 
there are yet two months more of this year. The volunteer 
work for this year is much greater than in 1916. There has 
been a great increase in the pastoral work. It has been frequently
 remarked at the conventions J,his year that never has 
there been such a spirit of loving devotion to the Lord and 
his cause and to each other as is shown by the friends in 
general, with the firm determination to finish their course 
with joy by now grasping the sword and using the "point" 
of it--the Seventh Volume — to the glory and praise of the 
Master. Interest at public meetings is also wonderfully increasing
. 

"Which had power over fire," means the authority to publish
 and send out an explanation of the prophecies of Ezekiel 
and Revelation, which are destructive to the present erroneous 
systems by turning the flood of light upon them. This is 
exactly the work now being done by the Society. "And the 
angel [Society] thrust in his sickle [message of truth] into 
the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth and cast it into 
the great winepress of the wrath of God" — by distributing 
far and wide amongst order-loving people the good news that 
the Babylonish systems of error are doomed, and a better 
time is near at hand. Will you have a part in this good 
work? Are you doing your part, and receiving the blessing? 

THE GREAT DEIVE BEGINWIKG 
Many are signifying their keen interest in this work by 
entering the colporteur service. The demand for colporteurterritory
 is every day increasing. Several new pilgrims are 
entering the service. The extension work is reviving; the 
pastoral work is increasing; volunteers are doing much more 
than heretofore; others are doing sharp-shooting; while still 
others are giving chart talks, and thus the army of the Lord, 
the little band of Gideon throughout the world, is now holding 
forth the light, proclaiming the message that the work may be 
finished in the Lord's appointed time, Babylon put to complete 
rout, and the Lord's little ones gathered home. 

Many classes are adopting the following method for a 
quick accomplishment of colporteuring of their respective districts
, namely : the territory of a city or a county is assigned 
by the Society upon request, to a district committee, consisting 
of two or three energetic members ( who may be regular colporteurs
 or otherwise) appointed by the class. This district 
committee deals exclusively with the home office in the way of 
ordering books, making reports, etc. This committee, whose 
assignment supercedes all others, will co-operate with any 
regular colporteurs who may be in the county, but the understanding
 being that the territory will be divided by the committee
 into small districts, and that every member in the local 
class who has the desire, time and ability will participate 
in the rapid colporteuring of that territory, by taking a small 
district and working it quickly. Many of the classes are ordering
 books in large quantities for this work, the Society granting
 them special colporteur rates. Our thought is that the 
canvassing of the colporteurs should be done for the entire 
seven volumes, but the colporteur should specialize on the 
Seventh Volume, To this end we suggest the following as 
a method, or canvass: 

"Good morning! I have here something that you will want, 
and I will take only a moment to call it to your attention. 
As we know, for more than three years the world has been 
involved in the greatest war of all times. The people everywhere
 are asking 'Why should We have such a war? What 


win be the result?' Those who read the Bible have wondered 
if this is the great war therein foretold. For a long time 
order-loving people, Bible readers and Christians have desired 
to understand the prophecies of Revelation and Ezekiel. 

"I have here a work recently published by the Bible Society
 of Brooklyn, New York, which is the first and only 
book that makes clear every part of Revelation and Ezekiel. 
It takes up these prophecies verse by verse, and explains them. 
It throws more light on the present war, the real causes, and 
what will be the result, than does anything yet written. It 
shows what part the Catholics, Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians
 and other church denominations have played in the 
world's history, and what part they are yet to perform. It 
treats the subject from the political, scientific, historical and 
prophetic viewpoints. Of course you will want it. You can't 
afford to be without it. The publishers have placed it at such 
a low figure that it is now within the reach of every one. 

[Pause a moment for them to ask price of book.] 

"The price is only 60 cents, less than half the usual price 
of a hook that size. While this book is complete within itself, 
yet r it is the last in a series of seven volumes. When you have 
these volumes you have a complete library, making clear every 
difficult Bible and prophetic question which you have heretofore
 been unable to understand. The house also publishes twice 
each month a journal which keeps abreast with current events 
in the light of the Scriptures. No matter what church you 
belong to, you need these books, and particularly the Seventh 
Volume. The entire set together with the journal is only 
$4.50. Shall I bring them to you?" 

Do the colporteur work first, then let pastoral workers 
follow, loaning books to those who do not purchase. 

The Society has been compelled to order another large 
edition of the Seventh Volume, that the demand may be supplied
. The friends are greatly encouraged at the outlook; 
and those who love the Lord' supremely are forgetting all 
differences and have in mind but one thought, as did St. 
Paul: "This one thing I do" — T am determined to win the 
prize. 

NEW VOLUNTEER MATTEB 

The Society is preparing and will shortly issue another 
number of volunteer matter for this year. In 1916 we had 
only one main issue. This year we have already published 
two, and the distribution has far exceeded that of 1916. The 
third number is now being prepared and will contain strong, 
pointed, compact truths in line with the message set forth 
in the Seventh Volume, the leading article being entitled The 
Fall of Babylon. We suggest that the friends order immediately
 the quantity they will be able to use. Specify B. 
S. M. No. 99. 

"And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried with 
a loud voice* saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of 
heaven, Come, gather yourselves together unto the supper of 
the great God." (Revelation 19:17) The angel standing in 
the sun clearly represents the the Elijah class yet on earth 
— those, we believe, who have joyfully accepted the Seventh 
Volume of Scripture Studies. Greater light has come to 
such and they are serene and happy in divine favor. Resplendent
 in the light that they have received in the closing 
hours of the age, these are eagerly spreading far and near 
to order-loving people the enlightening prophecies of Revelation
 and Ezekiel, They are not fearful; they are not complainers
; they are not shrinking from duty, hut are fearlessly 
and plainly declaring the message of truth, calling to the 
eagles (God's consecrated people) to <?ome and join in the 
feast of the Lord. This might suggest that those who reject 
the Seventh Volume would not be of the Elijah class, but would 
be separated from the Elijah class by the fiery chariot. 

Truly, we are living in a fearful and wonderful time, a 
time fraught with great danger, great responsibility and 
marvelous opportunities. Let each one who loves the Lord 
and his cause joyfully participate in using the instrument that 
shall reap "the vine of the earth.'* Seeing these thingB, let 
us look up and lift up our heads, for our deliverance draweth 
nigh. Your time, your love, your energy and strength, your 
means and your influence — your all — may now be used to the 
glory of the Lord and to your everlasting Denefit and happiness. 
Will you thus employ your talents? Soon our journey will 
be ended, and we shall be gathered to our glory home. Let 
us be faithful! 

"Come, all ye saints, to Pisgah'a mountain. 

Come view our home beyond the tide; 
Millennial Canaan is before us; 
Soon we'll sing on the other side." 


[6150] 


THE TEMPLE REBUILT AND DEDICATED 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Rebuilding the Temple/' published in issue of October 15, 1903, which please see.] 


EZRA'S RETURN FROM BABYLON 


[This article, with the exception of the first paragraph (printed below) was reprinted from article entitled «' Gathering and Winnowing
," published in issue of November 1, 1905, which please see. I 


The prophecies of Haggai were delivered to Israel about 
the time of their return from the Babylonian captivity, and 
therefore at the time of the founding of the Temple, the 
Prophet being advanced in years. Then the Prophet Zechariah, 
a younger man, was raised up by the Lord; and other messages 
were sent to the discouraged Israelites to show them that 
they must not expect great national prosperity at that time, 
but that nevertheless the Lord was with them, and that by 


faithfully continuing in an apparently small, insignificant 
matter they would be accomplishing his purposes. In some 
degree this corresponds with the messages which have come 
to the Lord's people since the time of WycIifTe, and which have 
led to the Reformation movement in its various aspects, and 
incidentally to the preparation of the "living stones" of the 
glorious antitypical Temple. 


SEVENTH VOLUME TRULY APPRECIATED 


It would be impossible for us to print the thousands of 
letters being received expressive of the joy and assistance received
 through careful and prayerful reading of the Seventh 
Volume, The Finished Mystery. 

Surely the blessing of the Lord has rested upon this volume 
in no measured terms! Hundreds have stated that they have 
renewed their consecration to the Lord, and have appreciated 
his protecting care from the evil spirits more and more as 
they see more clearly how these evil ones are operating. 
However, we are glad to make a few quotations from some of 
the letters, all of which we are sure w r ill be read with interest: 

"We desire to tell you of the joy and comfort Volume Seven 
has brought to us. We appreciate it as the gift of the Lord 
and consider it invaluable. Bringing to us the Sinaitic version 
of Revelation alone would be worth the money, to say nothing 
of the labor of love in bringing together our Pastor's comments 
and the harmonizing of the other portions. I also deeply 
appreciate the comments on the book of Ezekiel. I consider 
that the whole book is w T onderful. As I think over our Pastor
's words that Volume Seven would be given to the church in 
her hour of direst need, my heart is comforted as respects the 
members of the little flock this side the veil, and I am amazed 
at the gracious provision of our heavenly Father on behalf 
of the great company class, to be reached through the same 
volume. What a glorious assistance it will be in helping them 
to come quickly to a knowledge of the truth, present truth!" 
— C. H. S-, Pa. 

"The more I study, looking up references to Scripture 
Studies, Towers and Scriptures, the more fully I am convinced
 that it is indeed the promised Seventh Volume or 
'penny' — THE message now DUE. Words fail ,me to express 
the JOY and strength that fills my sou). The words of our 
Pastor have been culled from his writings of forty years, and 
brought together in one compact form, and supplemented by 
certain facts that he himself could not so well state as another
. Surely it will be a POWER to accomplish the Lord's 
purpose at this momentous time! I pray that I may use this 
chariot to mount to the skies."— E. M., Mass. 

"The most of us are rejoicing in the Seventh Volume. To 
my mind the volume came at the appointed time. I myself 
have been greatly oppressed of late with mental suggestions 
of a more or less lewd nature, and in talking to several of the 
friends I find this is true of both male and female. *Know ye 
not that we shall judge angels?' No doubt, the TEST IS 
NOW ON; and our dear Lord has provided us, through that 
wise servant, the vow, for our help and protection at this 
time. It seems to me very plain how those fallen ones are 
being judged, and at the same time we as well. Let ma REMEMBER
 THE VOW/'— G. M, K., Va. 

"I feel as though the 'penny* is hundreds, yea, more than 
hundreds, of times beyond what I deserve. It has given me so 
much encouragement and so much" blessing. 1 am only fourteen
 years old, so that I do not mingle with trre world at all, 
and my only friends are the dear truth people; and this 
makes me shy in giving tracts to strangers, but I am trying 
to overcome and hope to be counted worthy of being of the 
Elijah class in this momentous hour." — 0. F. D., N. Y. 

"Our hearts are overflowing with love and gratitude to our 
loving Heavenly Father and our present Bridegroom and 
Chief Reaper for the wonderful message received through 
Volume Seven. We are overwhelmed at the goodness of our 
God. Surely we are not worthy of his wonderful favors, to 
be among those who have hearing ears and seeing eyes!" — 
A Brother and Sister (the two oldest successful colporteurs 
in the field.) 

"All of the class are interested in the Father's plan as it 
is now being revealed in this last hour, and they have read 
and are studying the Seventh Volume as having been sent 


at just the time Pastor Russell said it would come — in a time 
of great distress prevailing in the church. All rejoice at the 
marked indications of the fulfilment of what we are to expect
 in the perilous times which the church must see before 
the glorification comes/'- — C. B., 111. 

"I can never tell you what joy was mine when the longIooked
-for Seventh Volume was handed to me. It certainly 
has been my Gethsemane comforter, renewing my zeal and 
courage with the reading of each page. How I long to be 
one of the three hundred (class) of the antitypical Gideon's 
band! and I am determined TO BE, by the Lords help. Each 
day since receiving the volume I have thanked my dear heavenly
 Father for so great a favor." — B. T. M., Minn. 

"I am rejoicing in the Seventh Volume. It is a call to look 
to our armor, fasten it carefully, to sharpen (our knowledge
 of) the Sword of the Spirit, and to lose no time in preparing
 to meet the foe. Before I had opened the parcel I 
felt it was the last message from our Head before we started 
for home. It is also a message for the false church, but how 
few will heed it till we are gone!" — Mary T. F. H., Ohio. 

"The enlightenment which I have received from Volume 
Seven, especially Rev. 7:1-3, has been a great help to me; for 
I have had corroborative experiences along this very line. It 
comes to me now as re- enforcement in the time of need, giving
 me new strength for battle against the unseen forces and 
a deeper love and sympathy for others. Praise the Lord*" — 
H. C. H„ Conn. 

"How great and rich a blessing has come to me through 
the Seventh Volume words cannot tell, but daily from its 
pages flows deeply and richly the Spirit of the Lord. How 
evident it is that God's hand is guiding and helping Brother 
Rutherford! How evidently the Lord guided in regard to 
Volume Seven!" — J. A. M., Pilgrim. 

"Am much pleased with the Seventh Volume and deeply 
impressed with the many facts pointing to the Passover of 
1918. My continued prayer is that we all may be found faithful
 to our covenant of sacrifice and found possessed of the 
Spirit of the Master, as illustrated in the first martyr, Stephen 
— 'Lord, lay not this sin to their charge/ " — G. F. E., Conn. 

"I cannot tell you how much I am enjoying the Seventh 
Volume. Am in the 14th chapter of Revelation, and it is getting
 more intensely interesting every minute. I am so anxious 
to get through with it to find out what the Lord's will has in 
store for us on this side of the veil, both of sorrows and 
joys."— R. B. J., Mich. 

"The wonderful Seventh Volume! We could hardly believe
 it was at last published. We are feasting on it, and are 
thankful we are accounted worthy to read it and understand 
it. We have been greatly encouraged by reading it and want 
to be of those who will use it to mount to the skies." — H. N., 
Ohio. 

"Oh, what a blessing the Seventh Volume has been to the 
church! Such encouragement we find while reading it! It 
causes us to be more diligent, and not let an opportunity slip 
that would help some poor struggling soul. I cannot find 
words to near tell my sentiments of this precious book." — 
E. T„ Mont. 

"We are rejoicing m the Seventh Volume; and we accept 
it as from the blessed Lord in this hour of temptation, and 
how thankful we are that we have lived to receive the penny. 
What a wonderful time we are living in, and what a Savior!" 
—0. R., Okla. 

"How rich we all are with the wealth of his truth, and 
now additionally with his latest gift,- 'the penny!* My heart 
is full of gratitude to him, and I praise him for hia keeping 
power and the deep peace which passeth understanding." — 
J. G. H., N. Y. 


[6151] 


(298-303) 


(303-307) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


"I am proceeding to put in shape my affairs in order to en 

?age in this latest Lord's work as the way may open to me. <oy<> oevenin voiume testimony, n any one present tlien 

shall truly be very sorry and ashamed if" I miss the chariot could not see it is the Seventh Volume, he was dumb as well 

when it ascends."— Sr. S., N. J. as blind."— E. H. T., D. C , 


"The testimony meeting last Sunday afternoon was about 
75% Seventh Volume testimony. If any one present then 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


CONVINCED THE LOEB MADE NO MISTAKE 

Sept. 9th, 1917. 
Deab Brethben: — 

Greetings in our dear Lord! Just a few lines to tell you 
of my full heart sympathy and loyal support in these times 
of stress upon the church in general, and particularly upon 
our dear President, who is so nobly and faithfully standing 
for truth and right. The kindly way in which he has spoken 
of the opposing brethren during each and all of the series of 
conventions this year has been a grand inspiration to me and 
a wonderful lesson in brotherly love. Of him I can now truthfully
 say in the words of St. Paul to the Philippian church, 
"I thank my God upon every remembrance of you." 

I was so glad to receive Harvest Siftings and to know 
exactly how conditions are. One little thing was cleared up 
which has been rather a mystery to me for over a year. T 
wondered why, when one of the now opposing brethren was in 
Vancouver on a pilgrim visit in 1916, he should have spoken 
so strangely about Brother Rutherford and Brother Van Amburgh
. He stated at my table that whenever Brother Russell 
was away for any length of time, he invariably, upon his return
, would be called upon to straighten out tangles at Bethel, 
doctrinally or otherwise, caused by Brothers Rutherford and 
Van Amburgh. I believed it then, coming as it did from one 
of the Society's officers. How could I reasonably doubt it? 
But now, with Harvest Sittings in my hand, I see plainly the 
motive behind these remarks. It appears the brother was 
here doing what he had been engaged in doing all through 
Canada — commonly known by the world as "knocking." Of 
course when the election took place last January I was greatly 
surprised that without any effort on Brother Rutherford's 


part he was placed in the position of honor and trust which 
he now holds under the Lord — that of President of the Watch 
Towkb Bible and Tract Society, which the Lord loves as 
the apple of his eye, I now see the wisdom of the Lord in 
the whole matter, and am convinced that He made no mistake. 

I notice in the new pamphlet gotten out by the opposition 
they charge that the Bethel Family and Pilgrims are staying 
by our President because they have been bribed. What an 
insult to the dear faithful friends at Bethel whom these 
brethren pretended to love! As one of the traveling brethren 
I positively deny being bought or bribed. I should think it a 
very dangerous position to take — to freely charge any of God's 
elect with such a crime: 

Dear Brother Rutherford is personally the target for 
Satan's darts at this time, but he has the prayers of all true 
saints that he may "be strong and very courageous." By 
divine favor, I am, 

Your brother in the truth, C. E. Heard, Pilgrim. 

SOME WORDS OF ENCOURAGEMENT 
Deab Brethren in Christ: — 

The Towers continue to be beautiful and inspiring; they 
seem just as stimulating and helpful as when our beloved 
Brother Russell was with us. There is one thing which has 
impressed me, one thing which marks this periodical as being 
of the Lord, namely, the absence of the ego, that personal 
element which is likely to engender sectarianism and pride. 

The dear Lord will surely continue this "meat in due season
" till the spiritual Israel are sealed and made meet for the 
glorious inheritance. Much love and best wishes. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer's name, 

Frederick Lardent. — England. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., OCTOBER 15, 1917 


No. 20 


PROPER AND IMPROPER JUDGMENT OF OURSELVES AND OTHERS 

"If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged. But 
should not be condemned with the 

In this text the Apostle seems to be saying that if we as 
Christians would properly criticise, examine and correct ourselves
, it would not be necessary for the Lord to take us in 
hand and give us disciplinary judgments, or criticisms. But 
if we fail to do this judging of ourselves, then the heavenly 
Father must do itj for he has taken us into his family, under 
his parentaJ care. The object of this chastening would not 
be to injure us, however, but to prevent our being condemned 
with the world. 

We judge ourselves when we criticise our own conduct, our 
own words, our own actions, and try them by the principles 
which are found in the Bible — justice, mercy, and truth. As 
our Lord has taught us, if we find that we have done wrong 
to another, we should leave our sacrifice on the altar, and first 
go to make apologies to our brother. (Matthew 5:23) Thus 
we would be judging ourselves, obligating ourselves to do the 
right thing. When we have done wrong, it is not enough to 
say, "Yes I am wrong; but then, no one is perfect." To do 
so would not be to act in harmony with the spirit of our text. 
That spirit is that if we find ourselves to be in the wrong, then 
we have a sacred duty to perform — we must make the matter 
right, to the best of our ability. 

If the wrong has been along the lines of uncharitable 
thoughts toward anybody, it is not necessary that we go to 
that person and tell him about the matter. But we should 
remind ourselves of all the circumstances, and then judge ourselves
, give ourselves a good setting-down. We are obligated 
to give ourselves a lesson along this line. Thus we should 
manifest that our heart's intentions are right, and that we 
are, therefore, right at heart. 

We understand that the will of God concerning us is, that 
we should judge ourselves. If we find that we have injured 
another with our tongue, or in any other way, we should go 
to that person and make proper apologies, thus setting matters 
right. Then we should put upon ourselves a penalty that we 
shall not easily forget. If the paying of that penalty requires 
considerable humility, so much thS better. But if we neglect 
to punish ourselves, we would thus demonstrate that we are 
not in proper heart condition; and in that case the best thing 
that could happen to us would be for the Lord to give us a 


when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we 
world."— 1 Corinthians 11:31, 32. 

severe chastisement. This might not come on the same day or 
week or month, however, as the wrong-doing. But we may be 
sure that if we fail to do right in the matter, the Lord will 
take us in hand and give us nsome kind of trying experience 
which will teach us the needed lesson. He may permit somebody
 to do something to us or to say something about us that 
will ahow us wherein we have failed to do right. Or he may 
permit us to come into such a position that it will bring upon 
us some kind of disciplinary suffering. 

The object of this arrangement — that if we do not judge 
or criticise ourselves, the Lord will do so — is that we shall 
not come into condemnation with the world. During the next 
age the race of mankind will be on trial, on judgment. (Acts 
17:31) If we were of the world, our judgment would come 
then instead of now. But we are not of the world; for the 
Lord has called us out of it. We are new creatures in Christ, 
begotten of the holy Spirit of God. In our case it may be 
the same now that it will be with the world in the future; 
that is, we might be making marks upon our character which 
must be removed. If this is true, the Lord will discipline us 
for their removal, unless we come to realize the situation and 
remove the marks ourselves. Otherwise we should not be fit 
for the kingdom. In other words, if we belong to the church of 
Christ, we must receive our judgments and punishments now, 
during the present age. If we fail thus to chastise ourselves, 
then the Lord will do so for our growth in holiness. 
JUDGMENT NOT NECESSARILY CONDEMNATION 

We very frequently use the words judgment and opinion 
as synonyms, as expressing the same sentiment. A man's 
opinion of a matter is his judgment upon the subject. Whether 
he expresses it to another or whether he keeps it to himself, 
his judgment is his opinion. There may be times when it 
would be proper for us to have an opinion, or judgment, that 
we would not think it wise to express. For instance, our 
Lord said to his disciples, "I have many things to tell you, 
but ye cannot bear them now." (John 16:12) There were certain
 reasons why he withheld knowledge from them. So it 
might be with us. 

In the Scriptures the word judgment is sometimes used, in 
a special sense; namely in the sense of condemnation. This 


[6162] 


Octobek IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(307-309) 


judging, however, the Lord forbids his people to do. We may 
say that certain lines of conduct and certain words or acts 
are, in our judgment, out of accord with the Lord's standards 
of righteousness. This is our privilege. When a matter is 
known to be a fact, we ought to have an opinion. Whoever 
has no opinion, no judgment, of his own is unstable in character
. Every intelligent person should have an opinion upon 
every suibjeet which comes up for criticism. How much of his 
mind he might tell others or might reserve to himself would 
be for him to determine, according to his own best judgment 
in the matter, 

"JUDGE NOTHING BEFORE THE TIME 1 ' 

Another Scripture says, "Judge nothing before the time/' 
(1 Corinthians 4:3-5) This does not relate to the judging 
of ourselves, however, but to our judging of others. It is 
not for us to judge heart-intentions. We should not denounce 
people and declare them guilty of evil intentions. While we 
might think that certain conduct is wrong or that certain 
teachings are wrong, yet it is not for us to say that the individual
 is willingly wrong; for we are not able to read the 
heart of any one. God is the only one who knows to what 
extent people are willing sinners, wilful wrong-doers. In some 
cases it may be that they are under delusion, ignorance, superstition
. In other cases it may be that their environment 
gives things a different color from that which we would see. 
At the proper time and as may be convenient, we are to do all 
in our power to show such people the error of their course; 
but, having done so, we are not to attempt to harm them or to 
punish them for those things which we esteem to be wrong. 

This principle applies to the punishments which are inflicted 
by society, such as imprisonment, capital punishment, etc. 
The civilized people of the world have reached the conclusion 
that mankind cannot read the heart. Therefore the governments
 assign different degrees of punishment for different 
crimes, not as an offset for the crime, but in order to restrain 
evil-doers. As a result, the doer of wrong deeds is often put 
into prison for a term of years and -sometimes for life, 
that he may be restrained from further wrong-doing and 
perhaps reformed in character. Even in capital punishment 
the thought is not that the punisment is proportionate to 
the heinousness of the crime, but that the taking away of life 
is for the restraint of wrong-doing. Thus various methods 
of capital punishment have been invented in order that it may 
be done in as painless a manner as possible. Some claim 
that the breaking of the neck in hanging does not keep the 
criminal in suffering. Others declare that the electric chair 
is so constructed that the person 'wilt have no consciousness 
whatever after the electric current has reached him. So we 
see that the endeavor has been merely to curtail the wroog-doer 
from the privileges and liberties of life, according to the decision
 of those sitting as legislators and law-makers as to what 
would be the proper restraint for evil-doing. 

PROPER AND IMPROPER JUDGING 

Reverting to what the Scriptures say of the people of God, 
we may not judge in the sense of determining the degree of 
guilt resting upon evil-doers. Love always hopes for the 
best, and is not given to evil-speaking or to an expression of 
evil judgment. Love ever seeks to think no evil, but rather to 
think something favorable, kind, rather to put away anything 
in the way of bias, prejudice. Love is rather given to suppose 
that the individual whose doings are under criticism did not 
discern the right, did not see it clearly, or for some reason 
was led into error. 

The Master said, "By their fruits ye shall know them." 
(Matthew 7:18-20) This means that we are to notice the 
fruitage of life in ourselves, in the brethren and in our 
neighbors. In our own minds we are to judge and disapprove 
of what is evil. We should continually judge whether various 
acts and words are right or wrong. Every day we see and 
hear many things in life which would not be pleasing to the 
Lord. Therefore we can exercise our judgment in respect to 
all of these things and get the lesson out of them. This would 
not mean, however, that we would judge the people who do 
and say these reprehensible things. It would be highly improper
 for us to relegate them to the second death. While 
we may appreciate our Lord's statement that a good tree will 
bring forth good fruit, and while we may see that there is 
something wrong in the conduct of another, yet we must not 
forget that we are not competent to judge as to what degree 
of punishment his wrong conduct would deserve. Therefore 
we might make a great mistake in endeavoring to judge others 
and to decide what punishment they should receive. 

The Scriptures state that by and by there will he a* time 
when judgments will come upon all those who do wrong. Until 


that time comes, we are not to judge others either in our minds 
or in our words. All that we may be able to do is to judge 
of conduct — whether it is proper or improper; but we should 
keep our conclusions to ourselves and not express them to 
others. If we are to go through life telling what we think of 
this one and of that one, we shall certainly have a hard time 
of it. Let us, therefore, recognize the fact that we cannot 
judge the heart of any one, just a3 no human being can know 
our hearts as well as we know them ourselves. 

But in judging even ourselves we should use a certain 
amount of leniency, as the Apostle suggests. (1 Corinthians 
4:3, 4) His thought seems to be'that when we come to recognize
 how high the divine standard is, we might be too apt to 
judge ourselves too severely and not take into account the 
fact that the Adamic race is shapen in sin and born in iniquity. 
(Genesis 3:20; Psalm 51:5) Instead of condemning ourselves 
too harshly, we should rather think: "I feel greatly condemned
 for what I have done. But while I cannot make any 
good excuse for myself, I hope that God will be able to make 
some allowance for me in this matter. Perhaps he will see 
spme extenuating circumstance which I do not see.'* Thus, 
as the Apostle suggests, we would not judge even ourselves. 

Those who have the organ of self-esteem small and that 
of conscientiousness large are prone to see clearly all of their 
recognized imperfections and to suffer much from self-condemnation
. Such persons should endeavor to see matters as they 
really are and to judge themselves justly. In fact, all judgment
 should be just; for justice is the very foundation of 
the divine throne. Therefore we should endeavor to be just in 
our judgments to the very best of our ability. All of the 
Lord's people will find it profitable to ascertain their own 
gains and losses as new creatures, and to perceive how, when 
and where these experiences came to them in the constant 
battle with the world, the flesh and the adversary. Let them 
note the weaknesses and filthiness of their own fallen fleshly 
nature, and seek to cleanse themselves of these blemishes, in 
order that more and more the new mind will be given full 
control, and that every thought will be brought into captivity 
to the will of God as- expressed by Christ and illustrated by 
his example. 

GOD'S PEOPLE RESPONSIBLE NOW 

Those who are children of God expect shortly to be made 
judges of the world. (1 Corinthians 6:2, 3) Moreover, God 
is now seeking to develop in our hearts and lives, in our 
character, those principles of righteousness which he desires 
and which will be preparatory to our future work of judging 
mankind. Therefore unless we are just in our very hearts, unless
 we appreciate the principles of righteousness and rejoice 
to practise them, we shall not be fit for the kingdom. We 
should not he unjust even to an animal. Every creature has 
its rights; and we should £ive them those rights, leaving the 
results with God. Thus doing, we shall be preparing our own 
minds and hearts for the glorious conditions in reservation for 
those who love God supremely. 

CROWNS APPORTIONED ACCORDING TO JUSTICE 

The prize of our high calling will not be given to anyone 
on the basis of mercy or of favor. God shows mercy in connection
 with the weaknesses and blemishes against which we 
are striving; but he will not permit even one individual to 
enter the kingdom class whose character is not suitable for 
that high position. Those whom he approves for joint-heirship
 with our Lord Jesus must represent the principles of 
righteousness and must know how to apply these principles 
now. Whoever is not disposed to justice to such an extent 
as to be willing to suffer los3 rather than to be unjust will 
not have a share in the Messianic kingdom. 

Let us ever remember that if we are true, loyal children 
of God, all our unwilling blemishes are covered by the robe 
of our Redeemer's righteousness; and that if we are doing 
with our might what our hands find to do in this great matter 
of judging, criticising, ourselves with a view to improvement 
of character, and are dealing with all others along the line 
of the Golden Rule, we are thus demonstrating to the heavenly 
Father that we appreciate highly the principle which is the 
foundation of his government. If, moreover, we build upon 
this sure foundation a superstructure of love, we shall thus 
be blessed and made ready for the kingdom of his dear Son, 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Very few have been fully awake to the importance of the 
Golden Rule. Very few have been careful to practise it in 
all the details of everyday life. Let us remember that there 
is comparatively little time left for character-building, that 
even now the great Judge is at the door, and that the final 


[6163] 


(306-313) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKtYH, N. Y. 


testings are upon us. If we hope to be of the kingdom class 
we must make haste. This is a very solemn thought. Therefore
 we should make the effort to learn what it is that God 


requires of those who are to be kings, priests and judges in 
the Messianic kingdom, in order that we may be amongst 
those who will make their calling and election sure. 


DEFEAT THROUGH DRUNKENNESS 

[This article with the exception of the paragraphs below was a reprint of that entitled "Elijah's Work Before Ascension/' published
 in issue of September l 9 1915, which please see.] 
THE CUBSE OP INTEMPEBAtfCE 

Intemperance is one of the most dreadful curses afflicting 
humanity, and even those who are its slaves will admit the 
truth of this statement. Apparently every one who comes 
under the baneful influence of strong drink becomes more or 
less its slave — the more so in proportion as he has become 
weak through the Adamic fall and the six thousand years 
of increasing loss of physical and mental strength and vigor. 
Only those who realize that inherited weakness has much to 
do with drunkenness can sympathize with a fallen one, or 
rightly appreciate why intoxicants have so much stronger 
influence over some than over others. But while pity and 
sympathy are properly called for, yet these qualities must be 
exercised in moderation, if we would benefit the fallen and 
weak. None are so weak, so degraded, as to be without some 
base of character; and our aim should be to strengthen and 
build up character, encouraging and stimulating resistance 
to these weaknesses, rather than condoning them too freely. 

The weak and degraded should be encouraged to know that 
they have a will-power which will greatly assist them in the 
cultivation of character if they will use it. But all should 
know that the greatest strength and stimulus to character 
comes from above; and that the weakest, as respects depravity 
of the flesh, may obtain such help of heart and of intellect 
from the promises, exhortations, admonitions and encouragements
 of God's Word as will make them strong in the Lord 
and in the power of his might. We need power and strength 
of our own wilk daily in overcoming the weaknesses of our 
fallen flesh. More than this, we need "grace to help in every 
time of need"; and we need to learn whence it is obtained, 
and how to approach the throne of heavenly grace with confidence
, so as to obtain the needed blessing. 

Here comes in the necessity for an appreciation of the 
doctrines of Christ, to assure us that our weaknesses are 
understood and sympathized with by our heavenly Father in 
every proper sense, and that his provision in Christ is such 
that he can foe just and yet justify believers in Jesus — that 
lie can be just, and yet forgive us our sins and grant us needed 
strength and help in overcoming. 

To those wha have friends or neighbors addicted to intemperance
, over whom they desire to exercise a helpful influence
, we* advise that they appeal to the will, to the selfrespect
, and to the rewards of temperance and intemperance, 
viewed from a worldly and social standpoint. We also advise 
that they go further, and urge that in view of their weakness 
of will manifested by the intemperate the latter should recognize
 that while all men need the Savior and the help which 
he alone can give, yet the weaker the will, the greater the 


need. When we are weak in the matter of self-reliance, and 
are thereby led to make a covenant with the Lord and to lean 
upon his strength, then we are strong. — 2 Corinthians 12:9, 10. 

SPECIAL LESSON TO THE CONSECRATED 

We have no reason to think that any of our readers arc 
slaves to intemperance; for we know that whom the Son makes 
free is free indeed. Therefore we urge upon all that the 
greater freedom which we receive in Christ, through a clear 
knowledge of the divine plan, should lead us more diligently 
to bring every talent and every power of mind and of body into 
full subjection to the divine will and into the service of the 
divine purposes. Those who are imbued with this thought 
will surely realize that they have neither mental nor physical 
powers to dissipate — that they belong to the Lord and are to 
glorify him in their bodies and their spirits, which are his. 
(1 Corinthians 6:20) They will perceive that they are merely 
stewards; and that any misuse of talents, either through 
intoxication or otherwise, would be a misuse of their stewardship
, and would surely lead on to that condition in which the 
Lord could not say unto them, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant." 

But while disposed to discourage intemperance in respect 
to intoxicants of every kind, we feel that the special lesson 
needed by the Lord's people is in respect to the intoxicating 
influences of the world, as these come to us and affect us as 
new creatures in Christ. There is an intoxication in wealth, 
in luxury, in ease, which tends to say to the soul, "Take thine 
ease; forget thy covenant of sacrifice — to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus and be dead with him to the world and its aims." 
There is an intoxication of pleasure, of fashion, of pride and 
fond desire, which appeals to the new creature very strongly 
through various avenues of the mortal body, and which seeks 
to intoxicate, to stupefy, the new mind, to make us dull of 
hearing as respects spiritual things, to make us lax as respects 
our sseal for the Lord, for the truth and for the brethren, and 
to make us covet the things that would be approved by the 
world and pleasurable to our own flesh, as well as harmonious 
to the wishes and exhortations of our friends. To all of these 
intoxicating allurements the answer must be, "No! We have 
covenanted our lives that henceforth we shall be dead to 
earthly interests and alive toward God. Our joys, pur pleasures
, our exhilarations, must be of the spiritual kind." We 
must become so enthused, so enraptured, with the heavenly 
things, with the joy and peace and blessing which accompany 
the eating and drinking at the Lord's table, and so filled with 
his spirit, that the intoxications of earthly joys will have 
less and less attraction for us. — Ephesiana 5:18. 


DIVINE TRUTH 


"All truth is calm, 

Refuge and rock and tower. 
The more of truth the more of calm, 

Its calmness is its power. 
Truth is not strife, 
Nor is to strife allied, 


It is the error that is bred 
Of storm, by rage and pride. 

Calmness is truth 

And truth is calmness still; 

Truth lifts its forehead to the storm 
Like some eternal hill." — 


-H. Bonar. 


NEHEMIAH'S PRAYER 

fThis article was a reprint of that published in issue of November 15, 1905, which please see.] 


CONCERTED VOLUNTEER PLAN 


Although we have announced that we would begin making 
shipments of the new "Volunteer issue 'The Fall of Babylon" 
early in October, it has since been suggested by some that 
all orders for the entire country J>e first listed, and then 
shipped so as to reach all classes about the same time; then 
the Society designate some particular Sunday as a Volunteer 
Day, on which date the friends all over the country will dis^ 
tribute this very important number, Wc think the plan a good 


one, and therefore suggest that all classes, including isolated 
friends, who have not yet sent in their order for this new 
Volunteer matter, do so at once that we may have same 
printed up and shipped in accordance with the foregoing 
program. We will then designate the date on which all the 
brethren, in every city, town, village and country district, 
may engage in this stupendous concerted distribution of 
"THE FALL OF BABYLON." 


CHARGES ANSWERED 

The Board of Directors have requested Brother Rutherford title, "Light After Darkness." This reply is not for general 
to prepare a reply to the paper recently issued under the distribution, but will be sent to any of the friends on request 

[6164] 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


THE THINGS WE ABB TO FOBGET 

Question. — "Forgetting those things which are behind." 
(Philippians 3:13) To what things "which are behind" does 
the Apostle refer in this text, and why should we forget them? 

Answer.— -St. Paul could not have meant by this that we 
should not have the things of our previous experiences in 
memory at all, that we should forget them all absolutely; 
for his writings show that he held his own past in memory. In 
our context he tells us of the things he had lost and the 
things he had gained; and these things of his past have been 
remembered to the extent that they have come down to the 
church for eighteen hundred years. The Apostle declared that 
he had suffered the loss of many things for the sake of the 
truth. He recounted the many persecutions and sufferings 
which he had endured, but said that he had borne all this 
willingly, gladly. He had relinquished all his worldly advantages
 because, as he said, these things had no particular value. 
They were as dross compared to hi3 opportunity of becoming 
a member of the body of Christ, of the church in glory. 

He was forgetting all these in the sense of renouncing them 
and easting them benind his back. He was forgetting — in the 
■H>nse of not dwelling upon them, being hindered by them — 
his previous failures te keep the law, his futile endeavors and 
inability to live up* to its requirements. He was giving up 
all his earthly ambitions, and was not mourning the opportunities
 in life that had gone from him because of his consecration
 to the Lord. He was doubtless seeking to forget his own 
personal weaknesses and failures in that he would not allow 
the memory of them to discourage him. But this did not mean 
that he so completely forgot them as to lose the benefit of the 
lessons which these weaknesses and failures had taught him. 

Our lives would amount to very little If we forgot all the 
past. What profit would it be to ourselves to have lived in 
the world if we forgot it all? The Apostle uses the word 
"forgetting" with somewhat the thought that it sometimes has 
now, when used in a sort of slang phrase. A man may say 
to his friend, "You did me a great kindness, and I would like 
to 'do what I can to repay it" And the friend replies, "Oh, 
forget it!" — that is, forget it in the sense of feeling under an 
obligation. And, so in the proper sense the Apostle was seeking 
to forget the things of the past. If he had made mistakes in 
the past, he was now seeking that all of his powers might be 
enlisted on the aide of righteousness. He might well forget 
these things in the sense of thinking of their being remembered 
against him, for they were all covered by the merit of Christ. 

So we hive made our peace with God. Having Christ as 
our Advocate and Master, we know that God has blotted out 
our failures from his book of remembrance. He no longer 
holds them against us. Therefore we should not lo3e time 
and strength in useless grieving over them. But we are to let 
them teach us lessons for the future. We are to forget the 
ambitions of the past, in the sense that we will not be controlled
 or influenced by them; for we have new hopes. We 
have the hope of association with Christ, of membership in 
his glorious body. We are to forget the worldly opportunities 
of the past that we ' sacrificed, even as St. Paul forgot the 
things which he sacrificed; as he no longer craved them nor 
sought them. 

There are some of the Lord's, professed people who have 
difficulty along this line. They say, "Oh, I sacrificed so much 
to become a child of God — I sacrificed so much!" And what 
they sacrificed is in their eyes too much. But it was not 
very much, whatever it was. The more we know of ourselves 
the more we realize how insignificant we are in ourselves, and 
how little of real value we could accomplish in our -own 
strength. And the more we know of the world and the things 
of the world the more we realize their emptiness and unsatisfactoriness
. So we decide that we will not think of some 


grains of sand that we dropped in order to take hold of the 
hand of the Lord; for we have glory, honor and immortality 
in view. 

St. Paul Baid he was glad that he could suffer something 
for Christ. And he was urging others to likewise rejoice in 
this great privilege, and inspiring his hearers with the courage 
to lay aside every weight and sin, and to run with patience 
the heavenly race. So all these glorious things God has promised
 are before us as Christians. Everything we had in the 
way of earthly ambitions or prospects or fame — these things 
are all behind us, and are nothing in comparison to the things 
we have already received and those we are hoping for, by the 
grace of God. 

TBESPASSES, NOT ORIGINAL SIN, BLOTTED OUT 

Question. — When the Apostle speaks of the sins that are 
past by the forbearance of God, we understand him to mean 
the sins that were forgiven when we accepted Christ and were 
begotten as new creatures. Suppose, then, that one so forgiven
 subsequently returns to wallow in the mire, would the 
sins that were past be revived against him, or not? 

Answer. — It is our understanding that in accepting the 
church the Lord accepts all of that number desirous of coming 
to the Father through him, and that he makes an imputation 
of hi3 merit sufficient to offset all their Adamic sin and 
weaknesses, in order that they may be made the righteousness 
of God through him. Being thus justified through faith they 
may have full peace with God, and. realize that old things 
have passed away and that all things have become new. We 
would think, therefore, that nothing in the past would be 
revived, jeven if they should commit the sin unto death; for 
all former sins were settled for. It would he the sin as a 
new creature that would bring his death — it would .not be 
necessary to go back to the past, when he was an old creature, 
to find something corroborating this. 

This blotting out of sins at. the glorification of the church 
does not refer to the blotting out of . original sin, but more 
particularly to the blotting out of those elements of sin that 
are in the flesh, those trespasses for which we need to go 
continually to God day by day and pray: 'Torgive us our 
trespasses!" All these are blotted out when the flesh itself 
shall have been relinquished and we shall have experienced 
the "change" to spirit nature. 

KNOWLEDGE PROPORTIONATE TO OBEDIENCE 

Question. — Is there any text of Scripture, or are there 
several texts — and if so, which? — that teach tjiat we must 
act upon truth when we receive it, before we may receive 
more truth! 

Answer. — "He that is faithful in that which is least, is 
faithful also in much." — Luke 16:10. 

"Whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth
 therein, being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of 
the work, this man shall -be blessed in his deed." — James 
1:25. See also verses 22-24. 

"Study to snow thyself approved unto God, a workman 
that needeth not to be ashamed, .rightly dividing the word 
of truth."— 2 Timothy 2:15. 

"The path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth 
more and more unto the perfect day." — Prov. 4:18. 

"If any man will to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine
 [the truth], whether it be of God.'^John 7:17. 

"If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall 
ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you," — John 15:7. 

Again Jesus said, "He that followeth me shall not walk in 
darkness, but shall have the light of life."— John 8:12. 

All the Word of God indicates the necessity of continuance
, of growing in grace and in knowledge— growing up 
into him who in all things is the Head of the body, even 
Christ. — Ephesians 4:15. 


PRESENT BLESSINGS INCREASING DISCONTENT 


The question lias been asked us, Has the Millennium any 
relationship to present-day strikes, etc.? We answer that the 
grandfathers of those men and women who are now rising 
up against the present order, received very much smaller 
compensation, worked much longer hours and were much more 
contented and happy, than is the present generation. Something
 has come in which has changed this attitude of mind 
and has brought great blessing, great riches, and increasing 
discontent. That thing, we believe, is the dawn of the Millennial
 day, with the light that it brings— the enlightenment, 
the knowledge and realization of power on the part of the 
masses. 

Some, of course, will be willing to use their knowledge 
righteously. We hope that all Bible Students feel so. Others 
will be inclined to use their knowledge selfishly. Seeing that 


things are wrong they may lack patience, lack love, be unwilling
 to endeavor to adjust the wrong in reasonable and proper 
ways, as should be the case with those guided by the wisdom 
from above. Hence the world is getting more and more bitter j 
this dissatisfied condition of mind is increasing. Men are 
truce-breakers, breakers of agreements — anything to further 
their selfish interests. — 2 Timothy 3:1-5. 

We do not know the merits of each particular case, but 
we think that what we have said would be applicable anywhere
. We think it safe to assume that the men who strike 
at present would average $3.00 per day for about nine hours' 
work, and the nine hours' work would not be as laborious 
as labor was formerly; for now it can nearly all be done by 
machinery. But many laboring men, working for the Standard 
Oil Company, the railroads, coal corporations, etc., see that 


[6156] 


(315-316) 


(316-317) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


in spite of paying good wages, these corporations are making 
much money. They read about the millions being paid in 
dividends. They feel in their own pockets. Not a million 
do they touch; and they wi9h there was a million there, and 
are envious and unhappy because it is not there. 
OMNIPOTENT POWER THE ONLY HELP 
The Bible points out this increase of knowledge of our 
day: "Many shall run to and fro'!; "Knowledge- shall be increased
"; "The wise shall understand" — the rest shall not 
understand, and "there shall be a time of trouble such as 
never was since, there was a nation." (Daniel 12:4, 10, 1) 
This is the prophetic view of the matter in advance. God 
permits the Millennial age to come in this way, in a measure, 
to demonstrate that it will not be rightly received and that 
selfishness would have gone on to even worse lengths if all the 


blessings of the Millennial age had been here before. The 
'World would have been in a worse condition, more discontented
. Jesus said that the discontent would go on to such 
a degree that "unless those days should be shortened there 
would be no flesh saved." (Matthew 24:22) Everywhere that 
spirit would go; and it is going everywhere. The Lord's 
Word seems to imply that this will be so until men shall learn 
that their happiness will come, not by might nor by power, 
but hy the Lord's Spirit. (Zechariah 4:6) As they learn this, 
they will see the great Ruler and his power rectifying things 
along the line of justice. Every evil of life shall thus be 
opened up to view, to correction; everything will be straightened
 out; and the world will begin to see the reign of holiness, 
of righteousness, harmony with God, justice, equity. Then 
the knowledge will do them good. 


RELATION OF EUROPEAN WAR TO ISRAEL'S HOPES 


We have been expecting great things for the Jewish people, 
and believe that these are on the way. Undoubtedly the war 
has a very important part to work out under divine supervision
, something that will be advantageous to the Jew, to 
Palestine, and eventually to everybody. We would not know 
how to forecast the future so as to say what effect the war 
will have; for if the Germans should win, then Palestine 
would remain under Turkish or German influence; and if 
the Allies should win, Palestine would come under the influence
 of the Allies, whose fraternal feeling for each other 
would lead them to protect each others' interests. 

We know the feeling of many of these countries towards 
Palestine. The Russians, for instance, treat the Jews very 
courteously when people of Russia go to Palestine — not, however
, with any feeling of friendship for the Jew. We know 
that the same is the general feeling throughout the world. 
Each nation would like to possess Palestine. It is not that 
Palestine is such a wonderful country, not that it will be 
greatly to the advantage of any of them to possess that little 
country; for it has not even one valuable port; but somehow 
all have an anxious desire for what is termed "the Holy 
Land." Russians, Germans, British and French — all are represented
 there; and they would not be willing to give up 
their hold on it unless there was some very special compensation
. 

As to the Jews themselves, we believe that they have more 
confidence in the Mohammedans, the Turks, who are their 
cousins by birth, than they have in any Christian nation. 
This is probably because they have been under the Turkish 
rule in Palestine, where Jews have had a better time than 
they are having in any other country. _ But we are not wise 
enough to do any guessing on this question. We simply know 
some of the facts as they stand today, and the great fact of 
the future as the Bible points it out, that Israel will again 
come fully into possession df their own land. 

We think that there are many Jew3 now in Russia, Poland, 
Germany, etc., who would be very glad had they gone over 
to Palestine when they had the chance. We understand that 
some of them are going over now, notwithstanding the war 
conditions. We had not so understood previously, but information
 has reached us that there is now a land immigration 
which is taking many Jews to Palestine. We are not, in any 
event, to expect that all the Jews will go there; no more 
than when God,, through the Prophet, declared that Israel 
would be brought again from the captivity of Babylon. We 
remember that many of them went into captivity to Babylon ; 
and that after being there, some of them for several centuries, 
the whole number that came out under Cyrus* decree was 
about 50,000, leaving the great mass of the nation "scattered, 
abroad," as we read in the New Testament — scattered amongst 
the heathen nations, preferring to live where they had become
 attached to the soil or land rather than to go back to 
Palestine. So we expect that the going back to Palestine will 
not include all the Jews now living, 'but merely representatives 
of the Jews, of the hopes of Israel. 

Without doubt great changes are just ahead, great favors 
and blessings, for the devout of the Jewish people who cling 
faithfully to the divine promises respecting them. However 
we are not to expect their full establishment as a nation 
through which tne Lord will operate, until after wars, revolutions
 and anarchy of the time of trouble have ceased, and the 
ancient worthies have been brought back from the dead in 
human perfection. On this point we here append a contribution
 from one of our readers, which agrees well with the 
presentations of Scripture Studies, Vol. 7, concerning the 
resurrection of the ancient worthies and their inheritance of 
the land: 


WHEN WILL ABRAHAM INHERIT^ THE LAND? 

I am basing my suggestions (a) pn the statement of 
Tabernacle Shadows, page 34, Par. 1, as .follows: "So, then, 
after the body of Christ completes the spiritual 'Seed,* that 
additional promise to Abraham respecting an earthly seed 
must have fulfillment," (Italics mine.) (b) Also on the fact 
that this additional promise is part and parcel of the great 
oath-bound Abrahamie Covenant; (c) on the reasonable inference
 that Hagar was a type of this additional promise, as 
was Sarah of the first promise to the spiritual seed; (d) on 
the belief that the 3960 years derived from Genesis 15:9 are 
creditably established as a chronological period; (e) and on 
the seeming discovery that the additional promise, of the 
earthly seed, was confirmed to Abraham ten years after the 
giving of the first or chief promise. 

Before Abraham moved into the I/and of Canaan there 
was the promise of a blessing. The ratification of the promise 
was contingent on his obedience to the divine injunction. 
When he began his sojourn in the land the promise came 
into being as a covenant exactly four hundred and thirty (430) 
years before the exodus. (Exodus 12:40, 41.) At the same 
time, Sarah came into existence as a type of the promise, or 
covenant, then made and pertaining exclusively to the spiritual
 seed.— Romans 4:13; Galatians 3:16, 17; 4:28. 

After the departure of Lot for Sodom, God made a certain
 promise respecting the land to Abraham — "All the land 
which thou seeest, to thee will I give it and to thy seed forever
." (Genesis 13 : 15) A certain command was annexed 
to the promise: "Arise, walk through the land, in the length 
of it and in the breadth of it." (v. 17) Abraham began 
at once to carry out this injunction. — V. 18. 

Subsequently, his faith having been satisfactorily demonstrated
, God ratified and confirmed to Abraham the promise 
of the land, apparently greatly increasing its scope, and made 
a covenant with Abraham concerning it. (Genesis 15:18) 
The date of the giving of this covenant is of great interest 
to Bible students. When was the promise of the land, pertaining
 exclusively to Abraham and his fleshly seed, ratified 
and confirmed as a covenant obligation, absolutely unconditional
, by Jehovah? 

"In the same day, God made a covenant with Abraham, 
saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land from the River 
of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates," (Genesis
 45:18) Here, it seems to me, we have the second part 
or instalment of the great Abrahamie Covenant, afterwards 
confirmed by oath and called The Promise, although embodying
 distinct promises to different classes. (Rom. 4:16) St. 
Paul has shown distinctly that the first part of the covenant, 
ratified when Abraham became a sojourner in the land, pertained
 only to the spiritual seed, which seed is Christ. (Galatians
 3:16) Tlie Abrahamie Covenant here came into existence
, hut not as a whole — only as to its first section. The 
second section of the covenant, or second covenant, after* 
wards merged with the first into the one great unconditional 
oath-bound "promise," came into existence "in the same day" 
mentioned in Genesis 15:18. 

Now if we can find the date of this covenant respecting 
the land we shall, with reasonable certainty, be able to fix the 
date on which Abraham will inherit the land. God instructed 
Abraham to perform a certain strange ceremony of symbolic 
significance at the, time that he ratified the promise of the 
land and entered Into a covenant regarding it. This ceremony
 by which it was customary to ratify covenant engagements
 or contracts at that time was in order to strengthen 
Abraham's faith, in answer to his question, "Whereby shall 
I know that I shall inherit it?" 


[6156] 


October 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(317-318) 


JEHOVAH'S SIGNIFICANT ANSW2B TO ABEAHAM 

We need not suppose that Abraham perceived any symbolic
 meaning hidden away in the ages of the victims selected. 
This is one of the things "hidden from ages and generations
," but now made known unto us by the Spirit. The 
three beasts were each three years of age; the two birds were 
young birds. We quote the Biblical comment on Genesis 
15:9 — "A bird is usually considered young up to one year 
old. Figuring thus, the ages of the- animals represent 11 
years. Eleven prophetic years of 360 literal years each equal 
3,960 years, the time from the giving of this covenant to 
Abraham till the year 1915, when he will inherit the land." 
The method here used in obtaining the period elapsing from 
the giving of this covenant till Abraham should inherit the 
land is sound and in accord with other symbolisms under 
which God hid or covered information until due time for it 
to be known. The period of 3,960 years seems a well fixed 
chronological period. However, we are absolutely certain 
that Abraham did not inherit the land in 1915. It may not 
seem improper, therefore, for the Bible student to carefully 
analyze the above comment, seeking an explanation. In doing 
this we can find no fault with the assertion that the 3,960 
years begin to count "from the giving of this covenant"; yet, 
if the year 1915 is wrong as the date of the end of the 3,960 
years, certainly the date fixed on in the comment as the date 
from which the 3,960 years begin to count is also erroneous. 
Evidently the comment begins the 3,960 years with Abraham's 
entrance into the land, 430 years before the exodus, or the 
year 2045 B. C. That is the date of the giving of the covenant
, or the first feature of the covenant, meant for the 
spiritual seed only. It seems reasonable, however, that the 
period intervening until Abraham should inherit the land 
would begin with the giving of the covenant respecting the 
land. This is the covenant of Genesis 15:18. Regarding this 
as the second instalment of the great oath-bound promise 
(Genesis 22:16, 17; 26:3, 4), we are perfectly correct in saying
 that the 3,960 years begin with the giving of the covenant. 
The points in regard to the covenant which were not noted 
in the comment are these: 

1. Its two specific parts were given at different times. 

2. The natural and logical date for beginning the 3,960 
years would be the giving of the second part of the oathbound
 compact. This was "in the same day" on which the 
ceremony attending the slaughter of the victims recorded in 
Chapter 15 took place. There and then God established his 
covenant with Abraham respectinng the land. — Genesis 15:18. 

WHEN "SECOND PABT" OF COVENANT WAS BATIFXED 

Has God left us a clue to this date? We answer, that we 
believe he has and it is found in Genesis 16:3. It is a reasonable
 inference that the event herein recorded followed 
immediately upon those recorded in Chapter 15. It seems a 
plain deduction that Hagar was a type of the covenant or 
promise to the fleshly seed, typified by her son Ishmael. We 
are not speaking here of the Law Covenant, of which she 
was a type, but of the specific promise to the fleshly seed, 
included in and forming a part of the oath-bound covenant. 
The law was added 430 years after the promise to the spiritual 
seed of Genesis 12:3, and 420 years after Abraham took 
Hagar to wife. 

The promise, so firmly ratified respecting the land and his 
earthly seed, greatly stimulated Abraham's desire for a son, 
and moved Sarah. (Chapter 16:1, 2) So Sarah, anxious 
to help, offered Hagar to Abraham. "And Sarai, Abraham's 
wife, took Hagar, her maid, the Egyptian, after Abraham 
had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan and gave her to 
her husband Abraham to be his wife," (V. 3) Here at this 
point Hagar came into existence as a type of that portion of 
the Abrahamic Covenant which exclusively pertains to the 
fleshly seed. Sarah became a type at the same time that the 
portion of the Abrahamic Covenant pertaining to the spiritual
 seed was ratified, when Abraham entered the land. Hagar 
became a type at the same time that the portion of the covenant
 respecting the fleshly seed's inheritance of the land was 
confirmed. This was ten years after Abraham entered the land. 
Hagar was, of course, a type of the Law Covenant and 
Keturah of the New. But these facts do not concern especially
 the present inquiry. It is true that the fleshly seed 
came under the law, out it is not true that Abraham or his 
seed will inherit the promise through (by keeping) the law. 
Abraham will inherit the land under the Abrahamic Covenant
 — that portion of it pertaining exclusively to him personally
 and his fleshly seed after him. — Genesis 15:7, 18; Acts 
7:5. 

There will be no slip-up. Abraham inherits the land by 
faith (as its reward) ; God's oath makes it certain, "The 
gifts and calling of God are without repentance." (Romans 
11:29) The promise respecting the land is as absolute and 
unconditional as the promise respecting the spiritual seed. 
"To the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed." 
— Romans 4:16. 

It seems a reasonable deduction from the foregoing that 
the date of the giving of the covenant respecting the land 
was coincident with the union of Abraham and Hagar. Here 
the 3,960 years begin to count. This union took place ten 
years after he entered the land. As he began his sojourn in 
the land in the year 2,045 B. C, it follows that the 3,960 years 
begin to count from 2,035 B. C. 2,035 plus 1,925 equals 3,960. 
Accordingly Abraham should enter upon the actual possession 
of his promised inheritance in the year 1925 A. D, 


REPORT 

Leaving Aurora, Illinois, our journey v was westward, the 
first stop heing at Spokane, Washington. Here about three 
hundred of the friends had assembled from nearby classes for 
a one-day convention. The morning was spent in praise, 
prayer and testimony, which was very edifying and profitable 
to all. In the afternoon the friends were addressed by Brother 
Rutherford on "The Bond of Completeness," text being taken 
from Col. 3 : 14. The speaker pointed out the necssity of 
putting on this bond of completeness as we near the end of 
our course. 

In the evening, a public lecture was given by Brother Rutherford
 at the Spokane Theater, the subject being, "Are We 
at the End of the World?" Fully 'two thousand people were 
present, many being turned away. This being a midweek 
meeting, it was considered unusually well attended. Interest 
was splendid and we hope much good may result. 

The next evening, the 16th of August, a public meeting was 
addressed by Brother Rutherford at the Everett Opera House, 
Everett, Washington, about twelve hundred being present. 
Just one year to the day prior thereto, the speaker had addressed
 an audience in the same Opera House with reference 
to the War, at which time he stated that the United States 
would be drawn into the war before another year. The public
 press at Everett commented on this fact and the fulfillment
 of this statement, which probably had much to do with 
bringing out many of Everett's most substantial citizens. The 
interest at the evening lecture was unusually good, many leaving
 cards signifying a desire for further information. 
TACOMA 00NV2HTI0V 

Tacoma, Washington, was a four-days convention, August 
16th to 19th, inclusive. The discourses were all listened to 
eagerly by the friends at each session of the convention, about 
fifteen hundred being present. The Photo Dbama of Creation
 was exhibited in the evening at the theater where the 


OF THE WESTERN CONVENTIONS 

convention was held, it being packed to overflowing at each 
session. Seventy symbolized their consecration to the Lord. 

Several months previous, the Mayor and Board of Trade 
of Tacoma had invited out Association to hold a convention 
at Tacoma, offering the use of the Stadium, which was accepted
. The Stadium is a mignificent structure built on the 
very banks of Puget Sound, with a seating capacity of more 
than thirty thousand, and the accoustics are so nearly perfect 
that when filled, everyone can hear a speaker addressing the 
audience in an ordinary voice. Some weeks after the invitation
 had been accepted, some of the ministers of the city 
of Tacoma objected to our using the Stadium unless it was 
agreed that nothing would be said derogatory to the clergy, 
and the Stadium Board asked that this limitation be put uponthe
 use of the place. We declined to accept it on these terms 
and had no idea of using the Stadium at all. The public 
meeting was advertised to l>e held at the Tacoma Theater, but 
it was evident that the Theater would not accomodate the 
people. The Mayor and Board of Trade then influenced the 
Stadium Board to withdraw all conditions on the Stadium and 
placed it at our disposal without restrictions. Only two days 
remained for advertising the meeting. The attendance Sunday
 afternoon was fully five thousand. The Mayor of the 
City presided and introduced the speaker, the subject being, 
"Are We at the End of the Worjd?" During the course of 
the lecture, Dr, Dyer, said to be the leading clergyman of 
Tacoma, took exception to some things the speaker said, came! 
to the platform and demanded that the Mayor suppress the 
meeting, which the Mayor refused to do; then, time and again 
he interrupted the meeting, going to the extent of standing on 
the platform and calling the speaker a liar three times. It was 
evident that the Audience was against him, and when the 
meeting was over, the minister left the auditorium amidst 
jeers and many of his own congregation were heard to say 


vn—22 


[6157] 


(318-309) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Bhooklyn, N. Y. 


that never again would they go to hear him. A great number
 of the audience left their address cards, signifying their 
desire to hear more. The interuption proved a splendid opportunity
 for a public witness to the truth, and again the 
Lord caused the wrath of man to result to his praise. 

On Monday evening, the 20th of August, a public meeting 
at Portland, Oregon, was addressed by Brother Rutherford, 
fully 1,200 being present. The interest manifested was very 
marked and many left their address cards. The day following
 there was a gathering of the friends at Salem, Oregon, 
being addressed by Brother Rutherford. 

From the 22nd to the 26th, inclusive, the convention was 
held at Oakland, California, Brother Wisdom being the chairman
. The other speakers of the convention were Brothers 
Anderson, Hadley, Heard, Talifaerro and Rutherford, about 
six hundred of the friends attended this convention, forty 
symbolizing their consecration. Sunday afternoon at Oakland, 
a* public meeting *was addressed by Brother Rutherford, about 
two thousand being 1 present. The same evening another public
 meeting was addressed at San Francisco, about one thousand
 being present. The attendance here was small, probably 
due to the fact that a street car strike rendered it difficult 
for the people to get to and fro in the city. This was a very 
blessed convention and everybody remarked that many blessings
 were received there. 

On August 31st to Sept 2nd, a convention of the I. B. S. A. 
was held at Los Angeles, California. It was not expected 
that more than four or live hundred would attend this convention
, but the attendance was fully eight hundred. Brother 
Heard was chairman here. The other speakers were Brothers 
Anderson, Wisdom, Hadley, Sexton, Lee, Sherman and Rutherford
. No public meeting was attempted at Los Angeles 
because it was the beginning of the Billy Sunday campaign 
and it was thought inadvisable to attempt a public meeting at 
this time, we preferring to wait a more opportune season. 
Fifty-six symbolized their consecration here. 

NOTICEABLE FEATURES OF THE CONVENTION 

At each one of the conventions above named, the spirit 
manifested was unusual. It has long been a custom at our 
conventions to have a committee to whom complaints would 


be referred. At these conventions there were no complaints, 
hence the trouble committee was without employment. There 
was a total absence at these conventions of gossip. The 
friends refused to discuss past troubles or disturbances. They 
seemed bent on dping but one thing, striving with earnestness 
and zeal to prepare for an abundant entrance of the church 
into the kingdom of our Lord. The Spirit of the Lord was 
everywhere manifest to a marked degree. All seemed to realize
 that the end of the harvest is very near, and the necessity 
of greater zeal and earnestness on the part of all the harvest 
workers. At each one of these conventions, at the conclusion 
of "Harvesters* Day," the enthusiasm and zeal to enter some 
branch of the work in these closing days of the harvest was 
everywhere marked. Many who had heretofore been in the 
colporteur work and required to stop, signified their determination
 to immediately return to it. Others who had never 
been colporteurs expressed a desire to immediately take up 
the work. Quite a number of brethren with ability offered 
themselves for the pilgrim service, some of whom have been 
selected and will shortly enter the w T ork. 

The Seventh Volume was enthusiastically received by most 
all who attended the various conventions, only here and there 
being an exception. At every convention resolutions were 
adopted by almost a unanimous vote approving the present 
management of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
and its officers, pledging unreserved loyalty to the Society. 
As an old soldier expressed it, "A good soldier always follows 
his regimental flag. The Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society is our flag. The Lord has used it all these years and 
continues to use it, and where he directs the work through 
it, we rejoice to follow." 

At every one of these conventions the friends could be 
heard enthusiastically saying, "This is the best convention I 
ever attended." The sweet spirit of love for the Lord and 
the brethren and loyalty to him and to his cause and to the 
channel he continues to use for the harvest was everywhere 
manifest. It was indeed good to be there, and reminded us 
that we are drawing nearer to the general convention of the 
church of the first-born where there will be fulness of joy 
in the presence of our King. 


"MEET FOR THE USE OF THE MASTER WE LOVE" 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of October 15, 1902, which please see.l 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


GREETINGS FROM AH ENGLISH P EI SON 
Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

Greetings in the precious name of our dear Redeemer, 

Seeing that so many of our dear brethren in America are 
being affected by the new military measure, we are desirous 
of extending to them our warmest sympathy. 

We rejoice to know that so many of the dear saints of 
God are standing thus firmly by the principles of righteousness 
in this hour of trial. Our prayer on their behalf is that they 
may have the necessary grace sufficient in every time of need 
and that wisdom which cometh from above, so that they 
may be enabled to "witness a good confession" and copy 
the noble example of our dear Redeomer, following in his 
footsteps. 

We are realizing, perhaps more than ever, that here we 
have no continuing city, that in the world we must have 
tribulation, and that the child of (rod must suffer persecution
, for it is only "if we suffer with him" that "we shall 
reign with him." Nevertheless we are learning from our 


illustrious Example the power of the joy that is set before known. 


Now, however, we are enjoying a measure of ireedom, 
not being fully subject to either military or prison discipline
. We are rejoicing to be accounted worthy to suffer 
on account of the name of Christ, and we hasten to send 
these few words of sympathy and encouragement to all the 
dear ones who will be affected by the Military Service Act. 

We also pray the heavenly father's richest blessing upon 
the Bethel Family and send our fervent Christian Love. 

Your brethren and fellow-servants in the Lord, 

{Signed by 37 Brethren.) 

LEABNING TO KNOW HERSELF 

My Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings in the name of the King of kings! I feel so 
very grateful to the Lord that I have a deeper sense of appreciation
 for him and for the results of our deceased Pastor
's faithful service in his name. And while my heart is 
lauding, magnifying, and praising him, I impose on your 
valuable time and with a few pen words make my thanks 


us, and we are seeking to cheerfully endure all things that 
God in his providence sees fit to bring upon us. 

Daily do our prayers ascend at the throne of heavenly 
grace foT all the dear brethren throughout the whole habitable
 who are affected by the military, and we sincerely trust 
that the dear American brethren may continue firm and 
steadfast, rejoicing in tribulation, and faithful unto the end, 
in all things seeking to glorify the name of our Father in 
heaven. We know not what awaits us, but then again we 
do know that faith can firmly trust him, come what may. 

Under divine providence we have heen before tribunals — 
in the hands of the military — and also in prison, but God 
has blessed and kept us in all of our experiences. Our 
temperaments are varied, our experiences have varied, but 
we have all felt the power of a deeper and sweeter communion
 with our heavenly Father and the Lord Jesus. We 
all testify to the fact of our being drawn nearer to our 
dear Father in heaven as a result of these experiences. 


Especially good and valued are The Watch Towers. Each 
subject seems to be addressed to me. Some bring much comfort
 and are as apples of gold in pictures of silver; while 
others bring rebukes and corrections to Self. Yes, where 
I once thought T was "some one/* now I am learning to 
know myself; and I find much dross, not to be desired. How 
anxious I am to have this purged out of my life, and to be 
transformed into his likeness, from one degree of radiant 
holiness to another, as derived from the Lord! 

In order to help me remember I am an ambassador for 
Christ, I have taken this way as a helper: Each morning 
after worship I inscribe with ink on the palm of my hand, 
or on the arm, the Scripture citation for the morning, and 
also the Bethel hymn, bo that when Satan would overtake 
me I see the citation. In what a wonderful way the Lord 
speaks! This simple method recalls the text. I find that 
T can have the music of God's great plan ring through vofy 
heart and life every day and hour. 

[6158] 


OcroBis* 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(319-324) 


I pray earnestly for you, and surely the .Lord will recompense
 your work and a full reward be given you of him 
under whose wings you are come to trust. — Ruth 2:12. 

Your sister, striving for the kingdom, R. E. Lawkence. 

CONTINUED APPRECIATIONS OP VOLTJME SEVEN 

"I am glad I can recognize the Seventh Volume as the 
genuine article. It has proven a blessing to me, and the 
"penny* pay is more than satisfactory. It is more than I deserve
, just like all of our dear Lord's rewards to his little 
ones."— C. R. P., Ga. 

"We huve not ceased to thank the Lord for the 'penny' 
and the desire and hope of riding in the fiery chariot. The 
grand old plan gets bigger and grander all the time." — 
W. F. McL., Ala. 

"I cannot close without expressing my gratitude for the 
Seventh Volume, I am now reading it for the second time, 
and I thank the Lord that I have been privileged to receive 
this volume."— Mrs. C. J. P., Ohio. 

"We cannot express in words the joy and comfort the 
Seventh Volume brought to our hearts. We are filled with 
adoration and praise and thanksgiving to our Father. Have 
gone through the book once but am now reading it, looking 
up each reference; and oh, the truths that are thus hidden! 
What blessing it brings!"— Mrs. R. W. H., Ohio. 

"I have received a great blessing from the Seventh Volume. 
I believe that it has come at just the right time — a time when 
the church would have severe trials and bitter experiences." 
—J. A. M., Ind. 

"How we are rejoicing in the light of Volume Seven, and 
noting its perfect harmony and w)iy our beloved Pastor could 
not put that out on this 3ide the veil!" — Mrs. A. T. B., Kan. 

"Having just finished the first and second parts of Volume 
Seven, I wish to express my loving appreciation and gratitude 


for the great blessing and inspiration received as a result of 
this unfolding of present truth." — J. S., Ind. 

"I am reading the Seventh Volume, and I never was so 
happy in my life. It is just what we need in this trying 
hour."-^J. A., Pa. 

"The Seventh Volume does satisfy me fully. I cannot 
tell you the joy and comfort it has given me. I am reading it 
the fourth time and find it better each time." — W. F. S., Ua. 

"The Seventh Volume is grand. While we have long 
been looking for this work, it more than filled our anticipations
."— V. P. N., Ala. 

"I am rejoicing in the encouragement and help 1 am getting 
in Volume Seven. It ia a marvel, a wonder. Really, God is 
its Author."— F. A. L., Tenn. 

"All the friends here, without an exception, have accepted 
the 'penny' with joy and gladness, praising and glorifying 
God."— G. B. R., Mass. 

"The Seventh Volume grows better to me every page I 
read. The Lord has blessed ua greatly. It has drawn me 
closer to him."— L. T. V., ST. Y. 

"Thank the dear Lord for 'The Finished Mystery!* I have 
read it twice, the last time very carefully. I surely appreciate 
what is there written concerning the fallen angels. I have 
been beset by them, owing to my own weakness and my not 
keeping the vow strictly enough, and have only been saved 
from discouragement by the Lord's favor through the Resolve 
and the Towers and prayer. I was not fully confident, however
, that I had not lost my crown until I read the blessed 
Seventh Volume. I now understand why my experiences have 
been permitted. It (the Volume) has been like the angel of 
Gethsemane to me, the assurance that I am still in our 
Father's favor. I can go forward with renewed energy because 
more joyous zeal. We have already sold twenty-five. Please 
remember us in prayer." — E. B. A., Conn. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., NOVEMBER 1, 1917 


No. 21 


A TRIBUTE TO THE SEVENTH MESSENGER 

"The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand ... the seven stars are the angels [messengers] of the 

seven churches." — Rev. 1:20. 


Since the days of the Apostles of Jesus no man on earth 
has held a dearer place in the hearts of consecrated Christians
 than has PASTOR CHARLES T. RUSSELL. He was 
known the world around, and loved most by those who knew 
him best. For thirty-six years he -was the sole editor of The 
Watch Tower. It seems fitting, therefore, that we should in 
these columns at this time take notice of the first anniversary 
of his glorification, which occurred on the last day of October
, 1916. 

Pastor Russell was a great man. This fact is more fully 
recognized today than it was a year ago. Appreciation of 
him by the people will necessarily increase as they come 
to a fuller realization of the position he occupied as a servant
 of the Lord. Some men are born great, while others attain
 greatness by reason of their faithfulness to duty. Pastor 
Russell was a great man from both of these viewpoints. The 
Scriptures indicate that he was chosen of the Lord from his 
birth. His mother was a consecrated Christian. She taught 
her son in the way of the Lord, and he early gave evidence of 
his loving devotion to the great Master. 

God used the Prophet Ezeidel to foretell the events that 
were to come to pass upon Christendom. He used Pastor 
Russell as an antitype of Ezekiel to make clear to Bible students
 the real meaning of these events as they came to pass. 
The great Master, speaking to the church through John the 
Revelator, foretold that the church would be developed during 
a time of stress, and that the entire Gospel age would be divided
 into seven distinct epochs or periods of time. He also 
clearly indicated that each of these periods or epochs of lime 
would be blessed by a special messenger representing him. 
The great drama of the Gospel age opened with the Apostle 
Paul as the chief messenger, or angel, to the church. It 
closes with Pastor Russell as the seventh, and last, messenger 
to the church militant. For the other ^ve epochs*of> the 
church the Lord provided messengers in the order named: St. 
John, Arius, Waldo, Wycliffe and Luther. Each in his turn 
bore the message due to be understood during the epoch he 
represented. The two most prominent messengers, however, 
are the first and last — St. Paul'and Pastor Russell. 
4 'THAT WISE AND FAITHFUL SERVANT" 

The Lord Jesus, in his great prophetic statement in Matthew
 24:45-47, made known the fact that at the end of the 
age he would be present and would have a special servant 
whom he would "make ruler over all his house to give meat 


in due season to the household." For many years Christian 
people of all denominations have been looking for the manifestation
 of that promised servant. For several years some 
have recognized, and now many more are recognizing, that 
Pastor Russell is that servant. Forty ^years ago he noted that 
the Scriptures held forth the undoubted testimony that the 
age would end with a great time of trouble, which would begin
 with international war; that the war would he followed 
by revolution j and that revolution would in turn be followed 
by anarchy, which would wreck all the ecclesiastical and civil 
institutions of the world, and thus make way for the establishment
 of Messiah's kingdom of righteousness, for which 
Christians have long hoped and prayed. He proved by Bible 
chronology the presence of the Lord from 1874 on, and demonstrated
 that 1914 would mark the end of the Gentile period and 
the beginning of the great international conflict. Time and 
events have proven the correctness of his deductions from 
the Scriptures, showing he possessed heavenly wisdom. 

Contrary to the rule of ecclesiasticism, Pastor % Russell 
never lifted a collection. He spent his own private fortune 
in making kiiown the "glad tidings." His writings and publications
 have reached a larger circulation than those of any 
man or class of men on earth, the Bible alone excepted. He 
long ago showed from the Scriptures that there would be a 
federation of churches nominal and a departure by them from 
the "faith once delivered to the saints," and that the true 
saints would be gathered together into the garner of the Lord. 
All of these things are practically accomplished facts, all of 
which testify that Pastor Russell is the servant promised to 
the church in the closing days of its earthly pilgrimage. Many 
are perceiving more and more each day that he was chosen of 
the Lord to perform a great work. 

HIS OBDINATION 

There are two ordinations of the servants of God, One is 
the divine ordination; the other, an ordination by the church. 
Ordination means authority to act as a representative of another
. Ordination of a minister of the Gospel means authority
 to preach the Gospel. Comparatively few ministers of our 
day have the real ordination. Pastor Russell had both the 
divine ordination and the ordination from the church. The 
ordination that comes from Jehovah is received by' all who 
are begotten and anointed of the holy Spirit, as set forth 
in Isaiah 61:1-3, The ordination that comes from the church 
is authority granted by an assembly of Christian people to a 


[6153] 


(324-325) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKLYN, N. Y. 


certain one to represent them in delivering the Gospel of the 
kingdom. When quite a young man Charles Taae Russell 
received the divine ordination. Shortly thereafter he received 
the ordination from the church by being authorized to preach 
the Gospel. A faithful representative or the Lord he was. For 
many years he proclaimed the sweet message of the kingdom. 
The gracious words which the Lord poured upon his lips and 
caused his pen to write have thrilled the hearts of many 
Christian people for years past, and in the years to come 
thousands will feed upon these words with gladness of heart. 
The great Master, through the Revelator, foretold that 
his voice should be heard through his messenger instructing 
his people to prepare the way of the Lord. He used PaBtor 
Russell to be that voice, ami a beautiful and faithful voice 
it was. Another has well said of him: 

"Beautiful voice of the Lord: strong, humble, wise, 

loving, gentle, just, merciful, faithful, self-sacrificing; 

one of the noblest, grandest characters of all history." 
Although he has passed forever from activities in the flesh, 
yet his voice is still heard in 2ion, both theoretically and 
actually — theoretically in the printed message he has left as a 
heritage to the Israel of God, and actually in the phonographic 
records of his speeches, which are yet spoken for the encouragement
 of those who love the Lord and his cause of righteousness
. 

Shortly after the Apostles fell asleep there began a period 
of great injustice to the people. Ambitious men entered the 
sacred precincts of the church, and human theories were substituted
 for the faith of Jesus and the apostles. The clergy 
as a class now came into existence, and by their actions indicated
, and have since indicated, that their chief prerogative was 
and is to look after self, to fleece the poor sheep; and to accomplish
 this they have kept the people in ignorance. The 
result is that darkness prevailed on the earth, and gross 
darkness was upon the people. This continued for more than 
1200 years; and then the great Reformation movement began, 
which has progressed amidst adverse conditions even to this 
day, 

HIS MISSION 
Pastor Russell, as we have observed, is the messenger to the 
Laodicean epoch of the church. The word Laodicea literally 
means "Justice to the people." Well does the record of Pastor 
Russell show that he was a man chosen of the Lord for this 
period of the church, his work being always unselfishly in the 
interests of the people. With malice toward none and love 
for all, he kindly removed the garb of deception that covered 
the self-constituted, arrogant clergy, and exposed them and 
their fallacious doctrines to the gaze of mankind. He turned 
on the great searchlight of divine truth and drove error away 
from the minds of many. He showed that for centuries the 
clergy, and the systems they represent, have defamed God'a 
holy name by teaching that he is a fiend who takes pleasure 
in the torture eternally, in a hell of fire and brimstone, of the 
masses of his creatures; that they had used such God-defamatory
 doctrines to deceive the people and keep them in subjection
. His voice was heard throughout the earth proclaiming
, "The doctrine of eternal torture is a foul stain upon the 
name of Jehovah, driving from his loving care innumerable 
companies of people who would otherwise have gladly sought 
his face." 

In the interests of the people Pastor Russell tore down 
the false and fraudulent walls of the doctrines that have held 
multitudes in Babylon; and many poor, emaciated saints have 
escaped therefrom, giving glory to God for their deliverance. 
He made clear to the Christian peoples of the earth the philosophy
 of the great ransom-sacrifice. The doctrinal walls of 
predestination and foreordination — the salvation of the few 
in heaven, and the eternal-torture of all others in the lake of 
fire and brimstone — fell with a great crash before the onslaught 
of this man of God, who earnestly and faithfully smote them 
with the mighty slaughter-weapon with which God armed 
him for the fight. As a result, many have been able to see 
that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for 
every man," and that in God's due time every man shall be 
brought to an accurate knowledge of the truth; for "there 
is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the man 
Christ Jesus, who gave his life a ransom for all, to be testified
 in due time," — 1 Timothy 2:5, 6. 

It was the fight of this Laodicean messenger in behalf of 
the people that enabled students of the Lord's Word to see that 
the mystery of God is The Chbist, Head and body; that The 
Messiah or mystery class is developed during the Gospel 
age; and that thereafter "times of refreshing shall come," 
when the great restitution blessing for mankind will be put in 
operation. What a glorious message of comfort is restitution 
for the groaning creatures of earth! As Christian people have 
been delivered from the captivity of nominal Zion (Babylonish
 systems), and have learned of the coming blessings of 
restitution to all of mankind that would be obedient, their 
hearts have found expression in the words of the Psalmist: 
"Then was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue 
with singing, . . . the Lord has done great things for the 
people."— Psalm 126:2. 

God caused certain plagues to come upon Egypt, which 
illustrated and foretold the plagues coming upon Babylonish 
Christendom in the end of the Gospel age. Pastor Russell was, 
and is, "the great voice [instrument of the Lord] out of the 
temple saying, Go your ways and pour out of the seven vials 
of the wrath of God- upon the earth." (Revelation 16:1) The 
seven vials of wrath represent the seven volumes of Studies 
in the Scriptures, which the Lord used Pastor Russell to 
prepare and publish to the world, six of which were published
 while he was with us, the seventh being a posthumous 
publication. And thus, "Though he be dead, he yet speaketh." 
The message contained in these seven volumes of Studies in 
the Scbiptubes, sets forth the great loving plan of Jehovah 
for the false, fraudulent and God-dishonoring systems that 
encumber the earth, and shows how that the wrath of God 
coming upon them shall destroy them all. These are indeed 
plagues upon Christendom. Many years ago Pastor Russell 
pointed out from the Scriptures that such would come; and 
now, beholding the fulfilment of these prophetic statements, 
Christian people who understand what they mean, are looking 
up and lifting up their heads because, as Jesus testified, such 
would be evidence that the deliverance of the last of the saints 
is at hand. 

Years ago the Pastor published far and wide the evidence 
that the Reign of the Lord would begin with a great woe or 
trouble upon the unrighteous systems of the earth, and that 
such is necessary to prepare the way for the full establishment 
of the kingdom of righteousness. Such woe is visited, as he 
foretold, upon those interested in maintaining indefinitely 
the present oppressive order of society to the personal advantage
 of a few. Pastor Russell said concerning such woe that 
"The battle of this great day of God Almighty will be the 
greatest revolution the world has ever seen. Behold how even 
now the searchlight of general intelligence is discovering the 
secret springs of political intrigue, financial policies, religious 
claims, etc.; and how all are brought to the oar of judgment, 
and by man as well as by God declared right or wrong, as 
judged by the teachings or the Word of God!" 
THE WORK ENDTTBES 
Only a year ago Pastor Russell passed from the earth. 
Those who felt keenly the lash of truth as he laid it on, and 
who preferred darkness to light, exultantly said. "Now the 
work that Russell began will soon die, and his name will be 
forgotten/' But not so! Millions of people today find themselves
 free from the burden of fear, imposed upon them by the 
teachings of hell fire and other false doctrines, and are therefore
 supporting Brother Russell, in some measure, even 
though they take little or no active part in spreading the 
glad tidings of great joy which soon shall come to all. The tide 
of truth, which began more than forty years ago, is still 
steadily rising and will continue to rise until it fills the 
whole earth; and its opponents might as well try to sweep 
back with an ordinary broom the waves of a mighty ocean as 
to prevent the truth from spreading throughout the earth. 
Zealous Christians are greatly rejoicing as their privileges of 
service and suffering continue. God promised to turn his 
hand upon his little ones; and indeed the proof shows that 
he has done so. During the past year every branch of the 
work of the harvest has increased. This work is conducted by 
the Watch Toweb Bible and Tbact Society, a corporation 
organized for that purpose by Pastor Russell years ago, and 
which, without doubt, was organized under the Lord's direction
, and which was managed and directed by Pastor Russell 
until his death. 

A comparison of the work of 1916 with that of 1917 discloses
 the fact that the amount of volunteer literature distributed
 during 1917 is far in excess of 1916. At this time 
there are over 200 more colporteurs in the field than there 
were ten months ago. More pilgrims are upon the road today 
than there were in 1916, bearing the message to those who have 
hearing ears. The voluntary contributions to the funds of the 
Society for carrying on this work are, for the first ten months 
of 1917, far in excess of what they were during the entire year 
of 1916. Today 954 classes are pushing vigorously the pastoral
 work, which work has 'more than doubled during the 
past six months. 

The year 1917 chronicles the publication of the Seventh 
Volume of Studies in the Scbtptubes, the last of a series 
produced by Pastor Russell. The first edition of 75,000 in 
cloth and 10,000 in karatol is fully exhausted. The second 


[6160] 


Novbubkk 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(325-327) 


edition of 100,000 is going rapidly, as orders are daily being
 received at the office in large numbers. Letters from 
hundreds of the friends throughout the country show an increasing
 zeal for and activity in the work. Thus we see that 
in many ways the Lord is manifesting his blessing upon the 
work of the harvest, greatly to the joy of those who are able 
to participate therein, either by actual labor or otherwise. 
JESUS THE GREAT CHIEF BE APE B 
Why, we are asked, is the work still progressing? We answer
, Because it is the Lord's work and not man's! Brother 
Russell always recognized that the work of the harvest is directed
 by the great Master of the harvest — Christ Jesus; and 
that all of those who labor therein are greatly privileged 
above all other creatures on earth. Furthermore, the Scriptures
 show that those who died since 1878 have been changed 
instantly, "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," and have 
entered into their eternal reward. "The Scriptures declare that 
while such have ceased from their laborious efforts, their works 
do follow them. (Revelation 14:13) Hence our dear Pastor, 
now in glory, is without doubt, manifesting a keen interest 
in the harvest work, and is permitted by the Lord to exercise 
some strong influence thereupon. (Revelation 14:17) It is 
not unreasonable to conclude that he has been privileged to do, 
in connection with the harvest work, things which he could not 
do while with us. Although we recognize that the Lord is the 
great Master and Director of the harvest, yet we recognize that 
he would privilege the saints beyond the veil to have a part 
in the work on this side; and thus all the saints, both in 
heaven and upon earth, are now given the honor of concluding 
the work on this side, preparatory to the full establishment of 
the kingdom of glory. 

"SCATTERING COALS OF FIBE" 

Pastor Russell organized the Watch Toweb Bible and 
Tract Society, under the Lord's direction, to carry on this 
work. This corporate body clearly seems to he designated in 
Revelation 14:18. It is the only organization on earth that 
is maintained by the sacrifice of the saints — the little voluntary
 sacrifices or the Lord's dear people throughout the world, 
who love him and his cause better than this life, and who 
joyfully make sacrifices in order that they may have a part 
in the work of setting the ecclesiastical heavens on fire, and 
announcing "the kingdom of heaven is at hand!" Thus the 
Society is granted power and authority to scatter coals of 
fire (truths destructive of error), particularly as contained 
in Volumes IV. and VII. of Studies in the Scriptures. 

Pastor Russell was a prodigious worker. He labored 
early and late to make known the precious message of the 
kingdom. The welfare of the church was always dear to his 
heart. Like the great Apostle Paul, he ceased not day and 
night to warn the flock of God, if not with literal tears, yet 
often with weariness of body and sadness of heart. One of the 
last messages which he delivered to the church was that after 
his departure great trials would come upon the Lord's flock; 
and we witness the fulfilment of this prophetic statement. 
While fiery experiences bring sadness for the time, yet all 
who are properly exercised thereby rejoice to be partakers of 
these sufferings as a further evidence of discipline from the 
Lord. 

For years he was the head of the Bethel family and director
 of a large corps of workers, both in America and abroad. 
Notwithstandng his arduous duties, he was never too busy 
to hear the troubles of others; and like a loving father and 
shepherd he sympathized with, comforted and directed the 
Lord's dear children. At the weekly meetings addressed by 
him, and at the many conventions which he attended, he always
 devoted a portion of the time to private counsel and aid 
to "the Lord's dear flock, over whch the Chief Reaper and 
Shepherd had made him overseer. Truly he was a Barnabas 
to the consecrated scattered throughout the earth. 

When the great adversary came in like a flood, threatening 
to overwhelm the saints, Pastor Russell, the Lord's chosen 
servant, raised up a standard against him (Is*. 59:19), bring* 


ing forth the "vow" of faithfulness, which has proved a protection
 and blessing to many in these evil days. The "Morning
 Resolve", another product of his fertile brain, has been 
a great comfort and help to many in time of need. 
HIS DEVOTION TO THE LORD 
His firmness wa3 a distinct part of his character. Once 
sure that he had the mind of the Lord upon a subject, he 
permitted nothing to stand in his way or to prevent him 
from carrying out what he considered to be the Lord's will. 
Indeed, the Lord foretold that his servant would possess this 
attribute of character, saying through his prototype: 

"Behold, I have made thy face strong against their 
faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. 
As an adamant, harder than flint, have I made thy forehead
."— Ezekiel 3:8, 9. 
Whatever trying situation Pastor Russell faced, the Lord 
made him equal to it, and gave him the strength to prevail 
according to God's holy will. His life motto, in fact the 
very keynote of his wonderful career, was, "God first" ; and 
this motto he kept faithfully, at whatever cost to himself 
or others dear to his heart. His loving devotion to Jehovah 
and to the Lord Jesus was an inspiration to all with whom 
he came in contact and served. Though firm, yet he possessed 
a gentleness like unto that of a woman. Benevolence was a 
marked attitude of Pastor Russell, which manifested itself in 
his liberality of sentiment and his untiring efforts to bring the 
"glad tidings" of the kingdom of peace to those who sit in 
darkness. He suffered much, yet was able to steel his mind 
against difficulty and attack/ and by the Lord's grace was 
enabled to stand firm and steadfast while others would grow 
weary and discouraged. He was endowed with keen perceptive
 powers, thereby rendering his range of observation extraordinary
; while his memory and ability to analyze, and to 
reach rapid and accurate conclusions, continued to be a marvel 
to all who were associated with him closely. He had an 
exalted sense of duty as a servant of the Lord, and the conviction
 that each moment is precious and must be utilized 
to the Master's praise seemed to pervade his entire being. 
This was a source of inspiration to the brethren generally. 
He faithfully and untiringly administered the affairs of the 
church, the members of which he loved devotedly. It was said 
of the Apostle John that when he was too old and feeble to 
walk to the meeting of the early Church, he was carried into 
the house and placed upon a couch, where he delivered his 
exhortation and message of love to the flock of God, always 
admonishing them to love one another. With a like loving 
spirit Pastor Russell faithfully looked after the interests of 
the Lord's ljttle ones, until his dying hour. When almost too 
feeble to walk and too feeble to stand for any length of time, 
he was assisted to the platform of the hall where the church 
at Los Angeles, California, was assembled; and there sitting 
with bowed head, he delivered to them the last loving message
 that he ever spoke. When he had finished this last message
 he quoted and asked the congregation to sing: 

"Abide, sweet Spirit, heavenly Dove, 
With light and comfort from above, 

Be thou our guardian, thou our guide; 
O'er every thought and step preside. 

f Teach us in watchfulness and prayer 

To wait for thine appointed hour, 
And fit us by thy grace to share 

The triumphs of thy conquering power*" 

Great men are not fully appreciated while they are 
among us. Such is true with reference to Pastor Russell. 
Like the great Master whom he devotedly loved and faithfully
 served, he was misunderstood and persecuted, all of 
which he bore in patience. He finished the work given 
him here to do, and iB now forever with the Lord, where 
there is fulness of joy and pleasures for ever more. 


THE HISTORY AND OPERATIONS OF OUR SOCIETY 


NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the annual meeting of the Shareholders of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract 
Society will be held at Carnegie Hall, in the City of Pittsburgh (North Side), County of Allegheny and State of Pennsylvania
, on the 5th day of January, 19.18, at ten o'clock in the forenoon, for the purpose of electing Directors and 
Officers and for the transaction of such other business as may properly come before said meeting. 

W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary. 


Because of the unusual interest in the ensuing Annual 
Meeting of the Watch Toweb Bible and Tbact Society, as 
per the foregoing notice, it is deemed proper that we here give 

[6161] 


The Watch Toweb readers a brief resume of the organization 
and operations of the Society. 

As is well known, Pastor Russell began his religious 


(327-328) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


activities about 1875. In 1884, together with six others, he 
formed a corporation under the name and style of Zion's 
Watch Tower Tract Society, incorporating it under the laws 
of the State of Pennsylvania. In the Lord's providence a 
body corporate is essential to the work of the harvest until it 
is completed. We have no doubt that the Lord directed the 
organization of this Corporation for the purpose of carryiag 
on his harvest work. Brother Russell was the Servant of 
the Laodicean period of the church, and organized the work 
under the Lord's direction. In 1896 a petition was presented 
to the Court of Common Pleas, at Allegheny County, Pennsylvania
, and the corporate name was changed to Watch Tower 
Bible and Tbact Society, by which name it has ever since 
been known. The Articles of Incorporation are as follows: 
AETICLES OF INOOBPOBATION 
"Be it known that the subscribers, having associated 
themselves together for the purpose of the dissemination of 
Bible Truths in various languages, and being desirous of 
becoming incorporated agreeably to the provisions of the 
Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania, entitled 'An Act to provide for the Incorporation
 and Regulations of certain Corporations/ approved the 
twenty-ninth day of April, Anno Domini, One Thousand Eight 
Hundred and Seventy Four, and its supplements, do hereby 
declare, set forth arid certify that the following are the purposes
, objects, articles and conditions of their said association
 for and upon which they desire to be incorporated: 

"I, The name of the Corporation shall be Zion's Watch 
Tower Tract Society. 

"II. The purpose for which the Corporation is formed is, 
the dissemination of Bible Truths in various languages by 
means of the publication of tracts, pamphlets, papers and 
other religious documents, and by the use of all other lawful 
means which its Board of Directors, duly constituted, shall 
deem expedient for the furtherance of the purpose stated. 

"III. The place where the business of the said Corporation
 is to be transacted, is the City of Allegheny, in the 
County of Allegheny, and State of Pennsylvania. 
"IV. The Corporation is to exist perpetually. 
"V. The Corporation has no capital stock. Bach donation
 of Ten Dollars to the funds of said Corporation shall 
entitle the contributor, or his assigns, to one non -forfeitable 
non-assessable, and non-dividend-bearing share, and to one 
vote for every such share in said Corporation. Certificates 
o| membership so acquired shall be issued by the Secretary, 
countersigned by the President, to the persona entitled thereto
. 

"VI, The Corporation is to be managed by a Board of 
Directors consisting of seven members, and the names of 
those already chosen Directors are as follows: — 
President, Charles T. Russell, Wm. C. MacMillan, 

Vice President, Wm. I. Mann, Simon O. Blunden, 

Secy, and Treas., Maria F. Russell, J. B. Adaznson, 
Joseph F, Smith. 
"VII. The said Corporation by its Board of Directors, a 
majority of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
 of, business, shall have full power and authority to 
make and enaot by-laws, rules, and ordinances, which shall 
be deemed and taken to be the law of said Corporation, and 
do any and everything useful for the good government and 
support of the affairs of the said Corporation; provided that 
the said by-laws, rules and ordinances, or any of them, shall 
not be repugnant to this Charter, to the constitution and laws 
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Constitution 
of the United States. 

"VIII. The said Corporation shall have as officers a 
President, who shall preside at the meetings of the Board of 
Directors; a Vice-President, who shall preside in the absence 
of the President; and a Secretary, who shall also be Treasurer
; and these officers shall be chosen from among the members
 of the Board of Directors annually, on the first Saturday 
of each year, by an election by ballot, to be held at the principal
 office of the Corporation m Allegheny City, Pennsylvania. 
"The members of the Board of Directors shall hold their 
respective offices for life, unless removed by a two-thirds vote 
of the Shareholders; and vacancies in the Board occasioned 
by death, resignation or removal, shall be filled by vote of a 
majority of the remaining members of the Board, who shall 
meet for the purpose within twenty days from the time when 
such vacancy or vacancies shall occur, and in the event of 
failure to fill such vanacy or vacancies in the- manner aforesai
4 within thirty days from the time when such vacancy or 
vacancies shall occur, then the said vacancy or vacancies shall 
be filled by the appointment of the President, and the person 
or persons so appointed shall hold his or their office or offices 
until the next annual election of officers of the Corporation, 
when such vacancy or vacancies Bhall be filled by election, in 


the same manner as the President, Vice-President and Secretary
 and Treasurer are elected. The persons entitled to vote 
at annual elections of the* Corporation shall be those who 
hold certificates of membership acquired in the manner aforesaid
. 

"IX, The said Corporation, under the name, style and 
title aforesaid, shall have full power and authority to make, 
have and use a common seal, with such device and inscription 
as they may deem proper, and the same to alter and renew at 
their pleasure; and by the name, style and title aforesaid, 
shall be able in law and equity to sue and be sued, plead and 
be impleaded in any Court or Courts, before and Judge or 
Justice of the Peace, in all manner of suits and complaints, 
pleas, causes, matters and demands whatsoever, and alt and 
every matter or thing therein to do in as full and ample a 
manner, and as effectually, as any other person or persons, 
bodies politic or corporate, within the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania, may or can do. 

"X. The said corporation, by the name, style and title 
aforesaid, shall have the right, power and authority to take, 
receive and hold in fee simple, or any less estate, all such message
, lots, lands, buildings, tenements, rents, annuities, franchise
 and hereditaments as may be necessary and proper for its 
purpose; and to sell, lease, mortgage, or otherwise dispose of 
the same or any part thereof; and it shall have the same right, 
power and authority to take, receive and hold, and to sell, 
lease or dispose of any and all kinds of personal property 
and money." 

OTHEE COBFOBATIONS 1EGAXLY NECESSARY 
In 1909, the chief point of activity in the Harvest work 
was removed from Allegheny, Ta., to Brooklyn, New York. 
It became necessary to have a New York corporation to carry 
on the work in a legal manner in the State of New York ; 
hence the Peoples Pulpit Association was organized under 
the Membership Corporation Law of New York State. 

For a number of years the work has been generally known 
as the International Bible Students Association, and in 
1914, the same identical work was incorporated under the 
laws of Great Britain, under the name and style of International
 Bible Students Association. All three of these 
Corporations were organized for purposes identical, and work 
together harmoniously. 

The officers of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
 must be elected annually. At present the officers are as 
fpllows: — 

President, J. F, Rutherford. 
Vice-President, A. N. Pierson, 
Secy, and Treas., W. E. Van Amburgh, 
The officers of the Peoples Pulpit Association are as follows
: — 

President, J. F. Rutherford, 
Vice-President, A. H. Macmillan, 
Secretary, W. F. Hudgings, 
Treasurer, W. E. Van Amburgh. 
The President of this Corporation, according to the terms 
of the Charter, holds his office for life, the other officers being 
elected by the Board of Directors annually. 

The officers of the International Bible Students Association
, are 

President, J. F. Rutherford, 
Vice-President, J, Hemery, 
Secretary, H. J. Shearn. 
Treasurer, Wm. Crawford. 
Each one of these Corporations has a separate and distinct 
Board of Directors. The Board of Directors of the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society, is, at present, as follows: — 
J. F. Rutherford, A. H. Macmillan 

A. N. Pierson, W. E. Spill, 

W. E. Van Amburgh, J. A. Bohnet, 

George H. Fisher. 
The law requires that the Board of Directors be elected annually
 at £he Shareholders* meeting. 

The Board of Directors of the Peoples Pulpit Association
, as at present constituted, are: — 
J. F. Rutherford, W. F. Hudgings, 

At H. Macmillan, A. E. Burgess, 

W. E. Van Amburgh, J. A. Baeuerlein, 

R, J. Martin, 
Members of this Board are elected at the annual meeting of 
the members of the Corporation, held in Brooklyn, New York. 
The controlling body of the International Bible Students
 Association is designated as a Council. The original 
Council was composed of Charles T. Russell, J. F. Rutherford
. J. Hemery, H. J. Shearn, W. Crawford. This Council, 
by the terms of the Act of Incorporation, elect their successors 
as well as the officers of the Corporation. 

All three of these Corporations are religious associations 


[6162] 


November 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(328-329) 


or institutions, incorporated, as provided by the terms of their 
respective Charters, for the purpose of dissemination of Bible 
Truths. The creed or belief of each, is the same; namely, the 
teachings of Jesus ami the Apostles. 

SOCIETY'S CHARTER ANALYZED 

There seemingly has been some misunderstanding about 
the Charter of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society; 
hence we here give a brief analysis thereof. 

The purpose of the corporation is set forth in plain terms 
in paragraph II. The domicile of the corporation is designated
 in paragraph III as Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. 
It is strictly a Pennsylvania corporation. Paragraph V of the 
Charter expressly provides that the Society has no capital 
stock. It has, however, voting shares which grant merely a 
personal right to each person to cast one vote for every ten 
dollars contributed at any one time by such person. 

Paragraph VI states that the corporation is to be managed 
by a Board of Directors consisting of seven members, and 
specifically names the first Board of Directors as follows, 
to wit: 

President, Charles T. Russell, Win. C. MacMillan, 

Vice-President, Win. I. Mann, Simon O. Blunden, 

Secy, and Treas., Maria F. Russell, J. B. Adamson, 
Joseph F. Smith. 

Thus it will be seen that the persons elected to the respective
 offices of President, Vice -President, Secretary and 
Treasurer, were, and are, by virtue of the terms of the 
Charter and their election, members of the Board of Directors, 
and any person elected as successor to such, offices, would 
thereby become members of the Board of Directors. Instead 
of the shareholders first electing Brother Russell each year 
as a Director and then electing him as President, they voted 
for him but once, and his election as President constituted 
him a member of the Board of Directors. And so it would 
be with his successor in office or with the other officers. There 
would seem to be no necessity for taking the two votes, although
 technically that would be the proper course. 

Strictly speaking, there has never been a legal election of 
a complete Board of Directors since 1885, for the reason that 
the law requires the Directors to be elected annually. At each 
annual election only the three officers were elected ; hence they 
alone constituted the legal members of the Board of Directors. 

Paragraph VIII of the Charter provides that the Board 
of Directors shall hold their respective offices for life, unless 
removed by a two-thirds vote of the Shareholders. This provision
 of the Charter, however, is directly contrary to the 
law of the State of Pennsylvania under which the Society was 
incorporated and hence that provision of the Charter is null 
and void. The law provides that the Board of Directors shall 
be elected annually by the shareholders. The Charter of a 
corporation cannot grant greater powers than the law under 
which it is created; hence this provision of the Charter must 
yield to the provision of the law. Where a vacancy occurs 
in the Board of Directors, the Charter provides that such 
vacancy may be filled by the remaining members of the Board 
of Directors, provided such vacancy is filled within thirty 
days; and if not so filled within that time then the President 
shall appoint a proper person, or persons to fill such vacancy 
or vacancies. (Art. VIII.) The Charter expressly provides 
that those selected or appointed to fijl such vacancies shall 
hold office only until the next annual election of officers of the 
corporation, at which time a full and complete Board must 
be elected by the shareholders. This provision of the Charter, 
however, was never complied with in the selection of the successors
 of any of the original seven Directors, except in the 
case of the three officers, who have been elected annually. 
Hence, according to the terms of the Charter itself, as well 
as the laws of Pennsylvania, four vacancies have existed in the 
Board of Directors until in July of this year, at which time the 
President appointed four members to hold office until January, 
1 DIB. in harmony with Paragraph VIII of the Charter. 

The persons named in the Charter as the original Board of 
Directors would hold office until their successors were elected. 
This rule applied to Brother Russell, and he was therefore 
always a legal member of the Board for this reason, and for 
the additional reason that he was elected annually to the 
office of President. The six others named in the Charter as 
members of the Board of Directors severed their connection 
with the Society by resignation or otherwise, at the dates 
named below: — 

W. I. Mann — April 11, 1&92 

J. F. Smith — April 11, 1892 

J. B. Adamson — Jan. 6, 1895 

W. C. MacMillan — May 13, 1898 

Mrs. M. F. Russell — Feb. 12, 1900 

S. O. Blunden — Jan. 6, 1908 


Successors to- these six original Directors were never elected by 
the shareholders, as the law expressly requires; hence for 
more than twenty years there was not a full and complete 
legal Board of Directors. Since Brother Russell, as President
, and two others as Vice-President and Secretary -Treasurer
, were legal Directors by virtue of their annual election 
as officers, and since Brother Russell controlled the Society by 
reason of having a majority of the voting shares, the fact 
that there was not a complete and legal Board worked no 
injury to the Society. 

Prior to 1908 Brother Russell held a majority of the voting
 shares by reason of the fact that he had contributed the 
major portion of the money to the Tract Fund. Thereafter 
the donations increased until within a short time Brother 
Russell held approximately one-third, and by 1916 he held 
only about one-fifth of the voting shares. The law requires 
the annual election to be held in Pennsylvania, hence after 
1908, when the headquarters were located in Brooklyn, most of 
the voting was done at Pittsburgh by proxy. Brother Russell 
always received all the votes that were cast. For the years 
1914 to 1916 inclusive, his shares were not voted at all. Fot 
the election of January, 1917, the proxies were sent out according
 to the custom that had been in vogue since 1909; 
hence most of the voting at the 1917 election was done at 
Pittsburgh by proxy. 

The provision of the law requiring the Directors to he 
elected annually by the shareholders is a wise one. If the 
Directors were permitted to hold office for life and to elect 
their successors, then it would be possible for seven men to 
absolutely and perpetually control the affairs of the Society 
in utter disregard of the wishes of the shareholders. This 
the law will not permit. 

WHO ARE ENTITLED TO VOTE 

The shareholders, in fact, constitute tjic corporation, or the 
constituent body. The shareholders are those who have contributed
 money to carry on the work of the Society. Every 
ten dollars contributed at one time, counts for one vote. Paragraph
 V of the Charter provides for issuing certificates of 
membership covering such contributions. This certificate of 
membership is purely a personal right to vote and cannot be 
transferred. When a person holding a certificate dies, the 
value of such certificates likewise dies. No one else could 
vote such certificates of shares. Many of the brethren have 
donated money to the Society, and have never received any 
certificates and are wondering why this is so. In 1894 Brother 
Russell issued this statement concerning these certificates: — 
"We have regularly printed certificates which for a time 
were sent out to those who contributed $10.00 or multiples
 thereof; but they made trouble and extra letter-writing 
because many of the Lord's sheep have little knowledge of 
business. Some supposed that the certificates were appeals 
for money; others could not tell what to make of them, and 
wrote for full particulars as to how they should vote, etc.; 
others feared that the owning of the certificates brought them 
into liability for any debts which the Society might contract
. It required patience and took time from more important
 work to answer scores of such letters; and we concluded 
that we had made a mistake, as far as the certificates were 
concerned. However, a full record is kept of all donations and 
of voting-shares." 

It has been difficult to keep track of the contributors because
 of the frequent change of address and many times 
change of name, as where a sister, having donated money, 
subsequently marries. At annual elections the Society has 
faithfully endeavored to locate more than a majority of the 
Shareholders*and send them notice by mail of Buch meeting. 
This year, the notice of election being published in The 
Watch Toweb, all who have contributed will have the opportunity
 of taking advantage o£ the voting privilege. The 
By-law of the Society now in force governing certificates of 
voting shares and the voting of same, is as follows, to wit: 

"1. Certificates of membership may he issued to any one 
entitled thereto, and shall be signed by the President and the 
Secretary and sealed with the corporate seal. Every person 
contributing ten dollars or more at any one time to the 
funds of the said Society shall be entitled to one vote, at 
any annual or special election held by the corporation, for 
every ten dollars so contributed. And the following words 
endorsed upon the Proxy when signed and sealed by the Secretary
 shall constitute a certificate of authority to vote the 
number of shares named therein, to wit : 

"I hereby certify that of 

is entitled to cast votes at the annual election of the 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, to be held on the 
day of January, A. D., 191 . .. 

"2. Certificates of stock are not subject to transfer, the 


[6163] 


(329-330) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyk, N. Y. 


right to vote being a personal right, which ceases with the 
death of the party having such right, or when such person 
becomes opposed to the work or policy of this Society. Any 
person making contributions to the funds of the Society may 
at the time of making such contribution request that the voting
 share be granted to some other person or persons named at 
the time." 

Pursuant to the above notice the next annual election will 
be held at Pittsburgh, January 5th, 1918, in Carnegie Hall, at 
which time and place any shareholder may appear in person 
and cast his vote, or he may appoint some one else as his 
proxy to vote in his place and stead. 

Ilie legal form of proxy for such an election is as follows: 
FORM OF PROXY 

I, > of 

(Your came) 

, do hereby make, 

(Your address) 

constitute a-nd appoint of 

(Name of proxy) 

my lawful proxy and at- 

( Address) 
torney for me and in my name, place and stead to appear at 
the meeting of the Shareholders of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society to be held at Pittsburgh, Allegheny County, 
State of Pennsylvania, on the 5th day of January, 1918, at 
ten o'clock in the forenoon, and at any adjourned or subsequent
 session of said annual meeting, and then and there to 
cast the number of votes to which I shall be entitled, in the 
election of Directors and Officers of said Society, and for 
the transaction of any other business that may require the votes 
of Shareholders; and my proxy shall have and exercise all the 
powers that I have or could exercise if personally pTesent. 

WITNESS MY HAND AND SEAL this dav 

of 191.. 

( Sign Here) 

ENDORSEMENT: 

I hereby certify that of 

is entitled to cast 

votes at the annual election of the Watch Tower Bible anp 
Tract Society to be held on the 5th day of January, A. D. 
1918. 

(SIGNED) 

[Seal.] Secretary. 

The foregoing endorsement is a form of certificate. When 
the proxy is duly signed and presented to the Secretary, he 
will ascertain from the hooks the number of votes the person 
signing the proxy is entitled to vote and will endorse the authority
 of the shareholder or his proxy to cast such number 
of votes at the election. 

Every proxy with the certificate endorsed thereon must 
be presented to the Secretary and signed and sealed by him 
before it will constitute an authority to vote at the election. 

A proxy is a general power of attorney, whereby the shareholder
 delegates to another the power and authority to vote 
in his name, place and stead. Hence, it is not proper to 
write on the proxy the name of the person or persons for 
whom votes shall be cast. However, the one holding the 
proxy would desire to respect the wish of the shareholder; 
and that he might know that wish, it would be proper that 
the shareholder attach to his proxy a letter of instruction, 
advising his proxy or substitute as to the person or persons 
for whom he may desire such votes cast — provided, of course, 
such person or persons .are nominated. It would not be reasonable
 to expect that every one who holds such instruction 
would be required to nominate any such person named— for 
this reason: Brother A may hold proxies from a dozen different
 persons, each of whom instructs him to vote those proxies 
for as many different persons, and it would be inconsistent 
for him to nominate opposing candidates. The obligation of 
the one holding a proxy is to. vote for those who are placed 
before the convention. 

We are inserting a loose leaf, which is an exact replica 
of the above proxy, and which each person may use to fill 
out, sign and return to Brother W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
, 13-17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, New York. He will place 
the proper endorsement thereon and deliver the same either 
to the shareholder or to his proxy in ample time to vote at 
the election. 

OKDBB OP BISECTION 
At the ensuing annual election, a Board of Directors of 
seven members will first be elected. The present members of 
the Board are: — 

J. F. Rutherford, A. H. Ma cm il Ian, 

A. N. Pierson, W. E. Spill, 

W. E. Van Amburgh, J, A. Bohnet, 

Geo. H. Fisher. 


The following persons also claim to be members of the 
Board: — 

A. I. Ritchie, I. F. Hoskins, 

R. H. Hirsh, J. D. Wright. 

The shareholders may vote for any of these or none of them, 
as they choose; they may vote for any shareholder they desire. 
After the Board of Directors is elected, then from amongst 
their number the officers of the corporation will be elected, 
It is the desire that all shareholders attend in person it 
possible; but since many of them live at a long distance, it 
will probably be necessary for many to send their proxies 
to other persons. Proxies, of course, should be given only 
to those who are fully consecrated, who are in harmony with 
the Society, and who also hold voting shares and have the 
best interests of the work at heart. A shareholder can give 
his or her proxy to any person who possesses the above qualifications
. (A proxy should be given only to one who i3 expected
 to attend the meeting in person.) In addition to the 
officers and members of the Board of Directors of the Society
 who will be personally present at the annual meeting, 
we are advised of the following persons who expect to be 
there, to wit: C. H. Anderson, Baltimore, Md., C. H. Ward, 
Cumberland, Md., A. M. Zimmerman, Lancaster, Pa,, B. 0. 
Rutledge, New Brighton, Pa., and E. 0. Chambers, Butler, 
Pa. We merely name these for the convenience of any who 
might not know to whom they could give a proxy. 

It is desirable that all of these proxies be in the hands of 
the Secretary on or before the tenth day of December, in 
order to afford ample time for him to ascertain from the 
books the number of votes each person is entitled to cast, 
and to endorse the same upon the certificate attached to the 
proxy, and thus to have it ready for the annual election, 

VOIOB OF THE CHURCH— THE WILL OF GOD 

It has been suggested that only a small portion of the consecrated
 of the International Bible Students Association 
are in fact shareholders of the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society. Many of the Lord's dear children are poor in 
this world's goods, yet they have given all their time for 
several yaars to faithful service in the harvest field. Unless 
one is a contributor to the Tract Fund he is not entitled to 
a vote. The following letter very well expresses the situation : 
"Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

"Pardon me if I am obtruding, but I feel constrained to 
offer the following thoughts and suggestions which have been 
upon my mind of late: 

"Don't you think that, with the present mode of electing 
officers and servants of our Society, there is a possibility of 
a few of the large shareholders controlling the election and 
the Society against the approval of the large majority of its 
members? Would this not be Lucre speaking for the Lord? 
Might it not be the manifested will of the adversary instead 
of the manifested will of God? In my opinion, some change 
should be made, throwing the election of officers in the hands 
of all its members as it now prevails in our ecclesias, giving 
each one an equal voice, and imposing equal responsibility upon 
all. As it now is, some brother possessing the money talent 
could have 5,000 votes, while many others have none. While 
it was right for THAT SERVANT, who was the largest contributor
, organizer, and charterer, to control in his lifetime, 
it doesn't seem right for any one, or for a minority, to control
 after his death. And again, we must remember that his 
votes were always on the side of the majority. 

"As our dear Brother Russell advocated that the largest 
MAJORITY should be accepted as the expressed will of the 
Lord, I would suggest your advocacy of all the classes throughout
 the land indicating their choice for officers and servants 
of the Society by vote, and the result be sent to some designated
 brother, and a committee be appointed to act with him 
to carefully canvass the votes and make a report to the 
annual meeting, thereby showing the sentiment of the friends 
throughout the land. 

"Surely all faithful, voting children of God would wish 
all other members of the body to have an equal voice in the 
selection of its official members, and would be thankful for 
just such an opportunity to properly use their money talent 
in casting their votes for the majority's preference; thereby 
relieving themselves of the great responsibility that now rests 
upon them. The spirit of the faithful is an acquiescing one 
to the majority's opinion, a submission of personal preference, 
will, judgment, etc., to the manifested choice of the Lord; 
while the refusing to do so indicates a self-opinionated, selffilled
, self-judgment condition. 

"I make these suggestions because I recognize the majority 
rule to be the expressed will of the Lord in such matters, 
and think that we should be submissive to the results even 
though the Lord may see fit to permit the adversary to con- 


[6164] 


Nov*MBMt 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(330-333) 


trol for the time, which would evidently be for the purpose 
of testing and trying our hearts and wills, to see whether or 
not our hearts are right, and our wills submissive. It does 
seem that our final trials will NOT be along doctrinal lines 
as in the past, but will be along the line of the WILL, the 
foundation of our consecration. 

"Hoping you will not think me presumptuous in expressing 
the above thoughts, and assuring you of my heartiest cooperation
, I remain, 

"Yours in the love and service of our Redeemer." 

"A. B. Dabney." 

A SUGGESTED METHOD 

The Board of Directors and officers of the Society desire 
to have a full and fair expression of the church as to who 
shall constitute their servants in an official capacity. The 
sentiment expressed in the above letter seems to be very 
just. We therefore make the following suggestions: that 
every Ecclesia of the International Bible Students Association
 to whom this notice goes, hold a general congregational 
meeting for the purpose of voting upon their choice for members
 of the Board of Directors and Officers of the Society. 
Tn order that this might be carried out in a uniform manner, 
we outline the following method of procedure, to wit: 

That on Wednesday, November 21st, at 7:30 p. m., all the 
ecclesias assemble at their usual meeting place; that every 
member of the class that is known to be fully consecrated be 
permitted to cast one vote in the class, of which he or she 
is a member; that the vote be first taken as to who shall 
constitute the members of the Board of Directors for the ensuing
 year, and then that another vote be taken as to who 
should constitute the officers ; and that full report of the result 
of this vote be made to a person designated to receive the 
same. That such person may be entirely removed from the 
influence of the officers of the Society, we name Brother 
Eliot H. Thomson, 1357 Oak Street, N. W., Washington, 
D. G., as the one to whom all reports or results of class votes 
shall be made, and Brothers General W. P. Hall and J. T. D. 
Pyles, of Washington, D. C, as two other members of a 
committee who, together with Brother Thomson, shall carefully
 canvass the vote and report the result to the Secretary 
of the Society, which report shall be read by the Secretary 
before the annual meeting for the information of the shareholders
 prior to the casting of the legal vote. 

Of course, we all understand that this vote taken by the 
classes will not constitute a legal election, but may be considered
 as advisory, or in the nature of instructions to the 
Shareholders as to what is the will of the church at large. 
We believe that this would be the better way of ascertaining 
the Lord's will; and since all the Shareholders will desire 
to do the Lord's will, they would doubtless desire to be governed
 by the expressed wish of a majority of the members 
of the Ecclesias. We cannot see that any one could have 
an objection to this method of ascertaining the Lord's will 
and it would be entirely fair to all. 

We submit the following form of report which can be 
made out and signed by the Chairman and the Secretary 
of each congregation and mailed to Brother Thomson, Washington
, D. C, as above suggested, to wit: 


CHURCH'S REPORT 

At a meeting of the Ecclesia at 

held on the 21st day of November, 1917, at 7:30 p. m., at 
the usual meeting place, for the purpose of ascertaining and 
expressing the will of the members as to who shall constitute 
the officers and servants of the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, we report the following result: 

We first voted upon who shall constitute members of the 
Board of Directors, and the vote stood as follows: 
Name Votes received 


The vote for Officers was as follows: 
For President Votes received . 


Vice-President 
Secy. & Treas. 


We hereby certify that the above and foregoing is a true 
and accurate record of the vote of said ecclesia as taken at 
the time and place above mentioned: 

SIGNED 

Chairman of meeting. 


Secretary of meeting. 
EXPLANATORY 

The purpose of the above arrangement is that every consecrated
 Bible Student may have an opportunity to express 
his or her choice for members of the Board of Directors and 
also for the officers. Therefore at each meeting each and 
every one should be privileged to vote for whomsoever they 
desire and the record should be made; for instance, if John 
Doe Teceives one vote, his name should be put down and his 
vote recorded, and if Richard Roe receives 100 votes, his 
name should be recorded and the number of votes he received. 
The names of the present Board of Directors, also four who 
claim to be Directors, and the names of the present officers 
of the Society are given above. No one is bound to vote 
for either of the persons named; he may vote for whom he 
desires, the purpose of this arrangement being to ascertain 
the will of the Lord through the expression of his people. 

At each ecclesia it should be well noted that no one is 
permitted to participate in the voting unless he is both fully 
consecrated and a member or regular attendant of that particular
 ecclesia. It is therefore decidedly important that each 
ecclesia meet and cast their votes the same day; hence, we 
have named Wednesday, November 2 1st, at 7:30 p. m. 

The Secretary of the ecclesia should mail the report to 
Brother E. H. Thomson, 1357 Oak St., N. W., Washington, 
D. C. immediately after the vote is taken. 


NEHEMIAH'S PRAYER ANSWERED 

[The first and ninth paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Colaborers with God," published in issue 
of November 1, 1911. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled "Nehemiah's Faith and Works," 
published in issue of November 1, 1899. Please see the articles named. 1 

while seeking to restrain this quality of our being as respects 
evil doing and injury to others, learn to exercise it kindly, 
lovingly, in opposing wrong, in "earnestly contending for 
the faith once delivered to the saints." And so with all the 
so-called baser organs of our fallen, unbalanced humanity. 
They may all be turned to usefulness and helpfulness if but 
rightly directed by our wills and by the spirit of a sound 
mind — "the mind of the Lord." 


In our experience in character building, the same lesson of 
turning everything to good account mav be profitably applied. 
For instance, if by nature we are quick and impulsive, let 
U3 seek not only to restrain such impulsiveness from speaking 
evil and wrong, but to exercise it in the speaking of that 
which is good and profitable for edifying, gradually accustoming
 ourselves to use this talent in a favorable manner, not in 
an unfavorable one. Have we large combativeness, let us, 


A PSALM OF THANKSGIVING 

[ Excepting the paragraph below, this article was a reprint of that entitled ' ' Praise Ye the Lord, ' f published in issue of May 

1, 1892, which please see.] 


Gratitude is one of the divinely implanted instincts of a 
soul bearing the image of God, and one which therefore should 
be carefully cultivated. It is this element of character in man 
which makes fellowship and communion with God possible. 
If the goodness of God could awaken in us no sense of grateful
 appreciation, if we were wholly dead to such sentiments, 
there could be no pleasure on God's part in manifesting his 
goodness to us, and there, would be nothing in ua to call out 


his love or to inspire love in us. But since it is for the 
divine pleasure that we are and were created, God has endowed 
his intelligent creatures with this element of character which, 
being responsive to his own goodness, institutes a lively and 
delightful fellowship with himself; and this fellowship is 
the chief end of existence, both on the aide of the creature 
and on that of the Creator. — Revelation 4:11. 

Viewed from this standpoint, thankfulness of heart is a 


[6165] 


(333-326) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


very sure sign of the character which God is seeking, especially
 in matters pertaining to our great salvation. Yet 
amongst all those who have been justified by faith — cleansed 
from their iniquities and covered with the robe of Christ's 
righteousness-^how few, comparatively, there are who carry 
out in full their consecration of themselves to God — their 
reasonable service. Only the truly thankful are constrained 
to do so — only the truly appreciative. Let us each and all 
seek to cultivate more and more the spirit of thankfulness, 
the "reasonable" spirit or disposition. Thankfulness will 
make every trial and sacrifice on our part seem small and 
proportionately easy to be offered; and it will make all of 
God's mercies and favors toward us proportionately grand, 
great and inspiring. 

Today's study expresses the heart sentiment of every truly 
consecrated child of God. The more we come into possession 
of the spiritual blessings which the Lord has promised us, and 
which we have accepted by faith, the more need shall we 
have of humility; and our humility will be proportionate to 
our appreciation of divine goodness and our thankfulness 
therefor. The grateful, thankful heart may go on from grace 
to grace, from strength to strength, from knowledge to 
knowledge, from attainment to attainment; but if gratitude 
begins to wane and if our advantages are accepted either as 
matters of our own attainment or of good luck, in that same 
proportion we shall find ourselves growing cold spiritually. 
Moreover, with unthankfulness will come unholiness, spiritual 
pride and self-conceit; and all of this will lead to spiritual 
dearth and, if persisted in, to spiritual death. 

FRIOE DEPOSITED WITH DIVINE JUSTICE 

Ever since Jesus died, the ransom-price has been in the 
hands of divine Justice — in the Father's hands, where our 
Lord placed it at the time of his death. But it is there only 
as a deposit; for the time has not yet come for it to be paid 
over oifltcially for Adam and his posterity. If the divine 
plan had been for Jesus to take possession of the world and 
to set up his kingdom at Pentecost, then it wouuld have been 
proper for him to pay over to the Father the ransom-price 


fully and completely — appropriating it as the offset to father 
Adam's sin and sentence on behalf of all his raae. If that 
Price had been formally paid over, the proper and logical 
thing would have been for the Father to put the whole world 
immediately into the hands of our Lord Jesus, and for the 
Millennial age to begin. 

God did not wish, however, to turn the kingdom over 
to our Lord until the great seventh day, the Millennium; 
for he had another feature of his plan to be worked out 
rirst. He purposed that during the intervening more than 
eighteen centuries a church class should be called out from 
amongst mankind, to be the bride and joint-heir of his iSon 
in, the kingdom. Hence the ransom-price for the sins of the 
whole world Was merely left unappropriated, while he dealt 
with the church. And since the Father's plan for the church 
was that they should sacrifice or surrender their earthly 
interests and receive instead heavenly interests and the divine 
nature, therefore it was not necessary to give the church 
restitution — the thing which the ransom-price will secure for 
the world of mankind. Hence, instead of giving the church 
a share in the ransom blessings, which would mean restitution
, the divine provision for them is different: namely, an 
imputation of merit covering their blemishes, so that they 
might present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable
 to God. 

All, therefore, that our Lord Jesus has done with the 
ransom-price is to impute the value arising therefrom to 
cover the shortcomings of those who desire to become his 
disciples and joint-heirs. The benefit to them is the same as 
though they had full restitution, for they are fully justified 
from all sin, and are thus permitted to be accepted of the 
Father as members of the house of sons, by the begetting 
of the holy Spirit. Shortly the church shall be completed, 
and later presented before the Father blameless and unreprovable
, without any of our present mental, moral and physical
 diseases and weaknesses, and in the full possession of 
the new life and the new resurrection bodies. 


BEREAN STUDIES IN VOLUME VII. STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

IAs these questions are to be had in book form we do not reproduce them here.] 

IF THEY ONLY KNEW 


Jerusalem, Jerusalem, hadst thou but known 

Thy day of visitation, hadst thou recognized 

Messiah in thy midst, would not tny Pharisees, 

With scoffing priests and populace, have vied to do 

Him homage! Dost thou think the Master e'er had been 

Footsore and weary! Would there not have stood by day, 

By night, full threescore chariots ready at his call! 

Ah, me! If they had only known, dost thinje the feast 

At Simon's house had been the only one thus spread; 

Or would He e'er have need to say, ''The birds have nests, 

The foxes of the earth have holes, but I, the Son 

Of Man, no place to lay my head!" Jerusalem, 

Would not thy palace gates have opened wide to him, 

The Alpha and Omega, Prophet, Priest and King! 

Ah me! Had they but known, in all the centuries since, 


The chosen few who bravely followed in his steps, 

Dost think earth's great ones would have left them lonely, 

poor, 
Despised? Would they have driven proudly by in state, 
The while "his feet" pressed wearily the wayside dust? 
All ye who often long, like Mary, to have poured 
The precious ointment on his head, remember this: 
His words are true today as then, that, "Inasmuch 
As ye have done it unto one of these, the least 
Of mine, it hath been done to me!" Ah, yes! and e'en 
A cup of water shall not fail of its reward, 
Because 'twas given in* the name of Christ, the Lord, 
Then, let us ever seek to find and humbly serve 
His "little ones"; for thus we do it unto him." 


Vou XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., NOVEMBER 15,1917 


No. 22 


THE PRICE OF EXALTATION 

'Be clothed with humility; for God reaisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under 
the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." — 1 Peter 5:5, 6. 

Now He has come, and the kingdom is being inaugurated. Many 
have already been exalted, while others are patiently waiting 
the day of their glorification. The latter must shortly finish 
their course. The time of the exaltation of the last members 
of the body of Ohrist is drawing nigh; hence the importance 
of the words of St. Peter in our text. All truly consecrated 
desire exaltation; therefore the importance of learning well 
the rules, that pertain to the heavenly way. 

THE MAJESTY OF JEHOVAH GOD 

True humility is that condition of mind or heart which 
causes one to have a proper appreciation of his own worth and 
tho worth of others, and to realize the value to himself of the 
robe of Christ's righteousness. It is that condition of mind 
which impels one always to keep the Lord in view and himself 
out of sight. All who have the robe of Christ's righteousness 
received it only after a full consecration to give up self-will 
and to do the will of God. To continue in such position of 


Who would dare, without divine authorization, to entertain
 a hope of membership in the royal family of heaven ! Yet 
not only is this hope held out to some, but such is the positive 
promise of Jehovah to those who, having been called to that 
high position and begotten of the holy Spirit of God, meet 
the requirements, continuing faithful unto death. The nearer 
we come to the time of exaltation, the greater is the thrill in 
contemplating the marvelous change. 

The Gospel age is closing with the greatest events of all 
time. The grave import of this hour will never be fully realized 
and appreciated until it is passed; indeed, it cannot be. For 
nearly nineteen hundred years the school of Christ has been in 
operation ; and during this time God has been inviting some 
to enter this school, with the promise of full graduation and 
exaltation to those who truly learn the lesBona,that are therein 
taught, In times past some faithful one* have made progress 
in tins school, have finished their course, have been approved, 
graduated, and set aside to. await the coming of the great King. 


[6166] 


November 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(339-340) 


favor, one must continue to be submissive to the will of the 
heavenly Father. 

False humility is that condition of mind or heart which 
causes one to make an outward ^how of humility to the world, 
whereas in reality there is pride in I113 heart. Some deceive 
themselves in this very respect. 

The hand is a symbol of power. In this text, the "Hand of 
God 51 symbolizes the mighty power of God, lovingly exercised 
in behalf of his children. 

But why should any one humble himself? Is not every 
intelligent creature endowed with free moral agency, with the 
privilege of doing according to his own will? Even so! Is 
not the creature's will his chief asset? To this we also agree. 
Why, then, should we be asked to humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God? Who is God that we should surrender 
our wills to him? The correct answer to this question shows 
why it is for the best interests of each one to submit his will 
to the will of God, and walk humbly before him. 

The Scriptures answer that God is the great "First Cause" 
of all things, the "Eternal One," the "Immortal One." "Justice 
and Judgment are the habitation of his throne." (Psalm 89:14) 
He changes not; for he is "the Father of lights, with whom 
is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.*' (James 1:17) 
He never fails in any of his good promises. All of his promises 
are good. All of his works are perfect. 

His wisdom is perfect. He made the planets, the moon, 
the sun, the stars, and has so nicely balanced each one of these 
myriads of heavenly bodies that they move through Bpace 
without noise or hindrance. Of him the Prophet declares that 
he "measures the waters of the deep in his hand and metes out 
the heavens with the span; he comprehends the dust of the 
earth in a measure, and weighs the mountains in scales, and 
the hills in a balance; he takes counsel with no one, and no 
one instructs him or shows him what is understanding." 
(Isaiah 40:12-14) When King David caught a slight glimpse 
of the creation of God, in worshipful adoration he exclaimed, 
"0 Lord, how manifold are thy works; in wisdom hast thou 
made them all; the earth is full of thy riches!" (Psalm 
104:24) Jehovah God is so wise that he never makes a mistake
. He cannot err. His will is always right and perfect. 

The power of Jehovah is without limitation. We behold
 a mighty ship tossed by the raging waves of the sea, as 
though it were a little shell ; and we marvel at the power exhibited
. Then we are reminded that it was God who made the 
seas and shut the doors thereof, until in his own due time he 
was pleased to have the waters break forth from the heavens. 
"Thou rulest the raging of the sea; when the waves thereof 
arise, Thou stillest them. . , 1 . Thou hast a mighty arm; 
strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand." (Psalm 89:9, 
13) "Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are 
counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he takoth 
up the isles as a very little thing. . . . All nations before him 
are as nothing: and they are counted to him less than nothing, 
and vanity." — Isaiah 40:15, 17. 

In the exercise of his power, according to his own good 
pleasure and in his own due time, God created the earth as 
a place for the habitation of his intelligent human creature, 
man. The angelic hosts of heaven watched the progressive acts 
of the great Creator; and when he laid the foundations of the 
earth, a thrill of ecstasy pervaded heaven, the morning stars 
sang together and all tfie sons of (rod (angels, cherubim and 
seraphim) shouted for joy. — Job 38:4-7. 

Love finds a perfect expression in Jehovah! God is love. 
His loving kindness goes out to all his creatures. Love is 
an unselfish desire to do good to others. The greatest expression
 of love is the putting of this desire in operation at great 
cost or sacrifice, for the benefit of others. The holy angels 
have experienced God's living kindness. At great cost he manifested
 his love to man. He sacrificed the dearest treasure of 
his heart in providing for mankind redemption and an opportunity
 for everlasting life with abundant blessings to those 
who gladly humble themselves under his mighty hand. 

Too wise to err, too good to be unkind, hi3 power always put 
to a righteous use, his promises sure, without possibility of deviation
 therefrom, his will could be exercised only for the good 
of all his creatures. Why, then, should any intelligent creature
 in heaven or in earth have any hesitancy in humbling himself
 under the mighty hand of God? 

The answer to this question discloses two opposing forces 
which have always existed; namely, good and evil. Good has 
always been active, while evil became active only after the 
creation of man. The course of evil lead**to debasement, degradation
 and death; while the course of good leads to life 
everlasting, exaltation and pleasures forevermore. Such are 
the fixed laws «f Jehovah. All of* God's intelligent creatures 


have been, or will be, given an opportunity to appreciate the 
outworkings of those laws. 

CONTENDING FOBCES OPERATING IN THE EARTH 

Behold a great drama opens with the earth aa the stage 
of action! All the intelligent creatures of heaven and earth, 
either as players or as observers, are being offered an opportunity
 to learn the lessons inculcated. The first act is 
staged in Eden, {he garden of God, the home of a perfect man 
and woman, the happy, joyful pair. — Enter Lucifer. 

The Prophet Ezekiel tells us that Lucifer was a beautiful 
creature; that every good fruit of character was his adornment
; that he held a high position amongst God's holy angels, 
and that he was appointed as the care-taker of the innocent 
pair in Eden. He was highly honored, but not the most highly 
honored. — Ezekiel 28:12-15. 

When Lucifer beheld Adam and Eve, he marked that they 
had the power of propagating their kind — a thing unknown to 
the angels of heaven. Pride and ambition soon began to 
operate. He lost confidence in God, He meditated in his heart 
that if he could capture these perfect creatures, who had the 
power to multiply their own species, in the course of time the 
earth would be inhabitatcd by a perfect race of people, and he 
could have a kingdom of his own, with all mankind under his 
control. He had not been sent to earth to carry out his own 
ambitions, but to do God's will. But he was not willing to 
humble himself under the mighty hand of God and tender 
faithful service in the place where he had been put. On the 
contrary, he said in his heart, "I will ascend into heaven; I 
will exalt my throne above the stars [spiritual hosts of God] ; 
I will sit upon the mount of the congregation [have a kingdom
 of my ownl, in the sides of the north [next unto Jehovah! ; 
I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like 
the Most High."— Isaiah 14:13, 14. 

To accomplish his purpose he resorted to fraud and deceit
. He destroyed Eve's confidence in God by telling her that 
she had certain rights; that she should stand for principle, 
and not permit God to deprive her of such rights; that God 
knew that the very day when she would eat of the fruit she 
would become as wise as himself; and that to prevent her from 
coming into her own rights God was deceiving her. Eve Vas 
deceived by Lucifer, and Adam afterwards joined in the transgression
. 

Satan's ambitious desire for exaltation resulted in his 
own downfall, and brought the curse of God upon man, entailing
 great sorrow, suffering and death upon humanity. ,, Lucifer
 then became the wicked creature since known as "that old 
serpent, Satan, the devil/' who God has decreed shall suffer 
everlasting destruction, — Elzek, 28:18; Hebrews 2:14. 

ANGELS OF HEAVEN DEBASED 

The angelic hosts of heaven had watched the development 
of the great drama, and beheld the suffering, sorrow and death 
that came to the earth. Later, by Jehovah's permission, some 
of them took upon themselves the forms of men, with the 
avowed purpose of uplifting mankind. But they soon forgot 
to be obedient to Jehovah, failing to humble themselves under 
his mighty hand. They pursued a course contrary to his will, 
by taking unto themselves wives from amongst the human 
race and debauching the human family until the earth was 
filled with violence. The course of these materialized angels 
became wicked in the superlative degree; and so vile were the 
off-spring of this unholy union that God declared his purpose of 
destroying all flesh from the earth. — Genesis 6:1-8. 

Noah, however, found favor in God's sight, humbling himself
 under Jehovah's mighty hand; and Noah's family joined 
him i» the course of righteousness. God instructed Noah to 
prepare for the coming deluge which would destroy everything 
on the earth. He attempted to proclaim to the people the coming
 end- of the then existing order. They heeded him not. The 
great deluge fell upon the earth, and all fleshly creatures were 
destroyed, except those saved with Noah in the ark. The angels 
who had materialized in human form had also the power of 
dematerialization, and therefore were not destroyed. Instead, 
they were incarcerated in darkness, restrained from further 
mingling with the human-kind, cast down into earth's atmosphere
, there to await their great day of judgment* (2 Peter 
2:4; Jude 6) They had chosen the course of pride and selfwill
, and the result was their degradation and los-s of favor 
with God. 

THE LOGOS 

After the Flood, Satan continued his opposition to God. 
To further his ambitious desire, he blinded the minds of the 
human race by deceiving them and leading them to believe 
that God is a great fiend, who would cause them to be tortured 
throughout the endless ages. He taught mankind that they 
had immortal souls which can never die, and cited himself as 


[6167] 


(341-342) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


an example. The whole human race fell under his control, only 
a few exceptions here and there who, breaking away from him, 
exercised faith in God, Satan gradually became the chief or 
head over all the hosts of demons, and continued his deceptive 
and nefarious work amongst the human family. 

The first and only- begotten creation of Jehovah was the 
Logos. After his creation he became the active agent of God 
in the creation of all things, Lucifer and all the holy angels of 
heaven included. (Revelation 3:14; Col. 1:15; John 1:1-3) 
All his works of creation were perfect. Observing the progress 
of the great drama, the Logos witnessed the result of the ambitious
 course of Lucifer and noted how it had dragged down 
from heaven many of the holy angels and had transformed the 
pure, beautiful human pair, Adam and Eve, into suffering, imperfect
, dying creatures. He marked how this wrongful course 
had plunged the entiTe human-kmd into the depths of sorrow, 
sin and death. 

For four thousand year3 the Logos beheld this course working
 injury to mankind. But he was .willing to abide Jehovah's 
own good time to take some step to undo the great wrong 
that Satan had done. The Logos was always in harmony with 
the Father's will. It was the will of God that mankind should 
be redeemed from sin and death, and that everyone be given a 
full, fair trial for life. Furthermore, before the foundation 
of the world was laid God had willed that there should be a 
new creation, which should possess the divine nature as a 
great reward for faithfulness; and that it should consist of 
one Head, or Mighty One, and 144,000 associates. The One 
who would accomplish this purpose of Jehovah must be entirely
 submissive to his will, must humble himself under the 
mighty hand of God. The Logos, being advised by Jehovah 
of his purposes, undertook to carry out God's great plan. 

Although occupying a position of great honor and glory 
with the Father in heaven, and possessing the riches of the 
spiritual realm, as an honored representative of Jehovah, the 
Logoe left the heavenly courts, and was changed from spirit 
to human nature. His humility -and full obedience are shown 
by the course he took: "Who though being in God's form, yet 
did not mediate a usurpation to be like God, but divested himself
 [of heavenly glory and power], took a bondsman's form, 
having been made in the likeness of man." JPhilippians 2; 6, 7 
— Diaglott) How unlike the course of Lucifer! The contrast 
could not be more striking. "We see Jesus, who was made a 
little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned 
wi^h glory and honor, that he, by the grace of God, should 
taste death for every man" — Jesus, who being in condition as 
a man, humbled himself, becoming "obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross." — Hebrews 2:9; Philippians 2:8 — 
Diaglott. 

OTO LORD'S GLOBIOUS EXAMPLE 

As a man our Lord was perfect in every respect, at the 
age of thirty years. He possessed a perfect human will, which 
he might have exercised to his own glory and honor. He had 
the power to produce a perfect race of people, filling the earth 
and ultimately receiving from them all the honor, plaudits, 
homage and glory that a perfect race could bestow upon a 
perfect man. He might have accomplished the very thing that 
Lucifer ambitiously desired. But it was the will of God 
concerning Jesus that he should die upon the cross, being made 
a sin-offering in behalf of man, to the intent that man might 
be restored to life if he would render himself in full obedience 
to God's will. We hear Jesus saying, "Lo, I come, as in the 
volume of the Book written of me, to do thy will, my God." 
(Hebrews 10:7) "For I came down from heaven not to do 
Mine own will, hut the will of him that sent me." ( John 
6:38) "I seek not mine own will; but the will of the Father 
which hath sent me.*' — John 5:30. 

Jesus deviated not one jot or tittle from the will of his 
Father. For three and one-half years he was subjected to all 
kinds of indignities. He was denounced as the chief of devils, 
as a drunkard, as a liar, as a blasphemer — all of which he 
bore patiently in obedience to the Father's will. Thus the 
mighty hand of God pressed down upon him in order that he 
might be made a sympathetic high priest and be perfected 
for the further carrying forth of his Father's plan. "He was 
oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth ; 
he was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before
 her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth." — Isaiah 
53:7; Acts 8:32-35. 

Betrayed by one whom he had especially blessed, he was 
taken before the constituted authorities, wrongfully accused 
of crime, illegally put through a trial which was a farce, subjected
 to every manner of insult, condemned without a cause 
and cruelly crucified upon the cross — the most ignominious 
death recognized by Jehovah and known to man. Yet he 
patiently submitted to it, because it was the Father's will. 


"Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted him and given him 
a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things in earth." 
—Phil. 2:10. 

Why hath Jehovah drawn such a sharp contrast between 
the two creatures — Lucifer and Jesus? For the evident purpose
 of teaching to all of his intelligent creatures his fixed 
and unchangeable law that "whosoever Bhall exalt himself 
shall be abased, and whosoever shall humble himself shall be 
exalted." (Matthew 23:12) Thus Jesus magnified the divine
 law, and proved that Jehovah is true. Thus he demonstrates
 to everyone the great value resulting to those who learn 
to humble themselves under God's mighty hand. 

NEW CBBATION TESTED BY THE SAME BULK 
Before the foundation of the world God ordained that 
Christ Jesus should have associated with him 144,000 jointheirs
 as his bride, all composing the "new creation." Each 
member of the new creation will be like the Lord, its Head. 
This side the veil such are called to be footstep followers, to 
suffer as he suffered and to be tested as he was tested. (1 
Peter 2:21; Romans 8:29; Hebrews 2:18) The great Master 
said, "Whosoever Bhall do the will of my Father which is in 
heaven, the same ia my brother." — Matt. 12:50. 

One who is called to be the brother and joint-heir of Jesus 
is greatly honored. Now he is put on trial and must be judged 
according to the fixed rule of God. God's rules change not. 
If one h proud in heart, the Lord will bring him low. If he 
properly appreciates the honor granted to him and honestly 
desires to humble himself, and does humble himself under the 
mighty hand of God, the position of honor which he has received
 from the Lord really upholds him. "A man's pride 
shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the humble in 
spirit." (Proverbs 29:23) A striking example of this is 
shown in the seventh messenger to the church. He was greatly 
honored of the Lord and his full appreciation of this honor 
made him more humble; and this humility of mind and spirit 
upheld him and m<&de him strong. 

Many ask, Why has not God destroyed the devil long ago? 
The fact that he permits Satan to live and pursue his nefarious 
work is proof that God has some good and sufficient reason 
for so doing. Jehovah desires his intelligent creatures to learn 
the lesson , that pride and ambition lead to suffering, sorrow 
and death, and that humility of mind and obedience to the 
Lord lead to life and exaltation. The church, following in the 
footsteps of Christ Jesus, the Head, must be subjected- to this 
great test in order to prove her loyalty and to demonstrate that 
Jehovah can trust her in the ages to come. To none other could 
he give the divine nature* 

Early in the drama, Jehovah announced that the seed of 
the woman should bruise the serpent's head. (Gen. 3:15) 
From then until now Satan has sought to destroy the seed, 
beginning with the murder of Abel. Since Satan is the prince 
of devils, it follows that all the evil spirits are likewise bent 
on destroying the seed, if possible. Revelation 7:1, 2 describes 
these evil ones as the "four winds of the earth," which the 
Lord Jesus det>!a*ed should not blow until his saints are sealed 
in their foreheads. It follows, then, that as soon as the sealing
 work is completed — that is to say, when all those of the 
saintly class remaining on this side the veil shall have been 
given an intellectual understanding and appreciation of the 
plan of God — then the evil spirits will get loose. The Scriptures
 show that they must have their judgment day; and they 
could not be fully judged until they are loosed. 

"The storm is held in check until the faithful servants 
of God are sealed in their foreheads; that is, until auch 
are given an intellectual appreciation of the time, presence, 
etc., which will not only comfort them and shield them, 
but also be a mark, seal, or evidence of their sonship, 
as indicated by our Lord when he promised that the holy 
Spirit should show them things to come." — Scrtptube 
Studies, Volume 2, Page 169. 

A CBTJOIAL TEST AT HAKD 
That there will then be a great conflict between the members
 of the new creation this side the veil and the fallen angels, 
there can be little doubt. To know the will of God and to be 
submissive thereto is an absolutely certain protection; hence 
the importance of seeing what the test will involve. Where 
will be the battleground ? Surely not in the hands, or feet, or 
ears! The Scriptures answer that the battleground is in the 
mind. "Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jeaua." 
(Fhilippian* 2:5) The mind of Jesus was to be fully submissive
 to the Father's will, humbling himself under God's mighty 
hand. "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind. 
(Romans 12:2) Thus the new creature is developed. 

Impressing upon the new creation the importance of the 


[6168] 


November 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(342-343) 


prize and what to do to win it, St. Paul admonishes all, saying
, "Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching 
forth unto those things which are before, press forward 
along the mark for the prize." (Philippians 3:13, 14) Surely 
the forgetting is with the mind, and likewise the contemplation
 of the glories before. Lucifer's sin was not what he did 
with his hands, but in the meditations of his heart. Undoubtedly
 the mind is the battleground. An open battleground is one 
where all obstructions are removed, that the contending forces 
may have free access. All along there have been obstructions 
which have prevented the evil spirits from attacking the new 
creation; but it must be apparent that when they are loosed 
they will have more power than ever before. 

It was the servant of the Laodicean church who wrote: — 

"The letting loose of these winds, or air powers, would 
seem to show that God would let go his hand of restraint, 
that he will have to do with the permission of the terrible 
trouble that will come. This outside influence will exercise 
a baneful effect upon men, when finally granted the liberty. 
These fallen spirits have been under restraint for these 
many centuries, but they have exercised their influence to 
whatever extent they have had permission. If they had 
possessed unlimited power they would have wrecked the 
world long ago; but tliey have been restrained. Apparently 
God will soon cease to restrain the fallen angels; and they 
will then proceed to vent their fury upon humanity, so 
that the whole earth will be full of violence, the same as 
in the days of Noah. The power manifested by the demons 
when loosed, will, we believe, be with a view to the injury 
of mankind. We do not know but that many of our readers 
will have a share in that injury. We have every reason 
to suppose that if these fallen angels shall get loose, they 
will vent their first anger upon the Lord's people. We are 
not to fear this, however, but to take whatever the Lord's 
providence permits to come, knowing that everything shall 
work for our good." — Z '14-166. 

PEIDE REMOVES ALL PROTECTION 
Pride is an inordinate self-sufficiency or self-esteem, causing
 one to feel his own greatness and importance, and to lose 
sight of the greatness of Jehovah and of the Lord Jesus. The 
humble-minded one looks at himself soberly and realizes that 
whatever position he has the Lord placed him there; for "God 
hath set the members every one of them in the bodv as it 
pleaseth him." (1 Cor. 12:18) He realizes that within himself
 there is no perfect thing; that God does not need him; 
and that the Lord Jesus would not continue to use him unless 
he walks humbly and looks unto Jesus, and not unto himself. 
While it is true that the fallen angels will have greater freedom
 to attack the new creature as we come nearer the end 
of the way, yet those who humbly obey the lord will be 
granted a sufficient armor of protection that as valiant soldiers 
of the cross they may fight a victorious battle against their 
enemies. (Ephesians 6:10-18; Psalm 91:1-7) But suppose 
one who has been long in the narrow way becomes proud 
of mind and heart. Could he hope for such continued protection
 ? The Apostle answers, "God resisteth the proud [pushes 
them away from him], and shows his favor to the humble." 
Thus we see that when one takes his mind off from the Lord, 
fills it with criticism and fault-finding of others, magnifies 
his own greatness and importance, and fails to humble himself
 under the mighty hand of God, he deprives himself of the 
protection the Lord has provided for his faithful ones. It 
was pride that caused Lucifer to fall. It was pride, or lack of 
humility, that caused the angels to fall. It is pride, or lack 
of humility, that causes others to fall. Plainly is God's will 
expressed concerning pride and ambition thus: — "but he giveth 
more grace. Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but 
giveth grace unto the humble." "The fear of the Lord is to 
hate evil; pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the 
forward mouth do I hate." "Pride goeth before destruction 
and an haughty spirit before a fall." — James 4:6; Proverbs 
8:13; 16:19. 

DAHGEE TO THE NEW CREATION 
Commenting upon the enemies of the new creation, Brother 
Russell wrote (Z '05-215): "God's people should beware of 
pride as they would avoid the most deadly plague. This rule, 
always good and well backed by Scripture, seema doubly needful
 to those who are blessed with the light of present truth. 
This may seem strange. It may be reasoned that the receiving
 of so much grander views of God's character and plan 
would make his people feel the more insignificant and humble, 
the more dependent upon divine guidance, the more trustful of 
God and the less trustful of themselves. And this should be 
the effect always and ever; but, alas, with very many this is 
not so. Many get to feel that the knowledge of the plan of 
the ages proves them especially wise or great or good. They 


seem to forget that God hides the truth from the wise and 
great, that no flesh should glory in his sight, . . . Beware of 
all such people! Sooner or later, unless they reform, they 
will fly the track entirely and injure more than they ever 
helped. God does not wish such people to serve his cause, 
and will surely permit their vanity to stumble them — however 
much their natural ability ; and it is generally the people of 
real or fancied ability who are thus afflicted with the spirit 
of pride or vanity, 'God opposeth the proud, but showeth 
his favor to the humble.' " 

Seeing, then, danger lurking in the pathway, and knowing 
that the enemy is on the alert to trip us up, what shall we 
do if we find that we are thinking too highly of self, if we 
have some ambition or pride in our heart, if we are not walking
 humbly before the Lord? The Apostle answers the question
, "Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that 
he may exalt you in due time." St. James states the same 
thing, saying, "Submit yourselves, therefore, to God. Resist 
the devil, and he will flee from you. Draw nigh to God and 
he will draw nigh unto you." (James 4:7, 8) Everyone in 
the narrow way needs the strength of the Lord manifested in 
his behalf. The proud or haughty or self-willed cannot hope 
for this favor; "For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro 
throughout the earth to show himself strong in behalf of them 
whose heart 13 perfect toward him." — 2 Chron. 16:9. 

HOW WE ASCERTAIN GOD'S WILL 

There are two general ways or modes by which the Lord's 
will toward us may be ascertained: (a) By his Word, (b) 
By his manner of dealing with us. To humble one's self under 
God's mighty hand means to know his will and to do it. God 
has expressed in his Word his will toward his children, saying
, "Study to show thyself approved unto God." (2 Timothy 
2:15) This means to study his Word and study his providences
 toward us, or his manner of dealing with us. Our 
Head set us the example. Immediately after his consecration, 
Jesus went into the wilderness and there remained forty days, 
studying the plan of Jehovah, in order to know the divine will. 
We should spend much time in study and in meditation upon 
the precious promises of the Lord, that we may know his will 
We need not expect to find in the Bible specific statements of 
everything we must do. God does not tell us just how much 
to eat and when to eat it, or what kind of clothing to wear; 
but he does lay down in his Word fixed rules or laws by which 
his creatures must be governed in order to receive the reward 
of exaltation which is in store for those that love him. 

THE PUTS' OF THE HOT/B 

Those who have diligently sought to know the will of the 
Lord may see that now we are in the close of the harvest 
period. Probably only a few more months remain in which 
to prove our loving loyalty to the Lord, Thus the time is 
fully ripe for all the truly consecrated to declare the day of 
God's vengeance upon the unrighteous systems of the world, 
in harmony with his expressed will. (Isaiah 61:1-3) To 
humble ourselves now would mean to be obedient to his commands
, doing not in our strength, but in the strength of the 
Lord, what our hands find to do, realizing we are in the last 
hours of the harvest of the Gospel age. 

Clearly, then, the command from our Captain comes to us, 
"Thrust in the sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the vine 
of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe." {Rev, 14:18) If 
we believe that this is a command from the lord, then we 
must believe that this is the Lord's will; and to humble ourselves
 under his mighty hand would mean that we would be 
obedient to his will to the extent of our opportunity and 
ability. Since the beginning of the harvest the Lord has been 
pleased to place the instrument for reaping in the hands of 
his people through his wise and faithful servant. He has 
finished his course as the Lord's servant this side the veil; and 
now the Lord promises to turn his hand upon the "little ones." 
(Zech. 13:7) God is faithful to all of his good promises. 

The sickle of the harvest is the message of truth. It is 
also called the sword. It is our opinion that the Seventh 
Volume of Studies in the Scriptures contains the message 
which is the instrument now to be used with which to reap 
the vine of the earth. 

SOME REASONS WHY 

Some, as we learn, are having difficulty in determining 
whether or not "The Finished Mystery" is the Seventh Volume 
of Studies ix the Scbiptubes. Probably they have been disturbed
 in their minds by the argument of some who have been 
developing pride and ambition. With sobriety of mind and a 
prayerful attitude, let us consider some of the reasons why 
we have the Seventh Volume. 

Revelation 16:1-17 has been understood by the consecrated 
for some time as indicating that there would be seven volumes 


[6169] 


(343-344) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


of Scbiptube Studies. Pastor Russell, as the seventh messenger
, many times stated that there would be a seventh volume 
prepared and delivered to the harvest workers; that he would 
prepare it himself if the Lord showed Jiim the key; but that 
if the Lord did not show him the key someone else would prepare
 it. He stated that the Seventh Volume would contain an 
explanation of the books of Ezekiel and Revelation. 

The Watch Towee Bible ksd Tract Society is that agency 
referred to in the words: "Another angel came out from the 
altar, which had power over fire." (Rev. 14:18) The altar is 
the place of sacrifice. The Society is maintained by the sacrifice
 of the Lord's saints. It has power (authority) over the 
publication and distribution of the prophecies that are destructive
 to Babylon. 

John the Baptist rebuked King Herod because of his unlawful
 relationship with a woman. (Matt. 14:1-12) The 
seventh messenger to the church pointed out that Herod was 
a type of the civil powers; that Herodias, the woman, was a 
type of the ecclesiastical systems composing Babylon; that 
John the Baptist typed the last members of the <?hurch this 
side the veil; and that the John class would deliver a message 
which would rebuke the unholy relationship existing between 
church and state. This message must be delivered before the 
church finishes its course in the flesh. In Revelation and Ezekiel 
Mystical Babylon, as typed by the woman, is clearly pointed 
out. The explanation of these two books as contained in the 
Seventh Volume is the message that will rebuke Babylon. If 
it is not, then one must yet be written; and it cannot be written
 without quotation from what Pastor Russell has written 
on these two books, which is already set forth in the Seventh 
Volume, 

Some have said, If the Seventh Volume contains the message
 representing the "penny", then why should it go to the 
world at all? The Prophet of the Lord, Jeremiah, "wrote in 
a book of the evil that should come upon Babylon, even all 
these words that are written against Babylon. And it shall 
be when thou hast made an end of reading this book that 
thou shalt bind a stone to it and cast it in the midst of the 
Euphrates [amongst the peoples]." (Jeremiah 51 :60-63 ) 
Surely the Seventh Volume contains an explanation of the evils 
which Babylon has practiced, and shows God's condemnation 
of her and how she shall fall ! In the type the Euphrates River 
was turned away from ancient Babylon, and the city fell. Is it 
not reasonable to conclude that when the people receive the 
message of truth concerning Mystic Babylon they will turn 
away from her, and she will fall? 

THOUGHTS TOB CAREFUL MEDITATION 

The Seventh Volume was prepared and published by and 
under the direction of Ihe Watch Tower Bible and Tbact 
Society, the messenger having power to send out truths destructive
 to Babylon. (G6; Rev. 14 : 18 ) . Pastor Russell is the 
real author, and the compilers give all the credit to him and 
to the great Lord of the harvest. From what he had written 
the compilers were enabled to understand the prophecies of 
Ezekiel and Revelation. 

It came to the church for her encouragement at a time 
of great need, as Pastor Russell had promised it should come. 

It names the seven messengers to the seven respective 
epochs of the church, giving the proof as to the correctness 
thereof. 

It proves that the key to the Seventh Volume is the Seventh 
Messenger to the church, and that for that reason he did not 
publish it. For the same reason Moses did not write his own 
eulogy.— Deut. 34:10-12. 

It names the beginning and ending of each epoch of church 
history, with the proof in support of same. 

It identifies the ancient jasper, and shows its perfect adaptation
 to the description of the heavenly Father. It shows how 
the sard represents the beauties of his character. — G-74. 

It identifies clearly the twenty-four elders.— G-76. 

It identifies the four beasts.— G-78-79. 

It shows clearly why the breaking of the seals makes 
prophecy easy to be understood, and identifies the strong 
angel inquiring who was worthy to do so. — G-97-98. 

It identifies the white horse, his rider and his weapon, 
and sh*ows where he got his crown. It identifies the red 
horse, his rider, and his butcher-knife.— G-106, 107. 

The souls under the altar are identified, and the time of 
their waiting is proven to be correct. — G-117. 

It explains and amplifies the work of the four angels holding
 the winds of the earth and the effect their blowing will 
have.-^M23-126. 

The great symbolic earthquake cannot occur until the 
Seventh Volume of Scripture Studies is published. All signs 
indicate that this earthquake is near. The Seventh Volume 
has been published. 


It shows that the Prophet Ezekiel was the prototype of 
the seventh messenger, and that the experiences of Ezekiel 
have been marvelously parallelled and fulfilled in the experiences
 of Pastor Russell. Ezekiel's prophecy, heretofore a sealed 
book, is now made clear in the closing hours Cti the harvest. It 
confirms the Lord's promise of the "faithful and wise servant/' 
and identifies him. 

It proves that Pastor Russell's seven volumes of Studies 
in the Scriptures w^re foreknown and foretold as the "thrice* 
doubled sword and its point/' and shows how it should be 
sent forth.— Ezekiel 21 ; Rev. 8. 

It shows that the clergy themselves have sown the seed of 
anarchy, and clearly outlines the reason why ecclesiasticism 
must perish. — G-5J9, 520. 

It contains the message that will set the ecclesiastical 
heavens on fire. 

The above are only a few reasons why "The Finished 
Mystery" is the long-looked-for Seventh Volume. If we believe
 that it contains the message which is the "point of the 
sword," and that we are nearing the end of the harvest, then 
surely it is the Lord's will concerning his people that they 
should use it by giving it a wide circulation. Two editions are 
practically exhausted, and the third one hundred thousand is 
on the press. 

WHAT SHALL WE IX>7 

Some are saying, "I sincerely desire to know the Lord's 
will; but how may I know it?" "Trust in the Lord with all 
thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding. In all 
thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy path!" — 
Proverbs 3:5, 6. 

Repeatedly the Lord promises to guide us with his counsel, 
and afterwards to receive us into glory. (Psalm 73:23, 24; 
32:8) We must not only trust him in our hearts, but acknowledge
 him and confess him before others. We must have 
full confidence that since we are his, he has the deepest interest 
in our welfare, Such as are careful to ackowledge him may be 
sure that he will direct their paths in all things. He will not 
direct the path of any to the satisfying of their own selfish 
desires or wills, however; nor do we wish him thus to do. But 
he will direct according to his perfect wisdom and for the 
good of those who love him supremely. 

"Could it be the Lord's will that I should colporteur the 
Seventh Volume?" someone asks. We answer, "If the message 
it contains is from the Lord, there could be no doubt about 
what his children should do. Of course they would want to put 
it out, and get the message to others." "But," says another, 
"I have declined to accept it as the Seventh Volume. Now if 
I would take a different course, I would be putting myself in a 
false light." We answer, "Is it not pride that causes one 
to take this position? Put aside pride now, and humble 
yourself under the mighty hand of the Lord. If you have 
taken the wrong course about anything for a time, and the 
Lord discloses to you that wrongful course, such a disclosure 
is a reproof to you; and he says, 'Turn you at my reproof; 
behold, I will pour out my Spirit upon you and I will make 
known my ways unto you.' "—^Proverbs 1:23. 

FULL OBEDIENCE OF VITAL IMPORTANCE 

The greatest work for us all to do is the conquering of 
self. "This is the will of God concerning you, even your 
sanctification." (1 Thessalonians 4:3) Sanctification does 
not mean human perfection. It does not mean the changing of 
our appearance, nor the removing of blemishes from out 
bodies miraculously. On the contrary, it is a devotion or 
consecration of the will, which through Christ is accepted as 
perfect. It is the consecration of the body unto death, which 
is counted acceptable through Christ. This will must bring 
every power and talent into harmony with Christ, and seek to 
exercise an influence in harmony therewith over others. 

Loyalty of heart to God's will, and hence a submission to 
his will, means a continued effort to bring all the conduct 
of our lives, even our thoughts and intentions, into subjection, 
or full submission to the will of God. Absolute holiness must 
be the standard maintained in our mind; and we must strive 
to live up to it. True submission or obedience to his will 
would mean for us that we would carefully consider the life 
and course of our High Priest, Jesus; that we would be 
diligent in Ms service and diligent in telling the truth to 
others, diligent in building each other up in the most holy 
faith and in doing good unto all as we have opportunity and 
diligent in laying down our lives for the brethren, and particularly
 in perfecting ourselves in the love of God. 

THE TESTS FOB THE CHURCH ABE GREATER THAN FOB 
THE ANGELS 
The angels were put to a great test, and many of them 
failed. The church is being put to a far greater test; for 


[6170] 


NoVRMBtR 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(345-350) 


God purposes to give the members thereof a greater reward. 
Such test of necessity entails much suffering. Important, then, 
is the question, IJow are we receiving these trials or tests? 
If we permit the fiery trials to stir up in our hearts malice, 
hatred, envy, ill-will, fault-finding, criticism and strife, this 
means that we are not humbling ourselves under the mighty 
hand of God and learning the lessons as he would have us do. 
(Proverbs 28:25) On the contrary, if these fiery trials are 
burning away the dross and working out in us the sweetness of 
character like unto our Master — namely, gentleness, kindness, 
patience, long-suffering, tender-heartedness and love — this shows 
that we are humbling ourselves under the mighty hand of God 
and profiting by it. Let each remember that since we are sons 
of God nothing can happen to us except by his permission, and 
that these trials are evidences of our sonship. (Hebrews 12:5, 
8) Willingness to suffer special trials because of our loyalty to 
God, to the cause of righteousness and to the principles of his 
government is evidence of exceptionally fine character. God is 
dealing with the new creation with a view to perfecting their 
characters to the very highest mark. 

If some of his children find themselves imprisoned or otherwise
 deprived of their liberty because of loyalty to him and his 
kingdom, let them rejoice, remembering the faithful men of 
old mentioned with honor by St. Paul. (Hebrews 11) God's 
mighty hand may press down hard upon us at times ; and if so, 
we may be sure that we have need of this very experience. We 
may know that it is permitted that we may be prepared and 
made fit for the Master's use. We should watch for his providences
 and joyfully submit to whatsoever he sees well to 
bring to us. For us the prophet wrote, "Behold, as the eyes 
of servants look unto the hand of their master, and as the 
eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress, so our eyes 
wait upon the Lord, our God, until that he have mercy upon 
us." (Psalm 123:2) And thus we are to watch his mighty 
hand, that we might see what is his will concerning us. 

It is to be noted that Jesus voluntarily submitted himself 
to the will of God, saying, "The cup that my Father hath 
poured for me, shall I not drink it?" (John 18:11) Likewise 
his followers should say: "If these trying experiences are 
necessary for me in order that I may be exalted to the position 
of joint-heir with Christ Jesus, then with joy I receive them." 

EXALTATION IN DUB TIME 
The exaltation of each one of the Lord's "little ones" will 
take place in his due time. It will be impossible for any one 
to be exalted prior to God's due time, or in any manner except
 that which the Father provides. Through his prophet he 
said, "Lift not up your horn [power] on high ; speak not with 
a stiff neck; for promotion eometh neither from the East nor 


from the West nor from the South: but God is the judge; he 
putteth down one and setteth up another." (Psalm 75:5-7) 
It is quite clear that the prophet here refers, not to those who 
have passed beyond the veil, but to those of the church who 
are still on the earth. \\ e would not expect any one to have 
a stiff neck — a stubborn, wilful disposition — after he had been 
exalted to glory. Clearly, then, this admonition was given for 
the benefit of those who hope for exaltation because of the 
precious promises given by the Father. When James and John 
asked the Master for a position of honor in his kingdom he 
said to them, "To sit on my right hand and on my left hand 
is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it 
is prepared." (Mark 10:40) Clearly, then, exaltation comes 
only to those who willingly humble themselves under the 
mighty hand of God, that they may be shaped and prepared 
for his use. 

Again, the Psalmist makes the matter clear when he asks 
the question: "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, 
and who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean 
hands and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto 
vanity nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing of 
the Lord and righteousness from the God of his salvation."- — 
Psalm 24:3-5. 

The temple standing on Mount Moriah was typical of the 
glorious temple of God. The Psalmist has here asked who will 
be accounted worthy to be exalted to the high position of 
membership in that great temple — who will be permitted to 
reign with Christ in his kingdom. Then he answers, "He that 
hath clean hands, [meaning clean actions and conduct] and a 
pure heart [meaning purity of will, intention or purpose — a 
pure heart, loving righteousness and truth but hating iniquity
] ; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity [another 
evidence that pride is an abomination to the Lord and to all 
who partake of his spirit], nor sworn deceitfully [meaning 
those who have made a covenant with the Lord and who have 
earnestly tried to keep it]." These shall receive the blessing 
that the Lord promised- in his Word, Soon the exaltation of 
the church will be completed; and then The Christ, Head and 
body, will begin the great work of reconstruction. In a thousand
 years The Christ will undo all that Satan and his associate
 evil ones have done during the past six thousand years;' 
and at the conclusion of that righteous reign Satan himself 
shall be destroyed, together with all of his wicked messengers. 
"All the proud, yea, all that do wickedly shaJl be as stubble." 
(Malaohi 4:1} Every creature will then have had. ample opportunity
 to learn the lesson that there is one mighty God 
who divideth his honor with none; and that all who render 
themselves in loving obedience to him shall be granted life 
everlasting with happiness and pleasures forevermore. 


NEHEMIAH REBUILDS THE WALLS OF JERUSALEM 

[The fourth and the last paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Nehemiah's Faith and Works," published
 in issue of December 1, 1905. The remainder was a reprint of an article also entitled "Nehemiah's Paith 
and Works," published in issue of November 1, 1899, Please see the articles named. 1 


EZRA AND NEHEMIAH TEACH THE LAW 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "The Power of the Word of God/' published in issue of November 15, 1899 5 which 

please see.] 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


SAME BEAUTIFUL SFIBIT IN THE TO WEE 

Deab BbetHBEN: — 

It has been a eource of wonder, as well as a great pleasure, 
to me to note the continued purity of The Watch Toweb 
articles, as well as that of their beautiful spirit. No one could 
tell by reading The Watch Toweb that Brother Russell was 
not editing it as of yore. 

In October 1st issue the leading article — "The Closing 
Work of Harvest" — is most timely, stirring, and pointed. 
I believe every word of it; and it deserves the most careful 
and honest study. 

We are studying the Seventh Volume here to great profit 
How we do thank the Lord for this further proof of His 
watch-care and love for us! Nothing will arouse us except 
the TRUTH, and nothing does arouse us like this blessed 
"point of the sword." 

Habvest Siftings, Part 11, has just fallen into my hands, 
and I am now glad it was gotten out, though it was my 


thought that "Light after Darkness" needed no reply. The 
spirit breathed by every line of the latter was its own condemnation
. It is the very spirit we have been trying to get 
away from for forty years. 

I am, your fellow-servant, O. L. Sullivan, N. J. 

bhcoueagement fob vounteers 
Gentlemen- : — 

In brief, I am a salesman; and walking into the Post 
Office of Chariton, Iowa, recently, I noticed a rack containing 
literature, about which was inscribed "Take One." Of course, 
in this day such a sign is about extinct. But I allowed my 
curiosity to be reasoned with, and took one. This sheet wa3 
Vol, IX, No. 5, of The Bible Students Monthly, treating 
the subjeet "Why Do the Nations War," etc. Greater articles 
than those contained therein are not to be found. It is convincing
 to the core, not on account of highly manufactured 
phrases of a rhetorical nature, but honest, pure, and crossexamined
 truth. Its equal cannot be found; and that I may 


[6171] 


(350-351) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyh, N. Y. 


be more familiar, and understand the real ways, causes, and 
effects of present conditions, do I wish to make purchase of 
the works therein mentioned. 

Wishing your organization the success of divine power, 
and knowing that it shall be a beacon light to all when the 
people come to understand, 

I am a faithful convert, F. G. B., Iowa. 

WOULD NOT MUKMTTB AQAINST GOD 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 
I feel that I have a greater appreciation of divine arrangement
 after considering our prayer meeting text last night-— 
"Thou shalt not tempt the Lord' thy God" — I first thought 
it was a hard text to consider, but after thinking upon the 
subject, I see what a wonderful illustration there is in it for 
all of us, especially at this time under present conditions. 
The words of our text you will recall are quoted by our 
Lord from Deuteronomy, and the context shows that the 
children of Israel "tempted God" through lack of appreciation 
of divine blessings. God had led them for forty years; He 
had fed them with Manna during this time and at the close 
of the forty years they should have appreciated divine favor. 
Since they were about to enter Canaan, the fruition of their 
hope, they were found to be murmuring against Moses and 
divine arrangement, and thus they were "tempting God." 

The result was they were bitten by that old serpent and 
died. This is where our appreciation comes in that we 
should have this text now for consideration realizing that 
it had been placed there by divine arrangement. In 1 
Corinthians 10:1-11, the great Apostle Paul delineates this 
question. He warns against idolaters, fornicators and murmurers
. Connecting this up with the type, we note that 
Pastor Russell in his comments has pointed out that idolatry 
refers to "self, wealth, pride, ambition, ease, gluttony, drunkenness
, denominationalism, etc.," while fornication is "fellowship
 in spirit with those who love not the Spirit of the Lord, 
but the spirit of the world." The Apostle adds, "Neither let 
us tempt Christ." The comparison is clear. Now as we draw 
nigh the end of our forty years of great blessing, having been 
fed with the true heavenly manna all this time, are we going 
back on our consecration vow, becoming idolatrous, fornicators 
and murmurers against divine arrangement? If so the outcome
 is just as certain and the judgment just as sure as in 
the case of the children of Israel; they were "stung," and the 
result was death. Shall we after enjoying these blessings for 
so many years, lose our appreciation of divine blessing and 
favor by allowing ourselves to murmur, that which we are 
so strongly warned against in this text, and which if we do, we 
tempt God T If so, the sting of death will be our portion ; the 
second death in our case. "Wherefore, let him that thinketh 
he standeth take heed lest he fall." I rejoice because I still 
have this appreciation of divine favor and pray for myself and 
all the dear "household of faith" that the Lord's Spirit shall 
prevail everywhere in the hearts of his children. 

I am enclosing herewith draft for Good Hopes from myself 
and family. 

Yours in the one hope, H. B. M. f Minn. 

TRANSFORMING POWER OF THE TRUTH 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

We greet you in the name of the Lord Je3us Christ, the 
great and faithful Shepherd of the flock. We wish to assure 
you of our fervent love for you and our confidence in you. 
As the night draws on apace we are trying to do what we can 
to point the many, many sad hearts to the silver lining in the 
clouds; and we rejoice to see that the dear Heavenly Father 
is able to use even us in a little way to rekindle the light 
of hope that is burning very low in tne hearts of some. We 
shall relate a little circumstance that has recently come under 
our observation. 

A man whom the writer knew to be a desperate character 
had been furnished some tracts and Volume I, Studies in 
the Scriptures. Immediately he became interested, and has 
made several inquiries about certain features of the plan of 
salvation. Recently he made us a visit, and seemed very 
restless. I knew there was something he wished to tell me, 
but of course did not know what it was. Suddenly he turned 
to me, and said he had something he desired to tell me. Then 
he related one of the most daring plots he and three other 
men had planned to carry out. Everything had been systematically
 arranged to rob a bank. He had bought a heavy 
revolver, had paid twenty-one dollars for it, had oeen in the 
bank many times and had outlined the whole scheme. He had 
also told his wife about it. He said that she had clung to 
his neck in tears, and had tried to talk him out of his desperate 
intentions, but had not succeeded. He had worked hard all 
his life to care for his family, but had not been able to do 
so in a satisfactory way; and he had in his beait a burning 


hatred against the capitalist system. But with tears in his 
eyes he said that the truth had changed the whole course 
of his life, and he had sent Word to his pals that there would 
be no robbery. He also sent them some literature; and they 
are also reading with much interest. 

His wife has recently called and asked us to come and 
tell them more about the coming kingdom of Christ. Truly, 
dear brethren, there is no other God that can deliver after 
this sort. (Daniel 3:29) Pray for us, dear ones, even as we 
do for you, that we may all be able to stand in this evil hour. 

Faithfully yours in the one bright hope, H. E. P., Okla. 

APPRECIATES THE LORD'S CONTINUED BLESSINGS 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Remembering the channel through which the knowledge of 
present truth by our Father's favor was given to us, and 
the fact that though that "faithful and wise servant" has gone 
to his reward the work entrusted to him by the Lord of the 
harvest is being faithfully and efficiently continued by the 
dear brethren appointed as overseers in his stead, we unitedly 
desire to express to you, and through you to all the faithful 
in the Lord everywhere, our continued and increasing appreciation
 of our multiplied favors from our heavenly Father and 
his royal Son in connection with the knowledge of the divine 
purposes, the illumination and transformation of our minds 
through an understanding of Jehovah's glorious attributes 
and our privilege of cooperation with you in the work of the 
harvest. 

In a blessed season of refreshment and fellowship at a 
recent testimony meeting we individually reaffirmed our vow 
of full consecration to the will of the Lord even unto death, 
at the same time reading and expressing our gratitude for 
the Morning Resolve and the Vow as being invaluable helps 
in the daily carrying out of our covenant. 

By hearty unanimous vote we collectively renewed our 
allegiance to the Society and its representatives, desiring to 
be in full harmony with the channel of blessing and its 
direction by the Lord's own choosing, and it is as an expression
 of this decision that this letter is written. Our humble 
prayers will continue to be that the God of all grace will 
make you perfect in every good work to do his will and that 
you may continue to be strong in the Lord and in the power 
of his might. We request, dear brethren, your prayers. 

Your brethren in Christ, 

Niagara Falls (N. Y.) Ecolesia. 
FBOFITINQ BY TIMELY ADMONITIONS 

Dear Friends : — 

I received The Watch Tower of August 1st, and I was 
very much interested and benefited by the article entitled, 
"Walk Circumspectly Because the Days Are Evil." I have 
read and reread it very carefully and I think it is just what 
I need at this time, i. e., I need to watch and scrutinize every 
act, seeing that I give offense to no man. The tongue is 
a little member, but if it is not guarded carefully and kept 
within bounds, what mischief it will lead you into! 

The article in question is one that can be read with much 
profit by every true believer in the wonderful truth. While 
reading it I could almost imagine I was having one of those 
wonderful heart to heart talks with our late dear Brother 
Russell. In the fall of 1902, when I obtained my first knowledge
 of the wonderful truth, I called on Brother Russell and 
told him how marvelous was the First Volume, which I had 
just finished reading. He smiled and said (and I will ever 
cherish in my memory the smile and the words), "Brother 

B , there is not money enough in the world to buy this 

wonderful knowledge of the 'Lord's plan of salvation' "which 
he has graciously permitted you to see, is there?" I answered 
"There is not!" He said, "Brother, are many of your friends 
in the truth?" and I told him there were not, then he quickly 
replied, "Brother, I caution you to be wise as a serpent and 
harmless as a dove. Do not talk; and again I say DO NOT 
TALK, but rather live, live, LIVE!" These wonderful words 
of advice given to me years ago by our beloved Pastor have 
been a great source of inspiration to me; but alas! much to 
my own hurt, I did not always follow them; and wherein I 
failed thus to do, I have always suffered a great many trials, 
which have heen largely brought about by my own wilful 
conduct. 

I am thankful for the many words of consolation which 
come through The Watch Tower so often, and asking an 
interest in your daily supplications at the throne of grace. 

Yours in the blessed hope, J. H. B., Pa. 

THE BLESSED WATCH TOWEE 

My Beloved Brethren: — 

Greetings in the glorious name of our Bridegroom and 
King, and favor from his gracious hand! Ever since our 
dear Pastor, of precious memory, left us, for a place with 


[6172] 


Novbiib«r 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(351-338) 


our Lord, I have watched with keenest interest the course 
of those whom he left in charge of The Watch Tower. It 
rejoices my heai-t unspeakably to express to you, my brethren, 
something of the deep appreciation I feel for the loyal humble 
spirit you have always manifested in this work. 

Knowing some of you personally impresses me with a 
fuller appreciation of your service. The blessed Watch 
Tower brings exactly the same kind of food to the "Household
" as our Lord sent by the hand of "that faithful and 
wise servant." We know where it comes from, my brethren, 
for no other being in the universe ever served his hungry 
sheep such food! Truly he is still leading us "in green 
pastures and beside still waters." Praises throughout the 
ages of eternity to our "Good Shepherd'* 1 

Have just read the leading article in July 1st To web and 
couldn't repress my earnest desire to say, Thank you] 

God bless and keep you, protecting you from the spirit of 
evil that is now king throughout the earth and which as a 
mighty giant is seeking to hurl his poisonous darts into the 
hearts and minds of God's dear saints. 

Holding you up before the great white throne every day 
is one of my most appreciated privileges* Be strong and of 
good courage, my brethren, for the church will surely need 
help from the strong and courageous in the very near future. 
What a privilege is yours to give the needed help from our 
Lord! 

Rejoicing with you in this privilege and earnestly asking 
an interest m your prayers, I am, 

Your sister by his grace, Mrs. C. E„ K., Texas. 

EXPBESSES HEARTY CO-OPERATION 
Dear Friends: — 

Perhaps we have been slow in writing you an assurance 
of our continued support of the Society, and of those who are 
in full harmony and cooperation therewith; but we now do so, 
and that most* heartily. We have good reason to believe that 
much of the matter appearing in all the late issues of The 
Tower is from the pen of our beloved President and from 
those in harmony with him. These messages of hope, love, 
comfort and good cheer are pure, enobling and elevating, and 
cannot be the product of one blinded to righteousness. 

Before the recent Pittsburgh convention (Sept. 29-Oct. 2), 
the secretary was instructed by the class here to make known 
to you their decision regarding the controversy about the 
'Society's management, which was reached by earnest prayer 
and careful consideration. They recognize the Lord's favor 
and blessing abiding with Brother Rutherford. Even if there 
were any misgivings at all, the lovely and memorable experiences
 at the convention entirely dispelled them. While the 
writer was compelled to be absent from the love feast on 
account of a sick brother, he felt, from the description given 
of it by the dear brethren present, that the Lord's presence 
and Spirit were never more clearly shown. 

Therefore, dear brethren, be assured of our love for and 
devotion to you and the Lord. 

Sincerely yours in him, 

New Kensington (Pa.) Ecclesia. 

WATCH TOWEB A "TOWER OF STRENGTH" 

Dear Brethren: — 

We, the Peru Associated Bible Students, do hereby extend 


to the dear brethren in the Bethel Home and all connected 
therewith our love and best wishes; and furthermore wish to 
pledge our hearty cooperation in the dear Lord's service in 
whatever capacity we may be called upon to serve. We wish 
to especially thank the management of The Watch Tower 
publication — surely it is a "tower of strength," doing a grand 
work for the Master. 

In conclusion we pray that the dear Lord will give you the 
needed strength to carry on the grand work still to be done. 

Yours in the Master's service, Peru, (Ind.) Ecclesia. 
MOST HELPFTTL CONTRIBUTION TO THE HARVEST MESSAGE 

Dear Brotheb Rutherford: — 

Just a line assuring you of my appreciation of this important
 privilege of again engaging in the pilgrim service, 
in these closing hours of the harvest. I am deeply grateful to 
you as his special representative at this time for an opportunity
 to do my "bit" toward comforting the brethren and, 
incidentally, demolishing "Babylon/' 

The brethren as a whole are abiding the tests and trials 
of the past few months remarkably well. With few exceptions
 they have concluded to let the Lord work out these 
difficulties in his own good time and way; wisely concluding 
the frantic efforts of certain "stewards" to tie your hands 
as the Society's President and reduce their efficiency is the 
last desperate attempt of the adversary to prevent the "smiting
 of Jordan." Would that all were humble enough to 
"wait on the Lord" and watch for his leadings 1 Suggestions 
of our own importance; abbreviation of our memory of the 
Lord's past dealings; impressions of personal responsibilities 
exaggerated out of all proportion ; with final possession by the 
spirit of envy, malice, slander, hatred, is truly the devil's 
favorite method in making shipwreck of one's faith. Thanks 
to Volume Seven, we are not ignorant of his devices. 

The explanation of Revelation 7 and the exposition of 
Efcekiel's Temple in the last chapter of Volume Seven are 
in my judgment the most helpful contributions to the harvest 
message, apart from the work of our Pastor. 

May the Lord continue to bless you, dear Brother, in 
your labors of love on behalf of his children. 

Yours in the Master's service, 

Wm. A. Baker, Pilgrim. 
CONVENTION REPORTS DISCONTINUED 

Brother (Dr.) L. W. Jones, of Chicago, writes us, under 
date of October 15th, as follows: 

"Pertaining to the publication of the Souvenir Convention 
Reports of the conventions of 1917, I have reached the conclusion
 that it will be for the best interests of all the friends 
for me to forego the privilege I have enjoyed in this connection
 during the past thirteen years. 

"I have also decided to abandon the publication of Pastor 
Russell's sermons in book form, as I understand the Society 
purposes a similar publication. 

"It is my sincere hope that the brethren throughout the 
world will not misconstrue this as indicating a loss of interest 
and zeal in the Lord's service and in the truth. Money 
already paid by the friends on orders is being refunded as 
rapidly as the clerical work can be done. 

"It will be muoh appreciated if an announcement to this 
effect is published in The Watoh Tower." 


PASTOR RUSSELL'S SERMONS^-TWO STYLES ONLY 


The book of sermons by Brother Russell will not be ready 
for shipment until early in December. No acknowledgement 
w T ill be made of your order until the hooks are ready for shipment
, so please do not be disturbed that you receive no acknowledgment
 sooner. 

It has been thought advisable to specialize on the clothbound
 edition of the Sermon Book, and we will, therefore, not 
publish it in the Karatol or India at this time. We will, however
, have some of our regular cloth edition put into Morocco 
covers for those who prefer a more expensive volume. The 
cloth edition, however, will be handsomely bound in dark green 
cloth, gold embossed, with gilt edges; a beautiful book. Price 
$1.00 postpaid. The stiff leather binding will be $1.50. Orders 
thus far received for the Karatol edition will be tilled with 
the cloth volume, and orders for the flexible leather will be filled 
with the stiff Morocco-bound book, unless otherwise instructed. 


The following questions have been asked, and we publish the 
answers for the benefit of others: 

Q. Am I entitled to votes for donations made several years 
ago? 

A. Yes. 

Q. I expect to attend the election. Shall I send my proxy 
to the Secretary, and what name shall I write in it? 

A. All proxies should be sent to the Secretary that he may 
insert the number of votes and certify to the same. Leave 
blank the space provided for appointment of proxy, if you expect
 to attend the election in person, but sign your name at 
the bottom of the proxy. 

Q. Does writing on the back of the proxy invalidate it? 


QUESTIONS RELATING TO VOTING 


A. No. It was suggested to write on the back of the proxy 
for convenience and the saving of paper. 

Q. Does the By-law, Section 2, published in the November 
1st Tower, page 329, relate to the recent disagreement as to 
who constitutes the legal Board of Directors? 

A. No. It particularly relates to those who oppose the 
message of the kingdom, as set forth in Studies in the Scriptures
, who deny Brother Russell as "that servant" and who 
are out of harmony with the purposes and work of the Society. 
The substance of this By-law was suggested by Brother Russell
 in 1911. A by-law intending to cover the point was passed 
at Pittsburgh on January 6th last, and approved by the lio ird 
of Directors, January 19th, and was since slightly amended, as 
published. 


VII— 23 


[6173] 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE LORD'S FAVOR 


The Society's fiscal year closes with October 31st. We take 
pleasure in acknowledging the Lord's great blessing upon the 
Harvest work for the year, evidenced by an increase in every 
branch of the service. Our trial balance shows that 1917 exceeds
 every other year of the harvest work except the phenominal
 years of 1913 and 1914. We feel sure the Triends will 
rejoice over this further evidence of the Lord's guidance and 
favor and that he is still at the helm. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N, Y., DECEMBER 1, 1917 


No. 23 


THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD 


"The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore east 

"Ye are the light of the world."- 
^ There is a depth of meaning in these words that the human 
mind cannot comprehend. This was especially true With reference
 to the statement of the Master when the disciples heard 
him say, "Ye are the light of the world/' They could not grasp 
the meaning of his words ; for the holy Spirit was not then 
given. Only the new creature in Christ can have an appreciation
 of the meaning thereof, and the extent of appreciation is 
in proportion to his spiritual development. 

In all the languages of the earth, light is a symbol of truth 
and life. The sun is the great light of the earth, and sustains 
a relationship to the earth and its products designedly 
analogous to that of God to the universe. As all light of the 
earth emanates from the sun, so all truth and life proceed from 
Cod. As light is adapted to the eye, so truth is adapted to the 
mind; and in proportion as we perceive and receive the truth, 
the light increases in our lives. Beginning with the sun and 
tracing out the analogy we find that all nature is really 
symbolic. This does not come by accident, but designedly so. 
It is not an accident that the sun and moon are symbols; for 
we read, "God said . . . Let them be for signs." — Gten. 1:14. 
The antithesis of light is darkness. It symbolizes evil, 
wickedness, error, sin, death and everything that is undesirable
. Light, therefore, is a symbol of righteousness, truth, 
life, and the blessings incident thereto. 

BIGHT TO LIVE LIMITED 
One of the principles of God's arrangement is that all 
righteous beings nave the right to live. Truth is the expression 
of righteousness. Hence it follows that all must have the truth 
before they can know the way to life. As an illustration: The 
sun is a great light which gives light to the earth and life to 
the vegetation of the earth. The sun is requisite to the growth 
and development of plant life. Plants will not grow and flourish
 in darkness, but will sicken and die. So it is with all who 
have life — they must have the light from the Great Light. The 
Scriptures describe Jehovah as a "sun" (Psalm 84:11), as "a 
consuming fire" (Hebrews 12:29), and a great "light, in whom 
is no darkness at all." (1 John 1:5) God, is the origin of 
light, and is therefore the origin of life* Where the sun 
shines, darkness flees before its rays. Where the countenance 
of Jehovah is made to appear, darkness and unrighteousness 
flee away. To this the Apostle referred when he said, "Times 
of refreshing shall come from the presence Iface] of the Lord." 
—Acts 3:19. 

THE OBEAT LIGHT 
In the Genesis account of creation we read that **God 
made two great lightB; the greater light to rule the day 
and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars 
also." (Cten. 1:16) The stars here symbolize that class 
to which Abraham belonged. Abraham had little light, but 
great faith. The moon symbolizes the Mosaic law given the 
Jews, to the exclusion of all others. Since the time of Adam, 
disobedience and darkness prevail over the earth, and gross 
darkness over the people. To the Jews God gave some light 
through the terms of the Law Covenant, which is symbolized 
by the moon. As we know, the moon does not give forth her 
own light, but reflects the light received from the sun. And so 
it is with the Law Covenant. It could not be appreciated by 
those living prior to the opening of the Gospel age. The law 
reflects the light from the Gospel of Messiah s kingdom, which 
Gospel was first preached to Abraham. (GaJatians 3:8) Only 
those who have received and accepted the light of the message 
of Messiah's kingdom can now appreciate the light coming from 
the Law Covenant, which foreshadows better things to come. — 
Hebrews 10:1. 

GREATER LIGHT 
At the close of the Jewish age there came into the world 
Jesus, the Son of God. Although born under the Law Covenant, 
he was greater than the law. Being a perfect man, he could 
comply with the terms of the law. This he did, and went beyond
 its requirements in the fulfilment of God's great plan. 
From Adam to Jesus there had been no true light in the world 
whatsoever. When Jesus came he declared, "I am the Light of 
the world." Again the Scriptures record of him: "He was 
. . . the true Light which Hghteth every man that cometh 
into the world." (John 1:9) The Light then was local; only 


off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. ' ' 
'— Romans 13:12; Matthew 5:14. 
a few saw it; for it shone in a dark place; and to those who 
did see it the Master declared, "Blessed are your eyes, for 
they see."— Matthew 13:16. 

In proof that light is a symbol of life we quote the words 
of the Master: "Then spake Jesus unto them, saying, I am the 
Light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in 
darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12) It 
follows then that all who have the right to life must have the 
light. Those who have no light have no right to life. All 
those who will ever have the right to life must have the light ; 
and since it is God*s purpose that every man shall have a 
chance to accept life the time must come that every man will 
see the light. Hence we read, "It is the will of God that all 
men shall be saved and brought to an accurate knowledge of 
the truth."— 1 Timothy 2:3, 4. 

HOW WE GET THE LIGHT 
If Jesus was the Light of the world, why did he say to 
his disciples, "Ye are the light of the world"? 

In answering this question we recall the words of the Master
 (John 9:5) : (( As long as I am in the world I am the 
Light of the world." When Jesus said, "Ye are the light of the 
world," he spoke prophetically; for it was not then true, except
 in the sense that they reflected his Spirit. In the fuller 
sense it was true after his crucifixion and resurrection, and 
after the giving of the holy Spirit to the consecrated at Pentecost
. He spake, however, of things that were to be as though 
they were. In one sense the disciples, as his representatives 
acting under his authority, were then the light of the world; 
for they reflected the light. But the time was to come, and did 
come, when they constituted the light of the world because they 
were in him as members of his body. This has been true with 
reference to every Christian who has abode in Christ and has 
had the words of Christ abiding in him. 

The ransom-price provided by the death and resurrection of 
Jesua was, at the time of his ascension into heaven, made available
 for the use of those who throughout the Gospel age should 
offer themselves to God in full consecration. The disciples 
were consecrated prior to Pentecost, but not justified. Hence 
their spirit-begetting could not take place until Pentecost. 
Those of the church receive the light only at the time of consecration
 and of the receipt of the merit of the Master's sacrifice ; 
and when they have been accepted by the Father and begotten 
of the holy Spirit, the illumination follows. These who are in 
Christ are members of his body. It is proper then to say that 
from the Jordan till now, The Christ is the light of the worl 1. 
for the reason that The ChriBt includes all those who have the 
Spirit of Jesus and who are walking in accord with the term^ 
of their covenant. 

This is very beautifully pictured by the golden candlestick 
in the Holy of the Tabernacle. The candle-stick was all of one 
piece, composed of gold, and represents those begotten to the 
divine nature, the centre-burner representing Jesus^ and the 
other burners representing the body members. The oil therein 
pictures the holy Spirit, and*. the light coming from the burning
 of the oil represents the illumination possessed by those 
who are in Christ, possessing his Spirit. This illumination 
constitutes such the fight of the world. 

WHAT WE SHALL DO 
Behold what a favored position the body members occupy! 
God is the great Light from whom cometh all light and life. 
Jesus is the express image of the Father; and through him the 
fully consecrated are privileged to be a reflection of Jehovah's 
light in the earth. When we realize this fact we can , better 
understand why the Apostle refers to the Christian as an ambassador
 of Christ's kingdom, and can better appreciate the 
responsibilities that rest upon us because of this light and 
privilege. 

Seeing the favored position which the members of the body 
this side the veil occupy with relation to Jehovah and to the 
great Master, St. Paul was evidently desirous of impressing this 
thought upon all Christians when he wrote: "The night is far 
spent, the day is at hand ; let us therefore cast off the works of 
darkness, and let ur put on the armor of light." — Romans 
13:12. 


(355-356) 


[6174] 


DitCEMBBR 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(356-357) 


The Apostle Paul had more information then than had 
any one else — more information than it was lawful for him 
to tell. (2 Cor. 12:1-5) Two things he states positively; 
namely, "The night is far spent" and "The day is at hand/' 
The "night" here refers to the long period of sin and death 
prevailing from the fall to the establishment of the Messianic 
kingdom. At the time the Apostle wrote, 4182 years of that 
great dark night had passed; and since he wrote these words, 
more than 1800 years additional have passed away. So the 
Christian today has the privilege of standing in the very dawn 
of the morning, when the light of the kingdom is breaking 
upon the earth and soon will shine forth in its resplendent 
glory. "The day" that "is at hand" is the thousand-year day 
of Christ, during which the Sun of Righteousness shall shine 
with healing in his beams, bringing light and life to all of the 
groaning creation who will accept the blessing upon the terms 
offered. Therefore because of this wonderful position which 
the people of God occupy, the Apostle admonisnes them that 
they should cast off all works of darkness and put on the 
whole armor of light. 

WORKS OF DABKNESS 

"Works of darkness" are those deeds that will not bear the 
fullest light of the new dispensation — any and all things that 
are out of harmony with truth and righteousness. The Apostle 
Paul enumerates some of these specifically, as follows: "Fornication
, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, 
and covetousness, which is idolatry: for which things* sake 
the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience: in 
the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them. 
But now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, 
hlasphemy, filthy communication out of your mouth. Lie not 
one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with 
his deeds." "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which 
are these: adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, 
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, 
and such like." — Colossians 3:5-&; Galatians 5:19-21. 

These works of darkness also include self-esteem in a 
superlative degree, selfishness and injustice. The light -bearers 
cannot have any fellowship with these. Anything that has a 
tendency to bring darkness into the life and to exclude tight 
should therefore be cast off, as works of the flesh and the 
devil. 

THE AEMOE OF LIGHT 

Then says the Apostle, "Put on the armor of light." This 
means the armor of God; for "God is light." In Ephesians 
6:10-17 the Apostle describes the armor of light, specifying the 
parts. He admonishes the Christian to have his loins girded 
with the truth. The girdle is a symbol of servitude, thus testifying
 that every light-bearer should be a servant of the truth. 
We are also to have on the breast-plate of righteousness* The 
breast-plate fitted over the vital organs — heart, etc. This 
signifies that the light-bearer should always have a righteous, 
pure heart. To have the "feet shod with the preparation of the 
Gospel of peace" means that we should see to it that the fiery 
trials that come upon us should not make us resentful, but 
rather that we should cultivate peace under all circumstances, 
that our feet may not be burned with these fiery trials. "Above 
all things taking the shield of faith," means to know the Word 
of God and to rely upon it; and to "take the helmet of salvation
 " symbolical of an intellectual understanding and appreciation
 of the Word of God, and "the Sword of the Spirit" 
means to have the Word of the Lord and be trained, as a good 
soldier, in its skilful use. 

It will be observed that the Apostle enumerates six parts 
of the armor; whereas the panoply of a Roman soldier consisted
 of seven parts. That part not named is the greaves, 
which fitted over the front part of the leg. This very beautifully
 symbolizes the Vow which the feet members are permitted 
to have; and as their face is always toward the enemy, they 
should be protected with this part of the armor. The Christian
's protection is light, whose beams search every nook and 
corner of earth's impurities, and enable him to dispel such from 
his own life. 

Continuing, the Apostle admonishes, "Walk honestly as in 
the day"; that is to say, as though we were living in the full 
light of that day of Christ— the day of the reign of Messiah 
in righteousness. While we are not fully in that day, yet the 
new creation should live as nearly up to the perfect standard 
as possible. "Honestly" means to be honest in business matters, 
honest with the Lord, honest with his message, honest with the 
brethren, and honest in everything in connection with his 
service. Honesty is the result of light. 

Furthermore, the Apostle says, "Not in rioting and drunkenness
." Evidently he does not refer here to the grosser sins 
which these words imply, but to the more refined from the 


world's standpoint — things which we would term indulgence 
in time-killing, intoxication with money-making, or with any 
earthly thing that would draw our attention away from the 
Lord and his service. Then he concludes his argument with 
the strongest and most important exhortation, saying, "Avoid 
strife and envying." 

One who indulges in the things previously mentioned by 
the Apostle would injure himself particularly. But one who 
indulges in strife and envy shows a bad condition of heart 
which might bar him from the kingdom, and which might result 
in great injury to others and hinder their development. These 
are fruits of the flesh; and in proportion as we yield to suoh 
improper desires, in that proportion, will the flesh prosper and 
the new creature languish and draw near unto death. On the 
contrary, the sons of God are to seek more and more to put on 
the Lord Jesus Christ; that is to say, to put on the qualities 
of meekness, forbearance, long suffering, patient endurance, 
gentleness, kindness and love. Each should nave the disposition 
to serve by love, being humble and submissive to the Lord's 
will. Make no provision for the' flesh, but let it die from 
neglect. 

THE CHBISTIAN'S ADVANTAGES 

Those who have the light are greatly advantaged above 
those that have not the light. Since Jesus was crucified 1884 
years have passed. Down through the age of sacrifice, along the 
narrow valley of trials and tears, the light-bearers of God, as 
members of the body of Christ, have walked^waiting, hoping, 
and praying for the return of the great Light, the Bridegroom, 
Many of these faithful ones have ceased from their labors and 
slept, awaiting the coming of the King. As this little band of 
lightbearers have passed along through the world, others not' 
ing their manner of living and devotion to truth and righteousness
, have turned aside to walk with them awhile. 

In this connection we are reminded of the parable of the 
wheat and tares. The wheat have been the lightbearers, while 
the tares have been mingling with them, aided somewhat by 
the light which has been shed forth by the true Christians. In 
the harvest a separation is now taking place. Of necessity the 
light reproves the darkness; and the breach widens between 
the merely nominal and the true Christians. All those who 
are striving to keep their covenant are in the light, Hence the 
Apostle says to such, "Ye are not in darkness" ; while all those 
are still in darkness who call themselves Christians but who 
persecute those who have the light. 

THE LIGHT-BEAEEES 

In the context the Apostle contrasts those who have the 
Light with others who have not. The light-bearers have ever 
looked for the return of the great Light, Christ Jesus. He 
did not say at what hour and day he would come, but stated 
in such clear phrase what might be expected that the true lightbearers
 can appreciate the times in which they are living. To 
them St. Paul says, "Of the times and seasons, brethren, ye 
have no need that I write unto you," {I Thess. 5:1-6) This 
was true because, having the light, they would be able to discern
 the presence of the greater Light, the Bridegroom. Then 
adds the Apostle, "For yourselves know perfectly that the day 
of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night." A thief comes 
in time of darkness, and of course would not be observed by 
those who are asleep or in the dark. At the second coming of 
our Lord all who were awake and had the light would be able 
to discern Jesus. The Apostle states that those who have the 
light will recognize the presence of the great King. Then he 
proceeds to tell us what is our duty, saying, "But ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a 
thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the 
day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore let 
us not sleep as do others; but let us watch and be sober." See 
also Matthew 24:42-44. 

As these faithful followers of the Lord waited in the early 
dawn of the new dispensation, their hearts were made glad 
by the knowledge of the presence of the Bridegroom; and as 
this knowledge came to them they joined in the cry, "Behold 
the Bridegroom!" Since then every one who has come to a 
knowledge of the Lord's presence has involuntarily said, "Behold
 the Bridegroom!" 

SOOFFEBS AND OPPOSEBS 

On the other hand, nominal Christians, being in darkness, 
have become offended at the exuberance manifested by the 
true light-bearers. Their time is devoted to social uplift and 
and various other things that are popular with the world ; and 
they understand not why the true light-bearer does not participate
 with them. Therefore nominal Christians have become 
scoffers, as the Apostle Peter foretold they would: "Where is 
the evidence of his presence? ... all things continue as 
they were from the beginning," — 2 Peter 3:4. 

At this moment we see the whole world in a state of war. 


[6175] 


(358-359) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N, Y. 


The nations are growing- weaker; and soon the various factions
 will see the necessity of stopping the war before all are 
entirely destroyed. Doubtless then the various elements — the 
financial, political and ecclesiastical — will be saying, "Peace!", 
and temporary peace will be established by the united action 
of the Papacy and the Protestant churches and the kingdom of 
this world. Referring to this time, the Apostle says, "For when 
they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction 
cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and 
they shall not escape." — 1 Thessalonians 5:3. 

THE GREAT COMPANY 
The Scriptures point out that there is another class of 
Christians who love the Lord, who love to be associated with 
the true light-bearers, and yet who are fearful of holding forth 
the light lest it should bring persecution upon them. These are 
consecrated to the Lord, but have only a small measure of his 
Spirit. They are described by the Master as those whose lamps 
are almost empty of oil, or whose supply of oil is running low. 
This means that their supply of the spirit of truth is nearly 
exhausted. They do not fully appreciate the value of the whole 
armor of light. They do not possess the zeal peculiar to the 
Lord's house (Psalm 09:9) ; but being overcharged by the cares 
of this life and fearing persecution and suffering, these believe 
that they can best pursue a more moderate course and refrain 
from actively testifying for the Master and his cause. These 
may be said, therefore, to be not walking in the full light, not 
appreciating their privileges. 

Doubtless some of this class are in present truth, and some 
amongst the Babylonish systems. The Psalmist describes 
them thus: "Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of 
death, being bound in affliction and iron: because they rebelled 
against the words of God and contemned the counsel of the 
most High." (Psalm 107:10, 11) The Lord Jesus describes 
them as the "foolish virgin" class, who are aroused to their 
privileges too late to have their vessels filled in time to enter 
into the kingdom, — Matthew 25:1-13. 

THE LESSON FOB THE CHTTROH 
Thus we see that the worldly do not understand the 
Christian because they never had the light, and that the great 
company do not see and appreciate present truth because their 
light is burning low. The lesson then that we should gather 
is to keep our lamps trimmed and burning. Or, to use another 
figure, we are to profit thereby. We are togive close attention 
to the words of life contained in God's Word, that we may 
come to an exact knowledge of the truth. Whether the error 
be one of doctrine or conduct, it must be purged away, so that 
the pure light of divine truth may^ shine out as clearly as 
possible through our daily lives. This evidently is what Jesus 
had in mind when he said, "Ye are the light of the world. A 
city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Let your light so shine 
before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your 
Father which is in heaven." — Matthew 6:14, 16. 

The light cannot shine out brightly to the glory of God 
unless our lamps are cleaned, trimmed and brightly burning. 
Some of the' Lord's dear children seem very indifferent to the 
matter of trimming their lamps and letting their light shine. 
They gat some truth and some error, and hold them bothtogether
. As a result, their light does not shine brightly; for 
the vessel is darkened by the error. Again, some may have the 
light, but fail to let the truth have the proper place or effect 
upon their characters; and so the light m them is very dim, 
because of the uncleanness of the medium through which it 
passes. The admonition of the Scriptures should be kept in 
mind: "Light is sown for the righteous." (Psalm 97:11) 
The Apostle referred to the proper condition of the light-bearer 
when he said, "Ye are our epistles . . . known and read of 
all men." The world cannot read and understand the Bible; 
but they can read and understand one's daily life. Again, the 
Apostle said, "We are made a spectacle [literally, a show or 
theatre] for men and angels." Therefore the eyes of all are 
upon the light-bearers; and they should see to it that they 
avoid everything which .has a tendency to shut out the light 
and preclude it from shining. — 2 Corinthians 3:2; 1 Corinthians
 4:9. 

As far as we permit prejudice, pride, selfishness, selfesteem
, combativeness, crookedness, injustice or unrighteousness
 to interrupt the freedom with which we receive and hold 
forth the light of truth, in that same proportion will the light 
rapidly decline or retrograde, and such a course persisted in 
will ultimately lead such a one into utter darkness. Hence 
Jesus said, "If thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full 
of darkness. If therefore th« light that is in thee be darkness, 
how great is that darkness! The light of the body is the eye; 
if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full 
of light. "-^Matthew 6:22, 23. 


DARKNESS SETTLING DOWN ON THE EABTH 

The Scriptures indicate that when the last member of the 
little flock is gone all the light left in the earth will be that 
possessed by the great company class. Since every spirit-begotten
 one must finish his course before the resurrection of 
the ancient worthies, it follows that between the time of the 
change of those who compose the great company and the 
resurrection of the ancient worthies there will be a brief period 
during which darkness will completely cover the earth and 
gross darkness the people. This day is rapidly approaching. 

"The path of the just is as a shining light that shineth 
more and more unto the day of perfection." (Proverbs 4:18) 
We are coming near to the end of our earthly journey — therefore
, near to the day of perfection. Should we not, then, expect
 the light to shine brighter and brighter upon our pathway
? Surely the Lord will fulfil this promise to his people, 
and is fulfilling it to them. If that light is shining brighter, 
shall we be stumbled and blinded by it? Or shall we appreciate 
what the Lord is doing for us and permit the manifestation 
of his loving kindness to stimulate us to greater love and zeal 
for him, his cause and his people? 

PRIVILEGES NOW GBEAT 
When first we read the Studies in the Scriptures and 
rejoiced in the light there found, we learned through their 
author that there would be seven volumes. We have looked 
forward with joyful expectancy to the coming of that time 
when we would have the Seventh Volume. The laborers in 
the harvest field realize that we are drawing nearer and 
nearer to the end of the harvest. Now the Seventh Volume has 
come to us; and it throws a great flood of light upon Revelation
 and Ezekiel, in harmony with what is contained in the 
other six volumes of Studies in the Scbiptukes and the 
Bible. Shall we not take this as a favor from the Lord, and 
as the fulfilment to us of his promise? 

How are we receiving that light and responding to it? 
"Well," answers one, "I have not yet been able to fully receive 
The Finished Mystery as the long promised Seventh Volume." 
Others are openly opposing it, notwithstanding the Lord's manifested
 favor upon its publication and distribution. We might 
wonder if all are appreciating fully the light that is shining 
upon the pathway. W T e recall that there were some who did 
not appreciate the other volumes for a time, and that some 
did not appreciate the Vow when it was given to the church. 
Indeed, some good, conscientious, fully consecrated brethren at 
first opposed it. When the Vow was first published by 
Brother Russell a certain sister found many objections to it; 
but being desirous of doing the Lord's will she called upon a 
brother to point out to her where it is advantageous for one 
to take the Vow. There followed a conversation between them, 
about as follows: 

"Sister, do you see anything in that vow that is out of 
harmony with your consecration to the Lord?" "No," she 
answered, "I do not" "Do you see anything in it to which 
the Lord would object?" "No, I do not." "Do you see anything
 in the Vew to which the devil would object?" "Ah, yes ! " 
she exclaimed, "I see many things in it to which the devil 
would object." "Then," replied the brother, "if you oppose the 
Vow would you not be agreeing with the devil and disagreeing 
with the Lord?" She at once saw the point. 

Now suppose we apply the same rule to "The Finished 
Mystery," Volume VII of Studies in the Scriptures. Let 
us ask ourselves, Is there anything in it contrary to the message
 of Messiah's kingdom and the great doctrine of the 
ransom? To this we must answer, No! Is there anything in 
it to which the heavenly Father or the Lord Jesus would object 
because out of harmony with his Spirit? To this we must 
also answer, No. Is there anything in it to which Satan would 
object or be opposed? Ah yes, certainly! for it pulls off the 
mask and exposes a system which Satan has builded up by 
blinding good Christian people. It shows that the great Papal 
system is Satan's counterfeit of Messiah's kingdom. It shows 
that the Romish system is the "mother" described as a 
"harlot"; and that nominal Protestantism constitutes the 
"daughters." It shows how these together constitute "Babylon
" and how they have made "drunk" the kings and rulers of 
the earth. It shows how the evil spirits have operated and 
will continue to operate under the chief of devils — Satan. It 
shows that "great Babylon" must fall, how Satan himself will 
be destroyed, and pictures the glories of the kingdom class in 
the "temple" condition beyond the veil. 

"THIS HONOR HAVE ALL HIS SAINTS" 

Has not this light that has fallen upon our pathway 
thrilled our hearts with joy in proportion as we have appreciated
 it? Surely, then, great are our privileges now, not only 
to feed upon this additional food, that the Lord has given us, 


T6176] 


Dbckmbrr 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(359-361) 


but to pass it on to others in "Babylon" and get the attention 
of thoae who have a hearing ear, that they may hear and flee 
therefrom; and even to tell the world that the present unrighteous
 systems soon must pass away, to be supplanted with 
the glorious kingdom of Christ Jesus. All the true lightbearers
 will therefore appreciate the privileges now given to 
them of having the light and of giving it out to others. Who 
is on the Lord's side? "Know ye not that to whom ye yield 
yourselves to obey, his servants ye are whom ye obey?" — Romans
 6:16; Exod. 32:20. 

For nearly nineteen centuries this little band of lightbearers
 have been shining forth in the world, reproving the 
darkness. For a long time it seemed that darkness might 
triumph; for the bearers of light have been suffering at the 
hands of the children of darkness. But now we are approaching
 the end of the reign of sin and death. The Prince of Darkness
 is marshalling all of his forces for the final crucial conflict
. The storm is raging in every quarter, and the waves of 
human passion are lashing against the thrones of earthly institutions
. This great time of trouble is striking terror to the 
hearts of many. But the true light-bearer takes courage in 
this hour of great trial; for. knowing that it is evidence that 
the kingdom is at hand he hears the words of his Captain 
saying, "Behold T come quickly; hold that fast which thou 
hast; let no man take thy crown." (Revelation 3:11) And 
again says the Apostle, "Cast not away your confidence which 
hath great recompense of reward ; for ye have need of patience 
[endurance] that after ye have done the will of God, ye might 
receive the promise." — Hebrews 10:35, 36. 

THE BLESSINGS OP THE KINGDOM 

Down into the depths of the great storm that is now 
upon the world, the light-bearers may soon go; but beyond 
its blackness and terror, these faithful ones will rise triumphant
 over death and be ushered into the glorious light of the 
sons of God, The Lord Jesus, speaking to the faithful with 
reference to this time, says, "Then shall the righteous shine 
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father" — Matthew 
13:43. 

As St. Paul states, the whole creation is groaning and 
travailing in pain, waiting far the full manifestation of the 
Rons of Light. (Rom. 8:19-23) What a glorious day it will 
be for the poor world when the light has completely driven 
away the darkness, and when the sunlight of God's love with 
healing and blessing will shine into the hearts and minds of 
all! Through the mouth of his Prophet Jehovah gave a wonderful
 and beautiful picture of the blessings that shall come 
to the world at that time. He said, "And his feet shall stand 
in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before 
Jerusalem on the east; and the Mount of Olives shall cleave 
in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west and 
there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain 
shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the 
south. And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains, . . 
. and the Lord my God shall come and all the saints with 
thee."— Zech. 14:4, 5. 

The olive is a symbol of light, peace and divine blessings 
through the holy Spirit. A mountain is a symbol of a kingdom
 of light, peace and divine blessings through the holy 
Spirit of God. The Prophet Joel states that during the Gospel
 age the Spirit of the Lord is made manifest to his servants
 and hand-maidens — to those who have made a full consecration
 to follow in the footsteps of Jesus. The Prophet 
then adds that after these days — namely, at the conclusion of 
the Gospel age when all the light-bearers of the kingdom 


class are developed — then God will pour out his Spirit upon 
all flesh. Then the light will begin to shine and increase in 
the hearts and minds of the people. 

VALLEY OP BLESSINGS 

In the above prophecy the phrase, "his feet" has reference 
to Jehovah, and signifies the divine law established on the 
earth through Messiah's kingdom of righteousness, the earth 
being referred to as Jehovah's foot-stool, which he will make 
glorious. The Prophet states that "the mount shall cleave 
in the midst thereof, toward the east and toward the west." 
The east is the position of the rising sun. The cleaving of a 
mountain in the midst thereof from east to west would cause 
the formation of a valley between the two portions, a part 
of the mountain being on the north and a part on the south. 
The north is the position of the Pleiades, and represents the 
throne of Jehovah, and therefore in the picture would represent
 the heavenly phase of God's kingdom. The south 
would represent the position or condition of the earthly phase 
of that kingdom. The sun rising in the east would shine 
clear through the valley, which extends east and west between
 the two parts of the mountain; that is to say, between 
the heavenly and earthly phases of God's kingdom. 

This pictures how the "Sun of Righteousness" with healing 
in his beams shall shine from the beginning to the ending of 
the Millennial reign of Christ. The valley filled with light 
represents the valley of blessings and life; and during the 
Millennial reign the people who come into this valley or 
condition of blessing will be healed, uplifted and blessed. The 
glorious and life-giving light will drive out all darkness, 
ignorance, superstition and death, and bring everlasting 
blessings to all who will receive it. Let us picture to our 
minds the millions returning from the tomb and entering this 
valley of blessings, there to receive the balm of Gilead which 
the Lord has so graciously provided for the binding up of 
broken hearts and comforting of them that mourn. Millions 
who have been torn from their loved ones by the great enemy 
death will be brought again together; families long separated 
will be reunited. They shall "come with songs and everlasting
 j°y u P<>n their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, 
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away."— Isaiah 35:10. 

The glorious reign of Christ completed, all the human 
race tried and tested, all wickedness and unrighteousness 
destroyed from the earth, no longer will there exist any 
necessity for the Gospel light, represented by the sun, nor 
the law, represented by the moon. "And the city [the holy 
government] had no need of the sun, neither of the moon 
to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it and the 
Lamb is the light thereof. And the nations [peoples fully 
restored] shall walk by the light thereof, and the kings 
[perfect men] of the earth do bring their glory into it, and 
the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day; for there shall 
be no night there." — Revelation 21:23-2o. 

The bringing of such blessings to the poor groaning 
creation will be the great privilege of the sons of God. 
"Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon 
us, that we should be called the sons of God!" (1 John 3:2) 
Behold, what a wonderful prospect is set before those who 
are privileged to be counted as light-bearers in the earth 
during the age of sacrifice and suffering, to those who are 
faithful unto death! What an inspiration to faithfulness and 
loyalty to the Lord! 

"For soon astonished men shall see 
The laurels of thy victory; 
And thou with grace and glory crowned, 
Mayst lavish blessings all around." 


NEHEMIAH ENFORCES THE LAW OF THE SABBATH 


[ This article was a reprint of that entitled 


'Nehemtah's Correction of Sabbath-Breaking," published in issue of November 13, 
1899, which please see.] 


MY REDEEMER 


"When first I heard of Jesus, so marred upon the tree, 
T felt no glad emotion as though he died for me; 
T saw no kingly beauty majestic, grand or brave; 
I turned away, despising his proffered aid to save. 

"But when I came to know him his precious name grew sweet, 
And like the tinted rainbow love arched the Mercy- Seat, 
And when through beams of glory the light shone from his 

face, 
All other objects faded before his matchless grace. 


"When first I heard the tidings how God's beloved Son 
Designs to bless the fallen since Adam's race begun, 
What could I do but praise him — make vault of heaven ring! 
And own him as my choicest — Redeemer, Lord and King! 

"0 Rose of rarest odor! Lily white and pure! 
O Chiefest of ten thousand, whose glory must endure! 
The intfre I see thy beauty, the more I know thy grace, 
The more I long unhindered to gaze upon thy face!'* 


[«177] 


THE ADVENT OF THE MESSIAH 

[The eleventh and twelfth paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Gift3 to Our King," published in issue 

of January 1, 1906. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled "Birth of the Man Christ Jesus/' 

published in issue of December 15, 1907. Please see the articles named. 1 


DIVINE PROTECTION AND DELIVERANCE 

fWith the exception of the following paragraphs this article was a reprint of article entitled "The Feet of Him," published in 

issue of December 1, 1911, which please see.] 
DECEiruER o0. — Quarterly Review 

NATURAL ISRAEL TYPICAL OF SPIRITUAL ISRAEL (JOD 'S CAKE AND PROTECTION- OF THE NATURAL ISRAELITES ILLUSTRATIVE OF SPIRITUAL 

BLESSINGS TO THE CHURCH — PERILOUS TIMES OF THE EVIL DAT — COMFORTING WORDS OF LIFE — WARNING 
VOICES AND WHOLESOME COUNSEL NECESSARY. 

"With Jehovah there is loving kindness, and with him is plenteous redemption/' — Psa. 130:7. 
This lesson is intended for a review of the history of the "He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will 


children of Israel during the period covered by the last 
quarter's lessons, namely, about two hundred and seventy 
years. We realize that natural Israel was typical of spiritual 
Israel, and the experiences which came to them illustrated 
the experiences of the church. The spiritual Israelite therefore
, receives much instruction by carefully noting the history 
of the natural Israelite, and can enter more heartily into their 
experiences and rejoice with them in their songs* of deliverance
. It is suggested by those who arranged the lessons that 
Ave read the 123rd and 124th Psalms. Tnese psalms are indeed
 beautiful, and suggest the loving kindness and protecting 
power of Jehovah over his faithful children. We, as spiritual 
Israelites, realize that we are still in the land of the enemy, 
and we know of no more fitting promises to apply to the 
present time than those contained in the 91at Psalm which 
have been an inspiration to the church throughout the many 
centuries of its existence. 

In the midst of the "perilous times" of this "evil day," 
and of the warning voices of prophets and apostles pointing 
out snares and pestilences and subtle dangers on every hand — 
and in the midst, toq, of a realizing sense of the actual existence
 of such evil besetments and perils — how precious to the 
saints are the assurances of divine protection and care and 
personal love! 

We call to mind the gracious promises of our Lord — "The 
Father himself loveth you;" "Fear not, little flock; it is 
your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom ;" and 


love him and will manifest myself to him; . . . and MY 
Father \\i\] love him, and we a\ ill come unto him and make 
Our abode with him. . . . Peace I leave with you, my 
peace I give unto you. Let not vour heart bo troubled, 
neither let it be afraid."— John 16:27; 14:21, 23, 27; Luke 
12:32. 

TIMELY WARNINGS— WHOLESOME OOTJNSEL 

But warning voices and wholesome counsel are also necessary
; and he is not wise who turns a deaf ear to them, -and 
takes cognizance alone of the comforting assurances which 
are designed only for those who faithfully "watch and pray 
lest they enter into temptation." Every soldier of the cross 
needs to heed the Apostle's warnings — "Take unto you the 
whole armor of God, that y$ may be able to withstand in the 
evil day, and haying done all. to stand;" and again, "Let us 
fear lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, 
any of you should seem to come short of it;" and fear also 
"lest, as the serpent [Satan] beguiled Eve, through his 
subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
 that is in Christ;" "for grievous wolves shall enter in 
among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves 
shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples
 after them," "Behold/* said our Lord, "I Bend you 
forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves." — Eph. 6:13; Heb, 4:1; 2 
Cor. 11:3? Acts 20:29, 30; Matt. 10:16, 


INCREASED OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE 


Many years ago Brother Russell proved from the Scriptures
 that a federation would be formed between the various 
nominal church systems, and that this federation would cooperate
 with the civil powers in the. exercise of control over 
the people. This federation is now practically an accomplished
 fact. Only a short time ago at a great mass meeting 
in Carnegie H;ilK New York City, Protestant and Catholic 
ministers and Jewish Rabbis united in an effort for Bible 
study, ignoring the name of Jesus Christ. That ecclesiasticism
 is now cooperating with the civil powers is patent to 
every thinking mind. "Pastor Russell foresaw this coming 
federation and repeatedly called the attention of The Watch 
Tower readers thereto. As far back as 1805, in an issue of 
Ths Watch Tower he set forth that John the Baptist and his 
experiences were typical; that in the antitype it would probably
 be the privilege of the consecrated, before the close of the 
harvest, to call attention to the tacit union and concurrent 
action of the church systems and civil powers of the land; that 
this would be displeasing to those in authority, especially to 
the ecclesiastics; that trie proclamation by the truly consecrated
, calling attention to this unholy alliance, would probably
 bring upon them certain trying experiences and would 
be a great honor to everyone joyfully participating in this 
work. 

It is apparent that the nations of earth are hopelessly 
divided on political and military issues, and that their only 
hope of establishing peace is by the intervention of ecclesiastical
 powers. The head of the Papal system has already made 
overtures to the civil powers, looking to the establishment of 
peace. It may be expected that he will make further representations
 to this end, and that the "nobles" of the Protestant
 systems will join with him, and that as a consequence 
these ecclesiastics will be given more prominence by the civil 
powers. The Scriptures in many -places describe this unholy 
alliance as Babylon, and likewise show that the evils concerning
 Babylon should be made known. 

"The Finished Mystery" — Volume VII of Studies m the 
Scriptures — without question contains an exposition — such 
as never before published — of the evils committed by Babylon, 
of the unrighteous relationship between ecclesiasticism and 


civil powers, the effect that a knowledge of these facts will 
have upon the people, and how Babylon's fall wiU be accomplished
. The Watch Tower subscribers are familiar with the 
further fact that Brother Russell as the Laodicean messenger 
repeatedly emphasized the fact that there should be a strong, 
vigorous witness of the truth to the world in the last days of 
the church's experiences this side the veil, and that the giving 
of this witness to the truth would probably result in the restraint
 of the antitypical "John" class; for the message when 
given will constitute a rebuke to Babylon. 

In harmony with this conclusion the Scriptures also show 
that the "vine of the earth" must be gathered, and the juice 
must be squeezed out of the grapes, constituting this "vine of 
the earth/' Since the Lord has shown that this message must 
be given to the church nominal, and since this message is 
contained in the Seventh Volume — "the point of the sword'' — 
the question now is, Who of the consecrated will join in using 
that point? Everything leads to the conclusion that the dark 
night referred to m the Scriptures, in which no man can 
work, is rapidly approaching and whatever work is done with 
reference to harvesting the vine of the earth must be done 
quickly. To this fact the brethren throughout the country 
are awake. Many are very anxious to enter the field and to 
spread far and wide the message contained in Volume VII. 

We realize that many of the colporteur brethren were 
compelled to leave the service in 1914 because they had u^ed 
all their worldly substance in the great work accomplished. 
that year. The Master of the harvest may be always relied 
upon to provide the means to accomplish his work, and now 
he has put it in the heart of a dear brother to come forward 
with a contribution to be used especially for the smiting of 
Babylon. This fund can be used to aid those colporteurs to 
enter the work, who have heretofore been hindered because of 
their financial condition. The Society has adopted what is 
believed to be the most economical plan, one which will enable 
the greatest number with this small means to again engage 
in the cotporteur work. The plan is that one hundred copies 
of Volume VII will be billed to each colporteur who needs 
assistance to get started in the work, free of charge, and that 


(362-365) 


[6178] 


Dkc*mbkr 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(365 366) 


the sale of this number will give to such colporteur a working
 capital on which he or she may go ahead in the work and 
continue in it until the finish. By this method we believe 
that fully a half million copies of The Finished Mystery 
may be placed in the hands of the people by the end of the 
year. We therefore suggest that everyone who desires to 
engage in the colporteur service, but who cannot do so because
 of their financial condition, and who by reason of the aid 
above suggested could do so, write us immediately for territory
 and for further instructions. The time seems opportune 
for the great drive that will divert the symbolic waters from 
Mystic Babylon, and thus hasten her downfall, preceding the 
full establishment of the kingdom of peace. The Psalmist 


declares that God will grant to his saints the privilege and 
honor of declaring these judgments written. — Psalm 149:5-9. 

Surely the saints beyond the veil have a keen, interest in 
the conclusion of the work, and every saint this side the 
veil will have a keen interest in that work. We believe that 
all the consecrated will appreciate the privilege of now participating
 with gladness of heart in this laboring. The time 
is short. Our responsibility is great. Let ua then do with 
our might what our hands find to do, laboring diligently 
while it is called clay. A little while and we shall finish our 
course and by his grace be permitted to have the Lord's approving
 smile and be forever with him. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


THANKTTJL FOR CONTINUATION or HARVEST WORK 
Dear Brethren: — 

We believe we would be remits in our duty and obligation 
to you and to our dear Lord, if we did not make known to 
you our determination of continued steadfastness. 

We take this time and manner to assure you of our sympathy
 and cooperation in your "labor of love/* "Daily will 
we remember at the throne of heavenly grace the general 
interests of the harvest work/* "trusting that the Chief 
Reaper will make all things work together for good." 

We are so thankful for the provision made for the continuation
 of the work, and we are sure our dear Lord's 
blessing will be on all who share in this service. 

With much Christian love, Winfield Ecclesia. — Kans. 
VETOES THE SUGGESTION 
Editorial Committee, The Watch Tower, 

Brooklyn, New York. 
Dear Brethren: — 

My attention is just directed to the suggestion in "Harvest
 Sif tings Reviewed " reading as follows: "Would not 
Brother Walter Page, a former vice president, make a much 
better President than Brother Rutherford?" 

As I am the only Brother Page who ever served as a vice 
president of the Society I presume I am the one referred to, 
although my name is not Walter but William. Under existing
 conditions I must emphatically veto the suggestion, and 
among other reasons are the following vital oiies: 

The President of the Society must needs be of tested, 
proven financial ability to handle its various important business
 transactions. 

He should be an able public speaker to properly present 
the object and w T ork of the SocrETY in its public meetings. 

I do not possess these essential qualifications and Brother 
Rutherford does; and in addition our dear Brother has a 
rounded, developed Christian character { the most essential 
factor) ; and understanding the work of the Society and 
having 1 it well in hand, he is in my judgment the Lord's best 
qualified agent to continue in charge of the interests and 
work of our Society. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, W. E. Page. — Ioica. 

GOD'S ARMOR THE ONLY PROTECTION 

Dear Brethren; — 

Since reading in Volume VII, page 126, the paragraph 
that states God may soon allow the minds of many of hi3 
little ones to become an open battleground upon which the 
fallen angels shall be judged, I have felt prompted to tell you 
that I have been tried along this line. For some time before 
I knew anything of the Seventh Volume I had several attacks, 
the memory of which makes me shudder. It seemed as if 
something gripped my forehead and forced me to doubt God. 
I struggled against the malignant influence. God did not 
eeem to be anywhere at all. In awful fear and anguish I 
went to the W T ord of God and pleaded for his promised help. 
If it had not been for divine aid I would have lost my mental 
balance, but God did not fail me in my time of need. Each 
attack proved less severe than the former. Still the tight 
feeling about my head remained. It was very harassing and 
had a depressing effect and I struggled to get rid of it. At 
last I came to the conclusion God must be allowing it for a 
purpose and that I had better count it a "light affliction which 
is but for a moment." After submission to the will of God, 
I read the aforesaid paragraph in Volume Seven. It came to 
me with strange force and almost scared me, but the peace of 
God through faith in the Father's power came to me and now 
I am no longer troubled with the gripping feeling in my head. 
When I cried to God for guidance he brought clearly to my 
notice the armor of God for the mind, mentioned in Ephesians 
6:17. Day by day, I put on these different pieces, and the 
result is wonderful. Please pray that I may continue to do 


so. This is my only safe-guard. I may not have been as 
faithful in the past as I ought to have been, and perhaps that 
is why the adversary came so close. "Now thanks to God 
who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ" 
"He will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, 
but will with the temptation also make a way of escape that 
we may be able to bear it.'* The Morning Kesolve, the Vow 
and the Manna are a great help daily. 

Your sincere sister in Christ, J. M. 

LOVE AND ZEAL NEVER MORE MANIFEST 

Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

During the twenty -three years I have enjoyed the "present 
truth" it was my blessed privilege to visit the Bible House 
in Allegheny from time to time, remaining three months during
 the summer of 1902; and after the headquarters were removed
 to Brooklyn, I came to the "Bethel'* several times a 
year, and while living in Philadelphia, during 1910, 1911, I 
spent the first Sunday in each month at Brooklyn. During the 
past four years, and especially since our dear Brother Russell
's death, I have been almost daily at the Bethel Home. 
In view of the foregoing 1 believe I am in a position to say 
for your encouragement that never in all these twenty-three 
years have I witnessed more harmony, more love, more fervent
 zeal, more joyful service, and in fact more of the Lord's 
Spirit, than is manifested among the dear friends in the 
"Bethel" at the present time. This seems to be a very strong 
evidence of the Lord's favor and blessing upon the management
 and upon the faithful co-laborers at the Tabernacle and 
in the Home. 

After considerable thought upon the matter, I am firmly 
convinced that the opposition to the present management is 
but a subtle effort of the adversary to "throw dust" into the 
eyes of the Lord's people, and thus to thwart the further publication
 and circulation of the Seventh Volume, if possible. 

And why should there be any objection to the Seventh 
Volume on the part of any one? Who is most interested in 
its suppression? Is there anything in this volume which the 
Lord would disapprove? Surely not! It speaks for itself. 
Is there anything in it which Satan would wish to oppose? 
Yea, verily! For does it not lay bare the evils of his government
; and will it not cause the complete overthrow of his 
kingdom, when once the truths of Revelation and Ezekiel are 
fully comprehended by the people, after "a stone has been 
bound to the book and it has been cast into Euphrates?" — 
Jeremiah 51:60-.64. 

A similar ruse was employed by the great adversary in 
1908. Ostensibly, the opposition was directed against the 
Vow, and our beloved Pastor was made the target of every 
manner of vilification at that time; but the real issue was the 
truth about "The Covenants!'* 

In re the Seventh Volume: it was my privilege some years 
ago to suggest to Brother Russell the title, "The Finished 
Mystery," which he then approved as "very good." And the 
fact that this very title was selected and used by the Society 
is strongly convincing to my mind that our beloved Pastor 
beyond the veil has supervised the writing and publication of 
this work. So much for external evidence. 

And what is the internal evidence? Let each one read for 
himself and ask the question, "Gould anyone have so clearly 
and harmoniously revealed the hidden things of God except 
the hand of the Lord had been upon him':" Nay, verilv! It 
would have been impossible! THE FINISHED MYSTERY 
is indeed the "seventh plague," and it will do its work! As 
for myself, I want to have a little share in bringing about the 
"Fall of Babylon." 

Pray for me, that I may be faithful even unto death. 

With Christian love, Yours in "that blessed hope," 

Gertrude W. Seibert. — A T . Y. 


[6179] 


(366-367) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


THINKS THE SUGGESTION A GOOD ONE 
Deab Bbethren: — 

I was glad to see your recommendation that all the brethren
 give a copy of Volume Seven to their relatives and friends 
this Christmas, and thus have a share in accomplishing The 
Fatx of Babylon, If Tnrc Watch Toweb subscribers would 
each give away on an average of 10 copies of Vol. VII (which 
are offered at half price, 30c each, plus expressage. in lots of 
10), that would mean at least 300,000 copies of The Finished
 Mysteby distributed this Christmas time! Some can 
give away more than ten copies. 

Am now boarding with a Catholic family, and they ask 
me many questions. They seem to have hearing ears. 
With Christian love, yours in his service, 

Axna J. Gillespie. — Iowa. 
CONTINUED APPBECIATIOKS OF VOLUME SEVEN 
"How can I keep from singing? I feel as did the ruler 
of the marriage feast in Cana when he snid: 'Thou has kept 
the good wine until now.' Surely, surely, Volume Seven is 
from the Master. I fully agree with every thought presented 
therein thus far. Just to think that our dear Master revealed 
to me last fall the significance of the living creatures of 
Ezekiel and the four beasts of Rev. 4:6, which has proven 
to be the KEY to Ezekiel and Revelation. My heart falls 
prone before Him in praise and thanksgiving for his wonderful
 manifestation of grace and love. The chariot mentioned 
on page 63 is wonderful. Of course, the little flock are 
bound to have a chariot to ride in before they could go to 
heaven. And who would desire BETTER horsemen than 
Ezekiel and John? And if it be the Lord's will that we go 
in a whirlwind of anarchy we need not fear, for our horsemen 
are perfectly trained and our chariot was made by the Lord 
himself. What a privilege! 'The cup which my Father hath 
given me shall I not drink it?' 'This is the victory that 
overcometh the world EVEN" OUR FAITH.' 'Have faith in 
God/ Have faith in tbe truth. Have faith in the Seventh 
volume." J. P. W,, Ky. 

"What a rich legacy our dear Pastor has left behind him! 
And I wish to express my thankfulness and appreciation to 
each one of those who had any part in getting this volume 
out, and more than this, I pray that each one may be granted 
a special blessing from the heavenly father as a reward for 
their labor of love for the dear saints everywhere," 

R. A. W., Conn. 
"Have read with deep interest and profit the illuminations 
of Revelation and Ezekiel. How wise and so wonderful that 
God should thus hide these things until these great institutions
 should have served his purpose and demonstrated to an 
astonished world the subtle and deceptive power of the 
adversary 1 How glad we are that his end and complete 
binding is so near at hand! May this fact and the glorious 
era of peace and good will to follow, stimulate us all to 
greater zeal and faithfulness until our change come." 

R. I., Ont. 
"My heart burned (glowed) with love as I eagerly read 
from 'To the King of kings and Lord of lords,' then the 
publishers' preface which I have reread, heartily endorsing it 
as given by the 'Chief Reaper* who fills our hearts with love 
for God and for his people, causing me to rejoice and give 
praise to the Lord for this further evidence of His blessed 
favor. I was graciously permitted the opportunity to finish 
its contents in a little over one week/' 

Mrs. L. E. M.. Mo. 
"I have read enough of Volume Seven to impress me with 
the certainty that its individual title 'The Finished Mystery 1 
well applies. It is indeed a wonderful interpretation of the 
two books of the Bible which the clergy have declared for 
centuries contained no message for mankind. Some of the 
able expositors of present truth in giving to the world the 
above named volume have made easy reading matter of Revelation
 and Ezekiel. It will surely be blessed of God in conveying
 a better understanding of the symbolic language of 
Scripture. It is indeed a fitting apex to the pyramid of Biblical
 interpretation by that 'faithful servant. Pastor Russell, 
who though dead, yet speaketh." S. W. M., Mich. 

"In my early childhood my mother had impressed upon 
my mind that, in time, Revelation would be understood. I 
used to ponder over the plagues, angels, etc. I knew the 
beast was the Roman Catholic church but I could not understand
 the plagues. In due time I learned. Volume Seven 
came as a complete surprise, and is proving a great pleasure." 

M. H. D., Tenn. 
"When Volume Seven was handed to me, the surprise 
made me almost gasp for breath. I am deeply thankful to 
God for this book and for the loving labors of every hand 
that has helped produce it." G. K., Okla. 


"Imagine my very happy surprise when on opening my 
P. O. Box I found Volume Seven! Oh, how delighted I was! 
I am wholly unable to express any appreciation to you for 
so kindly remembering me. Truly our heavenly Father 
knoweth "what things we have need "of and 'is supplying all 
our needs according to his riches in Christ Jesus.' " 

H. R., Tewas. 
"We cannot tell you how much we are anticipating enjoying
 Volume Seven nor of the hearts full of thankfulness and 
love to God and to you, as we read it. We surely realize 
that the Lord is using the same channel in dispensing meat 
in due season, We assure you of our loyal support now and 
to the end and recognize that our dear Brother Rutherford 
was surely chosen of the Lord to lead the church to the end 
of her journey." A. E. W. W., Ohio. 

"I am eighty -two years old and have often wondered, 
'Would I live to see the Seventh Volume of the world's most 
wonderful series of God's mysteries unfolded?' 'Praise the 
Lord, my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy 
name."' G. II., W. Va. 

"We accept Volume Seven heartily and fully as the last 
and final serving at our heavenly Father's table, what has 
been so sumptuously spread with delieious viands of truth 
from Jehovah, by His dear Son through that 'Faithful {Servant
' our dear Pastor. We also perceive it to be the fiery 
chariot that will separate the Elijah and Elisha classes." 

E. A. S. W., R. L 
"I feel that my cup of joy overflows. I rejoice that it 
is due time for this solemn message, and I desire to use 
Volume Seven as the 'chariot* that shall help me mount to 
the skies." Mbs. E. B., Mass. 

"The arrangement of Volume Seven, of chapter and verses 
with comments, is most satisfying. It makes the Sword of 
the Spirit shine brighter and renders its use more facile and 
effective. There is much in it to incite heart-searching as to 
faith, loyalty and love; much to arouse us to watchfulness. 
and to admonish 'My soul, be on thy guard'; much to cause 
thanksgiving and praise. To all who in any measure had any 
share in compiling the Seventh Volume I send my thanks and 
assure them of my prayers ascending to our heavenly Father 
in their behalf. Theirs has been a labor of love and of 
sacrifice. It may bring them persecution and suffering. If 
so, let ours be the privilege of building around them a wall 
of prayer to help comfort and sustain them." L M. F., Pa. 

"The way Volume Seven came to me was a great surprise — 
without any notice of its being off the press! I assure you it 
brings us much rejoicing and blessing of heart, and this is 
only a beginning of what we will receive by our further 
studies of this volume." E. L. M., Ind. 

"Volume Seven is precious beyond any dollar value — I 
would be glad if the payment were a thousand times more, 
I've only had time to taste a little of this 'meat in due season
' and oh! it's so good. Oh, how good God is! His ways 
are past understanding." Mrs. I. W. L., Neb. 

"The Lord has indeed multiplied my blessings this day 
by the safe and unexpected arrival of the Seventh Volume. 
My joy was so evident when the post woman delivered it 
that she had to know about it and was glad to get Volume 
One for herself. ( My cup runneth over.' 

"At our Praise meeting tonight the testimonies were full 
of thanksgiving for this very precious completing volume. The 
immediate effect of the short time already given to Volume 
Seven is a heart full of gratitude to God and a reiteration 
of my consecration to him; also deep thankfulness to our 
Lord Jesus, who has girded himself during this harvest neriod 
and is serving us with so rich a feast culminating in Volume 
Seven, through that 'faithful servant,' our beloved Brother 
Russell (who seems very near to us though parted from us for 
a brief while). The preceding six volumes are made still 
more precious by the possession of the Seventh. Truly we 
are thoroughly furnished." F. H. W., Scotland. 

"Brethren, I cannot fully express my appreciation and joy 
in the Truth, and especially for Volume Seven." 

L. G. M., N. y. 
"Volumo Seven has brought a rich blessing to me. How 
thankful we are that we can trust all things to our blessed 
Master, knowing of a truth that his storehouse is full of 
rich blessings for those that love him, and are called according
 to his purpose!" 0. W. H., Ohio. 

"One of the grandest things in Volume Seven appealing 
to me is that it is thought that 1918 may be the year that 
the church will be taken from the world. That is the greatest 
desire I have." Mrs, L. E. B„ Miss. 

"Thanks for having confidence to believe that the dear 
Volume would be appreciated. Yes I want to say may the 


[6180] 


DecKmbSr 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(354-371) 


dear Lord bless the compilers, publishers, editors, mailers, and 
the brethren for their zeal for him. The book is indeed a feast 
to the children of God." J. D. G., Ga. 

"In reading Volume Seven, 'my soul shall be satisfied as 


with marrow and fatness and my mouth shall praise Thee 
with joyful lips.' I greet my Watch Tower with eager hands 
and thrilling heart; for to me it is the blest tie that binds us 
all in him and brings sweet fellowship." M. M., Kan. 


DATE OF DISTRIBUTION— SUNDAY, DEC. 30 


The B. S. M. Volunteer Matter bearing the title THE FALL 
OF BABYLON, is being shipped to the various classes ordering 
the same. It is expected that the classes will have these papers 
by the latter part of December. Sunday, December 30th, is the 
date set for the distribution of this B. S. M. Where the territory
 is large and cannot be covered in one day, then we suggest 
that the work be continued on the 31st and on January 1st, the 


latter being a holiday. Please distribute none of these papers 
before December 30th. It will be well to neatly fold each 
paper and place under the door or in private letter boxes. 
Previous to the date set the territory should be systematically 
divided and eacn. one desiring to work assigned to his or 
her territory, that the work may be done thoroughly and 
quickly. h 


IN RE MILITARY SERVICE 


A number of the brethren throughout the country are asking 
us with reference to non-combatant service. The Selective 
Draft Act passed by Congress May 18th, this year, provides 
that no one is exempt from service which the President may 
declare is non-combatant. The President, up to the present 
time, has not denned what is non-combatant service, and, as 
we are advised by a high official, it is his intention not to do so. 
When Congress convenes again it is our understanding that the 
matter will be taken up and that body asked to define what is 
non-combatant service. Thus it is seen that at this time there 
is no such thing as non-combatant service that is officially defined
. 

As the law now stands, nobody aside from the President has 


any authority to define what is non-combatant service, so then 
if the Local Board of Exemption announces to any one that 
they will be given non-combatant service, such a statement is 
very indefinite and uncertain. In all probability no noncombatant
 service will be defined for several months in the* 
future. 

We have been asked how many adherents to the International
 Bible Students Association there are in the United 
States. From the names on our Watch Tower list we would 
answer, there are approximately 75,000 adherents. How many 
of these are fully consecrated we do not know. There are 
millions who support much of the doctrine taught by Pastor 
Russell and the I, B. S. A. 


IMPORTANT NOTICE 


Few realize the amount of work necessary to bring up all 
the Good Hopes accounts for the year, and to credit individually 
the thousands of monthly remittances and carry them forward 
to the voting-share record, Last year it was necessary to use 
an extra force of assistants for over six weeks. This year we 
adopted the method of sending out the proxy blanks first, so 
that each one who had voting shares could fill out quickly and 
return. It has been found necessary to close all records on 
November 30th, in order that there may be time to have the 
individual records listed, checked, verified and signed in time 
for the election, Jan. 5th. 

Proxies, to be valid for voting, must be dated and signed 
by the shareholder. Have the signature witnessed. Additionally
 all proxies must be certified by the Secretary and President 
of the Society. Such proxies are then Voting Certificates. Even 
though you expect to be personally present at the Annual 
Meetings, you must sign and send your proxy to the Secretary 
so that it may be properly certified and returned to you. Do 
not wait until the convention convenes. Such delay would 


cause confusion and would probably be too late. All proxies 
should be in the hands of the Secretary no later than Dec. 10th. 
After being certified they will be returned to you by mail, or 
delivered to you or to your proxy in person at the convention. 
Write nothing on the back of the proxy blank except your instructions
 to the party who holds your shares. Use a separate 
sheet for orders or letters. 

We shall make no reply to any further papers sent out by 
the opposition. We realize it is only a desperate attempt on 
the part of the adversary to hinder the harvest work which is 
shaking the very foundations of his kingdom. We prefer above 
everything else the approval of our Lord; and the evidence of 
his blessing upon the work of the past year, and especially 
during the last few months is,, to our mind, abundant evidence 
of his approval, and we therefore leave the matter in his hands, 
knowing that he is well able to care for his own, and bring the 
full truth to light in his own time. We have nothing to hide 
and nothing to fear, but a great and glorious work to do 
quickly* — Nehemiah 6:3. 


Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y,, DECEMBER 15, 1917 


No. 24 


1917— ANNUAL REPORT— 1917 


When the earnest laborers in the Lord's harvest field have 
carefully considered this report, we believe it will bring them 
joy and encouragement. It has been truly said that "Nothing 
succeeds like success." To succeed in the Lord's work means 
to have the blessing of the Lord; and "The blessing of the 
Lord, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it" (Proverbs
 10:22} Therefore the trials which he permits to come 
to us, if properly received, bring a blessing; and hence we 
rejoice in tribulation, thankful in our hearts for all the way 
he leads us. 

The year 1917 has been a strenuous one. The nations of 
earth are in great distress and perplexity as to what course 
shall be taken, and the hearts of men are failing them for 
what they see must be the inevitable result. Those who have 
no faith in prophecy cannot see the rapid weakening of the 
governments. Revolution merging into anarchy is now the 
order in Russia, a condition which is certain to follow in 
the other European nations. The public press quotes Mr. 
Gerard as saying, "When the revolution starts in Germany 
it will be so terrible that it will make the French Revolution 
look like a picnic." Earthquakes, disasters, famine, pestilence, 
etc., are all taking their place in the time of trouble, in fulfilment
 of the prophetic words of the Lord Jesus. Such great 
sorrow, suffering and distress in the world would discourage 
even the Christian, were it not for the assuring words of the 
Master, saying, "When these things begin to come to pass, 
then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption 
draweth nigh."— Luke 21:28. 

THE MASTER THE CHIEF BE APE E 

It is the tendency of almost everyone to lean upon some 
other person. Recognizing Brother Russell as the Lord's 


messenger to the Laodicean church and a3 the Lord's chosen 
servant for the period of the harvest, coupled with his strong 
personality, his kind and loving manner, all of the Lord's 
people of the present time who knew him were led to more 
or less lean upon him. He was a wonderful man, and wonderfully
 used of the Lord. It pleased the Lord to take him 
away from the field of earthly activities, and his passing was 
a great shock to others in the harvest field. It was the thought 
of many that his entering the kingdom marked the end of the 
work. 

The year 1917 opened with rather a discouraging outlook. 
Necessarily there were some misgivings, some doubts and 
fears. The trials came thick and fast; but with each trial 
came increased blessing as a further evidence that the Lord 
is still the Chief Reaper, and that the harvest is not the work 
of man, but the Lord's work. True to his promise, he "turned 
his hand upon his little ones," and has "opened the windows 
of heaven and poured out a blessing" upon his people beyond 
their greatest expectations or hopes. More and more his people
 began to realize that the work of the harvest does not 
depend upon any person or persons, but that the Lord is amply 
capable of performing his own sovereign will and accomplishing 
his purposes in his own due time. 

THE WORK AT BROOKLYN 

Shortly before the death of Brother Russell he had determined
 upon a reorganization of the office force; and to this 
end he made several changes and gave directions concerning 
others. These were carried out; and the Lord's guiding hand 
and overruling providences in this behalf .are plainly to he seen. 
The reorganization of the office force upon a strictly business 
and economic basis was completed and is now moving with a 


[6181] 


(371-372) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BuooxirYW, N. Y. 


smoothness and efficiency that should characterize any wellmanaged
 institution, accomplishing more work with less effort. 
The members of the office force realize that it is a privilege and 
not a right to be in the office; and each one vies with the 
other to do his or her part of the work in an efficient manner 
;tnd to the glory of the Lord. The same may be said of the 
management of" the Bethel Home. Everyone in both the 
home and the office is happy; and "the peace of God which 
passeth all human understanding" is enjoyed by all. 

It took some time, of course, to become accustomed to 
the home and the office without the presence of Brother Russell
, but those having and manifesting the spirit of the Lord 
have learned to lean more and more upon the Lord and to 
strive to be a blessing to others. That Brother Russell on 
the other side the veil has had much to do with the management
 of the office, the home and the work of the harvest on 
this side the veil, we verily believe. These things were dearest 
to hi? heart of all things on earth. He had devoted his life 
to this special work. He had established the Bethel Home 
and the office arrangement. Who would be more interested 
in having these used to the glory of the Lord than Brother 
Russell? It was his interpretation of Revelation 14:13 that 
the saants in glory beyond the veil still participate in the 
work this side the veil during the period of the harvest. Commenting
 upon that Scripture, he said: 

"One by one the 'feet' class will pass from the present 
condition, in which, though often weary and wounded, 
they are always rejoicing, to the other side of the veil — 
'changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye/ from 
mortality to immortality, from weakness to power, from 
dishonor to glory, from human to heavenly conditions, 
from animal to spirit bodies. Instead of the kingdom 
waiting for the living members to finish their course, the 
kingdom work began at once; and the living ones on 
this side the veil are privileged to know 'the mysteries 
of the kingdom* and to engage in kingdom work before 
their 'change 5 ; and as they die will not fall 'asleep/ 
but will be 'changed' in the moment of death, resurrected 
as part of the blessed and holy first resurrection. 

"Their work will not cease with this change; for all 

those who will be counted worthy of that change to glory 

will be already enlisted in the service of the kingdom on 

this side the veil: only the weariness, the labor feature, 

will cease with the change. We may not be able to judge 

accurately as to what features of the great work are now 

being carried on by the Lord and his glorified saints 

beyond the veil; but we may be sure that they are active 

participants in the work assigned to the members of the 

same kingdom class whose course and service are not 

yet ended on this sdde the veil — the harvest work." 

THE FINISHED MTSTEET 

For years Brother Russell held and taught that the church 

nominal^ Catholic and Protestant, would federate; that they 

would be recognized more or less by the civil powers; that the 

church nominal constitutes "Babylon"; that the association 

of the ecclesiastical with the civil powers is an abomination 

in the sight of the Lord; that the members of the church this 

side the veil, particularly during the latter part of the'harvest, 

were typed by John the Baptist; that the "John" class would 

probably give a strong rebuke to "Babylon"; that the rebuke 

would consist of a plain proclamation of the truth, exposing 

the error; and that this work would just precede the settling 

down of the "dark night when no man can work" in the harvest 

field; and that "Babylon" must fall. He was fully convinced 

that such work must be done. At a question meeting held at 

one of the conventions in 1916 by Brother Russell, in answering 

a question concerning the judgment and the binding of kings 

and nobles, he said: 

"The two-edged sword means the Word of God. That 
must mean here [this side the veil], for no one will be 
smiting anything with a two-edged sword over there. 
This two-edged sword in the hands of the saints means 
that while they are resting in their faith, they have the 
Word of God, sharp and powerful, and with it are able 
to oppose everything opposed to the truth. All this 
belongs to this side of the veil. These are the saints who 
are to execute the judgments written. How? I cannot 
give all the details. Undoubtedly there will be a great 
many details when we reach that time. We should be 
ready to take any part which the Lord may give us. He 
will 'give all of his people a share. We shall see what 
this judging may mean a little later on. The river Jordan 
means a judgment, and the smiting of this judgment may 
mean to put the truth in such a way as to do the judging. 
The EHijah will handle this sword." 
Up to the very day of his change Brother Russell was 


bending every effort to prepare for the smiting of "Babylon." 
It should be carefully marked that the message of truth in 
due time constitutes the sharp, two-edged sword; and that 
the an ti typical Elijah class, otherwise designated as the antitypical
 "John" class, would be used of the Lord to send forth 
this message of truth far and wide, that it might accomplish 
the divine purposes. 

Following Brother Russell's "change," an Executive Committee
, composed of Brothers Ritchie, Van Amburgh and Rutherford
, was appointed to manage the affairs of the Society 
until the annual election in January, 1917. Within a short 
time after the creation of this committee, it was brought to 
the attention of its members that Brothers Woodworth and 
Fisher had some understanding and interpretations of Revelation
 and Ezekiel that might be helpful; and since Brother 
Russell had stated that some one else would write the Seventh 
Volume, and since he had stated that the Seventh Volume 
would come to the church, and since the Scriptures clearly 
?ot forth that there must be seven volumes of Studies in the 
Scriptures, the Committee carefully considered the matter 
amd decided to have the two brethren named write manuscript 
and compile what had been written by Brother Russell upon 
the prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation. No promise whatsoever
 was made by the committee to these brethren as to 
whether the manuscript would be used. 

Early in the summer of 1917 the manuscript was completed
; and after a careful and prayerful consideration, it 
was believed to be the Lord's will that it should be published
 and given out to the church. The readers of Tiil 
Watch Tower are familiar with the fact that it was published
, and about the middle of July was sent to all Watch 
Tower subscribers, and on the 17th of July was delivered to 
the Bethel family. It was prepared under the direction of the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, as will be seen by 
reference to the preface. The name of the Society likewise 
appears on the outside of the cover. Upon the title page 
appears the name of the International Bible Students 
Association, which has likewise appeared on the title pages 
of the other volumes for several years; and the copyright 
was put in the name of the Peoples Pulpit Association. 
Thus it is seen that all three of the corporations, which jointly 
are used to carry on the harvest work, participated in the 
putting out of the hook; and its publication was fully accomplished
 by "the messenger" of Revelation 14:18 — the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society, which is maintained by 
the sacrifice of the saints of God. 

In harmony with the expectation of the Lord's "little 
ones," who had been engaged in the harvest work, this, The 
Finished Mystery, the seventh of the series of Studies in 
the Scriptures, contains a clear exposition of the prophecies 
of Ezekiel and Revelation. Never has there been any publication
 which so clearly defines "Babylon," outlines her wrongful 
course, and exposes her fraudulent practices, as the Seventh 
Volume. This book is designated "the Point of the Sword," 
which is set against the Babylonish systems, and which, cutting 
away the mask, exposes the true nature and foretells the 
imminent fall of Babylon. (Ezekiel 21 :15) The "Point of the 
Sword" is sharp on both sides. It truly represents the testimony
 of the two great prophetic books "of the Bible — Revelation
 and Ezekiel. Can there be a reasonable doubt that the 
message of the Seventh Volume is the instrument in the 
hands of the Lord's consecrated, the antitypical Elijah class, 
with which the smiting is to be done? And since Brother 
Russell stated, "The Elijah class will handle this sword; he 
will give all of his people a share," is it at all unreasonable 
to expect that in due time the truly consecrated and earnest 
workers in the harvest field will grasp the sword, and go 
forth with joyful hearts to the performance of the duties and 
privileges placed in their hands by the Lord? 

ITS PHENOMENAL SUCCESS 

When the book was first published, it was thought that 
less than 100,000 volumes would be required, and a contract 
was made by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
with the printers for the manufacture of less than 100,000 
volumes. This number was soon exhausted, and more were 
ordered. Near the close of our fiscal year the demand became 
so great — colporteurs everywhere reporting so much interest 
manifested by the public, the orders coming in with such 
rapidity — that up to this time we have found it necessary to 
give orders for the 850,000 edition. Many of the classes, following
 the suggestions of The Watch Tower of October 1st, 
have organized for the sale of the Seventh Volume j and 
hundreds of the friends who have heretofore had no active 
part in the colporteur service are now placing many volumes 
in the hands of the people. Many order-loving people, heretofore
 entire strangers to the harvest message, are receiving 


[6182] 


Dbckubkr 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(373-374) 


the message of Volume Seven with gladness of heart. If space would be especially pleasing to the Lord that his people 

would permit we could insert many statements similar to assemble in convention in 1917. 

the following; The Society put forth a strenuous effort to have one 

"It is the most wonderful book 1 have ever read. It has general convention at a central point in the United States, 

shown me clearly what is wrong with the churches and the with a view to having all the friends assemble there who 

clergy; and I don't want to go there any more." could possibly come. So many things interfered with arAnother
 said, "It has cleared all the mists away. No rangements for the holding of such a convention that we came 

wonder 1 could get no satisfaction from the churches!" to the conclusion that it was not the Lord's will to attempt 

Another wrote, "I always realized there was something to have it. We wondered if we could have a convention at 

wrong with the systems, but never could define the trouble all without Brother Russell being present in the flesh, ana 1 yet 

until I got this book. I want to get out of Babylon while we felt sure it would be pleasing to the Lord that his people 

the getting is good." come together. About the time our efforts for this general 

The sale of the Seventh Volume is unparallelled by the convention failed, requests began to pour into the office from 

sale of any other book known, in the same length of time, all parts of the country, asking for conventions to be held, 

excepting the Bible. The classes that are using it as a Bercan Arrangements were made to hold a few conventions. These 

study report wonderful blessings. It is not claimed that the were attended with such manifest approval of the Lord, and 

book is perfect, nor was this claim made for the preceding such a wonderful blessing to his people, that it was determined 

six volumes. No imperfect creature could produce any perfect to respond to the call of the church in so far as possiblo; 

thing. A number of typographical errors have been corrected and consequently the Society responded, arranging the routes 

in the second edition. Others will be corrected as found. It of the traveling pilgrim brethren and others of the office force 

is not claimed that all interpretations are perfect, nor would so that small conventions might be held in various parts of 

such claim be made for any of the series of the seven volumes; the United States. 

but that the hand of the Lord has supervised its publication Since August the first up to this time, twenty-one of these 

and distribution must be evident to all who have been watch- conventions have been held, not one of which was held except 

ing the Lord's direction of the harvest, and who have joy- upon the earnest request of the local classes. Those who have 

fully participated in that portion that has come to them. attended can testify to the wonderful blessings coming to them. 

We are pleased to announce that the translation of the Everywhere the spirit of the Lord has been manifest, and it 

Seventh Volume into Swedish and French has already been is our belief that Brother Russell beyond the veil has been 

accomplished, and both are to be off the press this month, in permitted to have some part in these conventions. Those who 

Europe. As soon as we can fill orders in these or other are privilpged to manage the work of the Society claim no 

languages, announcement will be made in these columns. It credit whatsoever, but numbly and joyfully acknowledge the 

is being translated and published by instalments in the Ger- Lord's favor in having any part in these assemblies which 

man, Polish and Greek Watch Towers. It is being translated have strengthened his people in the hour of greatest stress 

into four other foreign languages, and doubtless will be trans* that has yet come upon the world or upon the church. These 

lated into many more soon. conventions have not only strengthened the faith of the many 

"THIS HOVOR HAVE ALL HIS SAINTS" attending, but have enthused many to lay aside earthly weights 

Brother Russell long ago stated in The Watch Toweb and joyfully enter the harvest field. The requests for such 

that the "penny" of Matthew 20:2-17 constitutes "kingdom conventions continue to pour in, and we take this as an inhonors
," From the quotation above made, he mentions the dication from the Lord that it is his will that the Society 

honor that will come to the kingdom class in binding the kings continue to arrange for them. 

and nobles and in executing the judgments by the sword. He THE PBI0&IM SERVICE 

further stated that the giving of the "penny" surely means j^ has always pleased the Lord to have the message of the 

something that will occur in this present life this side the kingdom proclaimed by word of mouth. The pilgrim service 

veil, and that it would take place at the end of the age; that k a8 been greatly blessed by the Lord since the Society inaugthose
 coming into the harvest field recently have an equal urated it. The meetings held by the various pilgrim brethren 

opportunity with those who have been long in the service in have brought many blessings to the consecrated and to the 

wielding the eword according to the Lord'a appointed pur- public. The greatest number of pilgrims engaged in the work 

poses. Further commenting Upon the "penny," Brother Rus- m 191 6 was 69. Conditions became such that some of these 

sell said: are no longer engaged in the pilgrim service, but the Lord 

"We can think of only one way, and that is to apply seemingly has been pleased to raise up others to perform this 

the parable entirely to present life experiences of the part of his work. At this time there is a total of 93 brethren 

kingdom class, especially those who will be living at the engaged in this branch of the service, which we believe has 

close of the Gospel age, and a3 greater knowledge of not been exceeded during any year of the harvest. Below is 

present truth is now coming as a reward to all who will a brief summary of the pilgrim work for this year: 

labor at all in the vineyard of the Lord, let us not be sur- Engaged in pilgrim service 93 

prised if this should be equally distributed to those who Miles traveled 617,186 

have come in recently with those who have been a long Towns visited 6,672 

time in the Master's service," — Z '14, 171-172. Public meetings 1,956 

It is with sincere joy that we are privileged to report Semi-public meetings 3,287 

that amongst the activities of the Watch Tower Bible and Total attendance 850,734 

Tract Society for 1917 the Seventh Volume of Studies in VOLTOTEER service 

thb Scriptures has been published, and is now going forth, __ * 1.1. T j v j i. i i. 

We count this as another one of the strong proofs t&at the . £** arm f °« the L ?F d ha3 do ™ * *"** volunteer service 

harvest is nearing the end, and that in all probability the > n thls f™^*™**?** *?* B £ thls T m&an th * LP ubhca " 

Spring of 1918 will mark the beginning of the closing up of tian and free distribution of the Bible Students Monthly. 

all activities of the kingdom class on this side the veil Truly J™ ^ onS h * Ve bee " P ubl ^h d ™& districted, aggregating 

the message of Volume Seven has caused a great light to ?^6o,000 copies. The third edition of approximately 

shine upon the pathway of the Elijah class, and with joy they 10.000,000 is now enroute to the classes to be distributed on 

sinsr* December 30th of this year, and the first of January of next 

"And heaven shines clearer ?<*>*- Yl^t had many responses to these papers, testifyAnd
 rest comes nearer in S that thev have * r ° u g h * blessings to many hearts. 

At each step of the way." OTHEB BRANCHES OF THE WOBK 

OONVEOTIOHS OF HIS PEOPLE The PHOTO-DRAMA of Cbeation has been shown during the 

For a number of years it has been the custom of the year at various places, and interest in it still continues, the 

Watch Tower BrBLE and Tract Society to hold one or more total attendance for the year being 292,338. The number of 

general conventions, at which all believers in the ransom sac- productions was 678. The Eureka Drama productions were 

riflce are welcome. It has always been recognized that these 901 and the total attendance €2,483. 

conventions are stimulating, building up those who attend in Since it is contrary to the terms of the Charter of our 

the "most holy faith" and keeping their minds fixed upon Association for the Society to engage in the manufacture 

that great convention of the "general assembly of the church and sale of Angelophone machines, it became necessary to 

of the first borns" to which we have all been looking forward. put this branch of work in other hands, and it is still 

Having in mind that we were nearing the end of the way, continuing. It being entirely in harmony, however, for the 

and desiring to heed the words of the Apostle, "Not forsaking Society to still manufacture and sell the records for tla 

the assembling of yourselves together, as the manner of some Angelophone. arrangements were made with the brother who 

is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye took over the Angelophone Company, whereby the Society 

see the day approaching" (Hebrews 10:25), we felt that it finances the reproduction of the records. These new records 

[6183] 


(3N-J7S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brookitx, N. Y. 


have nroven ver y satisfactory, and furnish another means 
that the Lord is using to give the message of glad tidings to 
those having hearing ears. 

The pastoral work has been greatly blessed during the 
year. For the year 1916 there were 350 classes engaged m 
the pastoral work. During the first part of the year 1917 there 
was a slight increase, but later in the year more classes engaged
 in it, and the total number engaged in pastoral work 
tor 1917 was 924. The results have been very gratifying, 
many hearing the truth and making full consecration and 
symbolizing this consecration; a number of new Berean .Bible 
classes have been established. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

Many of the dear brethren who heretofore have been engaged
 in the colporteur work were compelled to engage in 
secular business in order to provide themselves with the 
necessities of life. Consequently during the year 1916 there 
were only 372 colporteurs. During the year 1917 this number 
has been increased to 461, regularly engaged in colporteur 
service. Added to this, 355 classes have duly organized and 
are carrying on the special colporteur work. By this means 
the county where the class is located is divided into smaller 
sections, and everyone of the consecrated who desires to have 
a part in this work is assigned to a small district until he has 
finished, and then assigned to another district until the territory
 is entirely covered. Some of the classes have as many as 
100 engaged in the colporteur work, many of whom have 
never before had any experience; but they report some very 
splendid results and many blessings of the Lord. If we count 
10 members as the average of a class doing the ^ colporteur 
work, we have 3550 special colporteurs and 461 regular colporteurs
, which at this time would aggregate 4011 engaged in 
the colporteur work; and from the daily reports coming to 
the office we anticipate this number will more than double 
very shortly. We give below a comparative summary of the 
output of the various publications for the years 1915, 1916 
and 1917: 

1915 1916 1917 

Studies (English and foreign) 362,344 265,495 574,838 

Drama Scenarios (hound books) 55,630 70,000 87,567 
Mannas and other books 53,355 42,000 95,898 

Booklets (English and foreign) 88,447 110,000 191,719 
the watch toweb {24 issues) 1,272,000 1,128,000 1,211,000 
German watch toweb (12 issues) 24,000 24,000 25,000 
Polish watch toweb (12 issues) 24,000 17,000 19,000 
Our correspondence for this year has been unusually heavy. 
We have endeavored with the well-organized office force to 
handle this as rapidly as possible. 
Number of letters received during the fiscal year, 203,686 
*' " " sent out during the fiscal year, 167,154 

ATOITORS' REPORT 

At various times heretofore the books of the Society have 
been audited by a committee selected by Brother Russell for 
that purpose. At a recent meeting of the Board of Directors 
an auditing committee was selected and notified to come to 
the office and make thorough examination and audit of the 
books and accounts of the Society, The report of this auditing
 committee appears below and speaks for itself: 

The undersigned committee, upon request of the President
 and the Secretary-Treasurer of the Watch Toweb 
Bible and Tbaot Society, submit the following report t 
On the 8th day of December, 1917, an examination of 
the books of the Society was made at the office in the 
Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N. Y„ 
said examination covering the period of the fiscal year, 
Nov. 1, 1916 to the close of business, Oct. 31, 1917. 

The books were found in excellent condition, accurately
 kept, with the accounts stated fully and clearly. 
The Society's cash was found to be properly deposited 
in banks, trust companies and safety deposit vaults. 

The system of accounting used in the office seems admirably
 adapted for the purpose of the Society. The 
office has been organized on an excellent efficiency basis, 
the space, material and personnel being used in a manner 
that commands our highest commendation. 

With our knowledge of corporations doing large business
, we doubt whether it would be possible to find elsewhere
 the same amount of business transacted with the 
same number of employes. 

Every feature of the office work, the forma used, and 
the methods employed, bespeak the utmost economy in 
time and money. 

The committee finds the stock of books and other literature
 kept in an orderly manner, and that the amount 
of stock is kept at the lowest point consistent with good 


management, and that the movement of the stock is expedited
 by every known means. 

The transportation of large shipments to various parts 
of the country is made expeditious and economical, whereever
 possible, by forwarding direct from the factory. 

The record of voting shares kept hy the SecretaryTreasurer
 we find to be complete and accurate. 
Eliot H. Thomson, 

General Bookkeeper, Washington Loan & Trust 
Company, .Washington, D. C. 
Hakry J. Aldbich, 

Efficiency Engineer, Spencer Kellogg 3 Sons, 
Incorporated, Buffalo, N. V. 
Clayton J. Woodwobth, 

Vice-President and Auditor, Foster Correspondence
 Schools, Scranton, Pa. 

FINANCIAL CONDITION 
Never during the harvest has the Lord's approval and 
loving kindness been made more manifest in his provision 
for the carrying on of his work than during this year. At 
the beginning of the fiscal year the contributions came rather 
slowly. For the first four months they were about like the 
first part of 1915; but in the latter part of the fiscal year, 
particularly from August until the close of the year on 
October 31st, 1917, contributions to the Tract Fund greatly 
increased, and by comparing this with the previous reports 
published in The Watch Tower it will be seen that for the 
fiscal year 1917 the contributions exceeded any yet in the history
 of the Society, with the exception of the two phenomenal 
years of 1913 and 1914. The zeal and earnestness manifested 
by the friends in sending in their sacrifices has been an inspiration
 to those who have read their communications. We 
append hereto a copy of the financial statement issued by the 
auditing committee, which is self-explanatory: 

The audit of the books of the WAtch Toweb Bible 
and Tract Society for the fiscal year ending October 31, 
1917, is in detail as follows: 

Receipts 
Good Hopes and Tract Fund 

Donations $219,545.41 

^ , . Expenditures 

Pilgrim Service $27,700.63 

Free Literature, Books, etc 54,544.20 

Sent to Foreign Fields 24,512.20 

Pastoral Work 282.24 

Various Conventions 2,866.00 

Repayment of advances made in 
1916 (See Z. '15-373 and '16-389. 
$100,713.09 minus $20,000.00) 80,713.09 
Balance on hand 28,927.05 


$219,545.41 
[Signed] Eliot H. Thomson 
Habby J. Aldbich 
Clayton J. Woodwobth 

It is proper that we mention the fact that by reference 
to the report for 1915 it will be seen that the Society borrowed 
a large sum. It will be observed on the financial sheet of 
1917 that after repaying this amount there is still a balance 
of the approximate sum of $28,000 to the credit of the Good 
Hopes fund. It should be observed, however, that the needs 
of the foreign branches are such that it has been necessary 
for us to remit to them a goodly amount since the close of 
the fiscal year. It is also necessary for us to carry a large 
stock of paper in order that we may have our books and 
tracts promptly manufactured. During the month of November
 alone it was necessary for us to order 18 carloads of paper 
at an average cost of $2,000.00 per car. Paper this year is 
much higher than it has been in previous years. It will thus 
be seen by reference to the financial report that the Society 
is in a healthy financial condition, but as it has always been 
the policv of the Society to use the money as it came in, the 
preparation for the work in the near future will quickly 
absorb the balance to the credit of the Good Hopes fund. Our 
future operations will be governed as the Lord may indicate 
by providing the means. 

We are pleased to announce that the Brooklyn Tabernacle 
and the Bethel Home are free from all debt or encumbrance, 
and since the disposition of the New York City Temple, which 
was heavily mortgaged, the Socihtty has no debts upon which 
it i« required to pay interest. 

For all the Lord's leadings and blessings in this behalf we 
are indeed grateful, and to him we give all the credit and 
praise for every feature of the service. 
REFERENDUM VOTE 

As heretofore announced in Thr Watch Toweb, upon the 


[6184] 


December 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(375-376) 


suggestion of others the classes were asked to meet at their 
respective places of assembly on the 21st day of November, 
and cast a referendum vote as to who should constitute the 
servants of the Society in the capacity of Directors and 
officers for the ensuing year. The following well known 
brethren; namely, K. H. Thomson, Gen. W. P. Hall, and J. T. 
D. Pyles, of Washington, D. C, consented to act as a committee
 to receive and tabulate the vote, and report, Some 
of the classes laboring under a misapprehension, as we are 
advised, neglected to take that vote; but the classes voting 
and thus far reported to the committee, show returns as 
given below : 

Washington, D. C, Dec. 13, 1917. 
To the Officers and Directors of the 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, 
Brooklyn, New York. 
Dear Brethren : 

We report herewith the returns from 813 ecclesias 
who have sent to this committee the results of the advisory
 election for Directors and Oihjcers of the Society, 
as suggested in The Watch Tower of November 1, 1917. 

_ _ Sec'yCandidate
 Director 

J. F. Kutnerford 10,990 

W. E. Van Amburgh 10,909 

G. H. Fisher 10,333 

J. A, Bohnet 10 323 

10,204 

9,880 

8,888 

1,776 

680 

548 

469 

459 

444 

342 

293 

181 

143 

126 

100 


A. H. Macmillan 

W. E. Spill 

A. N. Pierson 

C J. Woodworth 

M. Sttirgeon 

A. I. Ritchie 

R. H. Hirsh 

I. H. Hoskins 

J. I>. Wright 

H. O. Rockwell 

R. J. Martin 

W. F. Hudgings 

A. E. Burgess 

P. S. li. Johnson. . . . 

E. W. Brenneisen . . . 

89 others receiving 

than 100 votes . . . 


less 


1,036 


Pres. 

Vice-Pres. 

Treas. 

10,869 

14 

3 

14 

418 

10,700 

4 

395 

30 

1 

126 

4 

2 

1,856 

102 


183 

1 

49 

5,722 

13 

28 

828 

2 

376 

73 

36 

10 

223 

21 

1 

2 

25 

3 

2 

4 

5 

X 

13 

209 

17 

73 

7 


30 

14 


9 

11 

20 

25 

19 

1 

4 

3 

26 

182 

94 


TOTAL. VOTES CAST 11,421 9,680 11,802 

Fifty-live classes reported that they were unable or 
unwilling to vote. 

A final report, to include belated returns from foreign 
points, will be submitted at the annual meeting in January
 next. 

[Signed] J. T. D. Ptles 
W. P. Haix 
Eliot H. Thomson. 

FOREIGN WORK 

The harvest work in the foreign field still has the Lord's 
blessing, notwithstanding the great stress. In Germany the 
pilgrim service, colporteur^ work and the harvest work in 
general are still progressing. The Bible House is maintained, 
but its management from the headquarters is conducted 
through a representative of the Society in a neutral country. 
The work in general is in very good condition, we are pleased 
to report 

The first public meeting held in Holland was in the summer
 of 1913. Considerable interest was then manifested, and 
now we have two representatives in Holland and much interest 
in the Lord's cause is being aroused. 

The condition of the work in other foreign fields will oppear
 from the reports, some of which are published below, and 
others will be published in subsequent issues. 

BEFOET OF BRITISH BBANOH 

Dear Bbotheb Ruthebfqbd: — 

I have pleasure in enclosing a summary of the output of 
books and tracts in the British Harvest Field during the year 
which ended with us on October 31st last, the memorial to 
us of our dear Brother Russell's death. 1 have also the 
pleasure of giving you herewith a brief review of the year's 
work. The year has been in some ways the strangest of 
years for us. We have had our trials and difficulties; and 
these have come in unexpected ways, and from unexpected 
quarters. But the year has been one of the best that we have 
had in the whole of our experience in the harvest work, and 
we have very much for which to .thank the Lord. Looking 
at the figures which we are enabled to report, we are surprised
 that during the third year of the great European war 
we are able to show so good a report. The pressure of the 
Military Service Act began to be felt at the opening of our 
financial year, and it has continued. Our young men, those 
who made in almost every ecclesia the dynamic force of the 
class, have been taken away from us. The Chief Reaper has 
seen fit to take them out of the harvest field, and he has 
placed them in strange situations. Many of them are together
 in various settlements in the country, and they are 
enabled to look back over their experiences, and in many 
cases they are enabled to "try" one another. Also they have 
the privilege of gladly helping each other toward that rounding
 out of the character which the Master desires to have. 
It seems as if the general experience of the. harvest work this 
year has emphasized this latter feature: probably the harvesters
 have more than at any time felt that the benefit of 
the work was for themselves rather than those for whom they 
seemed to labor. 

I will now give you a brief account of the various branches 
of the work, beginning with the 

Pilgrim Service 

In this branch of the work we report with pleasure, and 
with thankfulness of heart to our heavenly Father, a considerable
 increase of activity, . We were, by the favour of 
the Lord, able to use the time and talents of good, loyal 
brethren who had, if not the whole time, at least a considerable
 portion of their time free for thi3 service. The result 
is that there has been more visitation of the British classes 
than at any time in the history of the harvest work. The 
letters from all the classes are full of gratitude and appreciation
 of the labour and ministry of our pilgrim brethren
; and it is abundantly evident that the blessing of the 
Lord has been with us in this branch of the service. There 
is a very close bond of union between the brethren in this 
country at this time; and we believe the Lord will bless us 
even more abundantly. 

Colporteur Work 

The colporteur work has not been so brisk as last year, 
nor indeed as brisk, we think, as it might have been. We give 
all honour to the dear brethren who have continued in that 
work, and who have wrought so hard and so well. Our output
 of books is 62,685, which is only 9,000 less than last year. 
Most of these books have, of course, been put out by the 
colporteurs, and a fair proportion of them have been sold 
in the Drama follow-up work. 

Volunteer Work 
Our output of volunteer literature has fallen considerably. 
There are two main factors in this decline: the fact that our 
workers are depleted — many active young men who engaged 
in this work having been taken away from us — and the shortage
 of paper. In the early part of the year it was almost 
impossible to buy paper, and the price asked was very heavy. 
Then we did not receive our copy from America for quite 
a while, and thus we thought it might not be the Lord's will 
for us to force open a door. However, as soon as the Lord 
gave liberty, we hurried the work forward; and our brethren 
speedily got out a good edition of the "World on Fire," 
B. S. M. No. 91. Altogether a total of 3,300,000 ha-s been 
distributed during the year. Our output of tracts, including 
those to advertise the Drama, is 4,100,000, which may be said 
to be about one- third of a late average good year. 
PHOTO-DRAMA 

The Drama has done well, though we must use that w T ord 
in a comparative sense. It seemed as if it3 days here were 
numbered. There was nothing doing. But in late Spring, 
the Lord opened the way. One of our dear brethren who 
had conditional exemption from the Military Service wrought 
hard and long, and we have been able, by his and other willing 
service, to run one exhibition, as might be said, almost continuously
; that is, we have taken one exhibition to a town, 
evening only, for four days, concluding with the finale on 
Sundays. The results have been very gratifying, almost as 
good as if we had h«d an eight days show with two exhibitions
 per day. Even in this limited way we have had 
over 9,000 names for colporteur calls; and very good results 
have, on the whole, been obtained. It seems as if the Lord 
were about to open the Drama door a little wider, and there 
is a possibility of a good witness yet being given by this 
means. The Photo-Drama is very acceptable everywhere. Any 
town would take it regularly; and it would be a continuous 
attraction, though of course we seek to do that which is best 
in the general interests of the harvest field. 
Fa*tor*l Work 

The pastoral work is new to us this year, and we on this 
side were late in starting. For several reasons it seemed impossible
 to begin until the year was well advanced. The 
number of classes which have taken up this work is seventyeight
; and though our reports are not all that we can desire 
in showing results, yet we know that the Lord has blessed 
the work very much. There are many today who are fully 
consecrated to the Lord but who, before they were visited by 
the pastoral workers, did not know the way of consecration, 
even though their hearts were leaning towards the Lord, and 


[6186] 


(376-377) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


who did not know the joy of his glorious plan. Our hearts keep the Lord's people busy in the harvest field, so that all 

are made glad as we think of the blessings which have come their spare time is devoted to this work. Whenever a new 

through this work. The sisters are rejoicing in their oppor- B. S. M. is issued, the friends hold special prayer meetings, 

tunities of service, and the Lord is blessing them very much. and then on the same day they distribute the good tidings in 

Finance every part of the French harvest field. Thus the work is 

The financial side of the work has been easy; for there supported by the continued prayers of the saints, and the 

ha3 been no difficulty whatever here. The contributions ot blessing has been much greater than ever before. We do the 

the Lord's people to the work have not stopped; and the same f or photo-Drama showings and for public lectures, 
brethren generally have expressed their confidence that the During the year the French work has made much progress, 

office still represented the Lord's work, and\ that the Lord especially in the unity of spirit amongst the brethren. The 

would take care of that which was committed to him. This distribution of free literature is much larger than that of last 

has been shown by an increase of over £1000 compared with year — the ou tput this year having been 210,000 tracts more 

last year, and we have been very thankful for these indica- t h an j aat vear> ^ ie attendance at public leeturee has been 

tions of the Lord's good pleasure. excellent — about 5,000 more than last year. The increase in 

Seventh Volume t* le number of volumes sold was 1,300. This year we are 

There is one feature of the work which remains to be publishing Vol. 3, and Vol. 7 is now on the press. Early in 

mentioned— the Seventh Volume. We should have been very the incoming year we hope to publish Vol. 4 We shall then 

pleased if we could have reported to you that the brethren have all the Studies in the Scriptures in irench. tor this 

had this in hand, and that its message was being spread. As great blessing we are very thankful to the Lord. 
you know we could not get this circulated here because of General Eeport for the Year 

lack of the necessary plates. At the time of writing the Letters and Cards received 3,230 

plates are not yet in hand, and it may be that there will be Letters and Card dispatched 2,147 

difficulties in getting them through the importation burrage. Packages and Parcels dispatched 2,121 

However, this matter is in the Lord's hands, and we quite Scripture Studies sold 2,735 

understand that it is of his providence that the plates are on Booklets sold 3,715 

this side and so near to us. Paper also is a difficulty. We Tracts distributed 418,217 

ordered paper many months ago, but we have not yet got a Total attendance at pilgrim meetings arid at 

delivery of it. However, no doubt the paper will be ready Photo-Drama showings 56,550 

just about the time when the plates are ready; and then ****** Eeport 

when we are through with the printing and other litle dim- p^^ah^^o 

culties— and the printers and binders are very busy with the Receipts bxptn&xturea 

trashy books which fill our book-stalls— we shall hope to put Donations re- * or b o ok s, 

the Seventh Volume in circulation in time to get it into the ceived and tracts, etc. . 30,450.02 Fr. 

hearts of the brethren and into the hands of those to whom stock on Balance 69.86 

the Lord would send it. ha * d • 30,519.88 Fr. « ft «,QB«u-7 

We would urge the dear British brethren who read this oa-i«qqtj. JU,dih.*s *r. 

report, and who have ability to serve in the colporteur work, J?"'?"!-* 58 t r * T 

to consider very specially in the sight of the Lord the privi- With much Christian love I am, -__ 

lege of this work before the hours of service are ended. Those Your Brother and servant m the Lord, A. Feettag. 

who cannot enter into that work directly may still do so by AUSTRALASIAN BBANOH REPOBT 

praying the Lord of the harvest to send laborers into his £>eab Bbethrkn in Uhbist: — 

service; for still it is true the harvest is great, but the j us t one year has passed since we became bereft of our 

laborers are few. dear Brother Russell; and while we still have his beautiful 

The general condition of the country is one of prosperity; words of comfort, revealment of the Scripture and guidance, 

and certainly it is true that there are weary hearts to com- ve t even though so far away from the centre of the work, 

fort, hungry souls to be fed as never before. The devastating h ow greatly have we missed his influence! Yet we realize 

effects of this terrible war are making many long for some- that the Lord has been with us and that while we have not 

thing they feel ought to be there, but which they do not get. p U t 0U £ so man y volumes as previously, yet there has really 

They have asked for bread; they got a stone. We are thank- been mor e interest discovered through the various methods 

ful for signs of a movement towards an increase of work in f WO rk in vogue. 

the colporteur field, and we believe that there will yet be We bave j oa t S( > m e colporteurs through sickness, death 
a good work done. and other circumstances. This accounts for the small output; 
The Watch Toweb continues to be welcomed as always; f 0T BOme f t he wor ]t ers have done better this year than 
and the brethren receive it as they have been accustomed to ever before. At times local conditions have made it difficult 
do, as the channel conveying to them the Lord's blessing. ^ p] ace the volumes in the homes. But generally the people 
We regularly pray that the Lord will bless this channel to have mor e money now than ever, and it is usually easier to 
His people, that they may .be fed and led. The spiritual g e t a hearing and stir interest. We are glad that there is 
health of the brethren continues good. The Tabernacle con- ^m a p r0 spect of more laborers entering the field, and trust 
gregation continues with one heart and mind, waiting upon that much may yet be done in sending out the Tiuth. 
the Lord; and the congregations in the larger centres — Tn e shipping difficulties which interfered with the colGlasgow
, Edinburgh, Liverpool, Birmingham, Manchester, porteur work also interfered with the volunteer work, so that 
Oldham and Bristol — are continuing in the way of the Lord we bave f a u en below the million mark. What has been dene, 
in faith and patient Jabor. The many other classes are labor- however, has been done well. Our work of sending through 
ing as faithfully and patiently, and we should be glad to the post to ajl out-lying towns and districts has resulted in 
mention them all to you. It is a pleasure to us to think that interest being found in parts which could never have been 
you know so many of the British friends, and that you are reached by hand distribution or by colporteurs, 
familiar with British conditions. Classes have been gradually increasing and numbers atIt
 has been a pleasure to me as I have visited the British tending the old established classes have also been added to. 
friends to find them loyal to* r the Society and to yourself as The great distances make it very difficult to operate any f reits
 President elected by the brethren to that high privilege q Uen t pilgrim service, but we have done what we could. The 
of service. Whenever you can find in the Lord's providence ma i n c i asse s have been visited ; and this has meant the travelam
 opportunity of Coming over here, you will he heartily - m g by land and sea of several thousands of miles. We hope, 
welcomed by us all. The London Bethel family send warm however, that this service may be extended if the Lord wills, as 
love to you, and to their brethren in the Brooklyn Bethel; classes are now gathering up a little better to make calls en 
so would all the British friends if they had the opportunity. route t0 tne distant ones. 

Believing that the Lord has much work to be done, I count q uf experience seems to have been in line with yours in 

it a great privilege from the Lord to be enabled to report re gard to the. increase in donations to the Tract Fund, so 

thus to you, and with warm love and loyalty, I am, that you will notice we have been enabled to substantially 

Yours in the Master's grace and service, J. Hesieby, reduce our debt to Brooklyn. This we are sure will be pleasEEPOET
 OP FBBNOH AND SWISS BRANCH ing for many of our friends to know, as there is a general 

Deab Brother Rutherford: — feeling that we should he able to not only pay our own way 

It is a blessed privilege to give here a full report of the but to reimburse Brooklyn for first expenditure, if possible. 
French work — Nov. 1, 1916, to Oct. 31, 1917. Not only have The pastoral work progresses. So far away, we are some 

the ecclesias increased in number during thi3 year, but the months behind in anything started at Brooklyn; and even 
dear friends understand better than ever before the deep yet all the classes have not organized for this work. Melthings
 of consecration to the Lord. It is our endeavor to bourne and Adelaide are the only ones that have sent a 

[6186] 


DecsifBKR 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(377-378) 


general report, though Brisbane is active in the work and 
Sydney ias just commenced. The reports of Adelaide and 
Melbourne indicate that though the work needs great patience 
and plodding-perseverance on the part of the sisters, yet in 
the long run the results are good and well worth the efforts 
of weary feet and patience-tried hearts. 

The Adelaide Friends called on about 1,100 names and 
had 16 chart talks, with average attendance of about 20. Four 
new classes have been started with an average weekly attendance
 of about 35. They had about 29 workers. Many 
of these workers could only give very little time. The Melbourne
 figures are very similar: — 1,200 visited, 18 talks with 
average attendance of about 32. In both cases there are many 
who are now reading the volumes though not able to attend 
the classes. 

The Photo-Drama of Creation has been fairly operative 
in S. A. and Victoria, having been shown at 16 places to 
about 116 audiences, with total attendance of about 37,640. 
We find that some good comes wherever it goes. We have 
been short-handed since Brother Lea left us; but Brother 
Michelmore has managed the whole thing in a most creditable
 manner. The Eureka Drama has also been operated very 
successfully in New Zealand by Brother and Sister Nelson in 
co-operation with the New Zealand classes, who jointly own 
the outfit. Then Brisbane, as well as West Australia, South 
Australia, and Tasmania, have all done good work in the way. 
I have not particulars from all, and time and space prevent 
going into too much detail. 

up to now we have not received our shipment of the Seventh 
Volume and all are anxiously awaiting its arrival. 

Yours in the service of Christ, Australian Branch. 


Annual Statement 1916-1917 
Literature circulated: — 

Studies in Scripture*, Bound Volume* 11,185 

Studies in Scripture, Paper Edition 1/795 


Booklets, and "Hell" Watch Tower*. 


Photo-Drama of Creation Books . . . 
Photo-Drama of Creation Booklets. 


1,149 
445 


12,980 
3,880 


16.860 


Free Literature: — 

"P. P." and "B. S. M." 

Watch Tower' ' 

Free Scenarios 

Correspondence: — 

Letters received 

Letters out 

Tract Fund Expenditure 
£ s d 

Donations 1,846 4 

Subscriptions ' ' P . 
P." 

Donations to Drama 

Subscriptions to Sermons
 in Newspapers
 


1,594 

18,454 

723,500 
6,190 
6,800 

4,859 
4,859 


3 


£ 
.1,852 


124 16 
29 5 


17 


28 16 1 
Deficiency "".".*.". '. '.', 1,223 10 8 


3,252 12 


Deficiency, 1916 

Purchase Printing 
Paper 472 

Pilgrim service, including
 Advertising
: Rent Hall, 
Fares and Personal
 expense 

Postage, Freights ,etc. 

Postage on "P. P.'* 

Printing "P. P.".. 

Photo-Drama Work. 

Expense re Sermons* 

publications 119 18 

Proportion General 
Expense, Gas, 
Rent, &c 75 . . 


3.252 12 


91 15 

5 

67 3 

8 

24 9 

6 

871 11 

2 

177 12 

5 


WALKING TO THE LORD UPON THE WAVES 


"O thou of little faith, wherefore 

Jesus and his apostles had been across the Sea of Galilee. 
A multitude had gathered there; and Jesus was loth to send 
them to their homes; for it was toward evening and they had 
had no food for some time. Therefore he performed a great 
miracle and fed all the people. After this Jesus hade his 
disciples to get into a ship and cross again to the other side 
of the sea. But he himself remained to go into the mountain 
alone to pray. That night the sea became very boisterous and 
stormy. While the boat was rolling about upon the troubled 
sea, the apostles saw Jesus coming toward them, walking upon 
the billows. Some of them cried out in fear, thinking that 
they saw a phantom.' But St. Peter recognized that it was 
the Lord. Suddenly the thought came to him that he might 
also walk upon the water and go to meet the Master. He 
called to Jesus, asking permission. Jesus answered, "Come"; 
and St. Peter stepped out boldly upon the great heaving 
billows. 

This was a sudden spurt of faith, apparently, on the part 
of St. Peter — a wonderful faith it would seem. We wonder 
whether any of us would have thought of venturing out 
upon those waters! If Jesus had said to any of us that we 
might come to him walking upon the sea, would we have done 
so? When St. Peter had gone a little distance from the boat, 
he looked at the boisterous billows and his faith wavered. 
Immediately he began to sink. But he did the right thing to 
call, "Lord, save, or I perish!" It must have been quite a 
severe storm, as the context indicates. Poor Peter was helped 
by the Master, and then he and the Lord were received into 
the ship. 

The disciples had been out for some time tossing about, and 
doubtless were some distance from the shore. But immediately 
they were at the land, as St. John tells us. (John 6:21) Perhaps
 the Master worked a miracle in the boat's coming so 
quickly to land — but no matter. 

Why should the Lord speak of St Peter as having little 
faith ? He showed far more faith than most Christiana would 
exercise. We are inclined to think of the Master's words as 
encouraging the Apostle — "You had a little faith; why did 
you not hold to it? Why did you doubt? If you had continued
 to exercise the faith with which you started out, it 
would have carried you safely over to me." 


didst thou doubt ?"— Matt. 14:31. 

Our admiration for St. Peter is greatly augmented by the 
narration of this incident on the Sea of Galilee. He was ever 
impulsive, but his faith was genuine, and the Lord loved him 
therefor. The Apostle did not sit on the side of the boat and 
wonder if the Lord really meant it when he had invited him 
to come. On the contrary we find that he immediately believed 
the Master's voice and straightway be climbed over the ship's 
side and placed his feet upon the water. He did not question; 
he did not hesitate nor falter. The Master had beckoned to 
him, and it was for him to obey. And he did! Truly he 
possessed faith, real faith, great faith — though "little" in 
comparison to the faith of Jesus himself. Had St. Peter, 
after recognizing the Lord's presence, hesitated or refused 
to heed his invitation, preferring to remain with his companions 
in the sinking ship, the results might have been disastrous. 

We think that we may learn a lesson from this incident. 
More than eighteen centuries ago the Lord left his church. 
Then she started out upon the stormy sea of her experiences 
and has toiled on throughout the night of this Gospel age. 
And now we have about reached the dawning of the Millennial 
morning; and we perceive the presence of Jesus. We see him 
walking on the billows of the world's stormy sea. It is no 
phantom. Our Lord is really with us, and has bidden us to 
come to him over the boisterous waves. It is a time for the 
exercise of faith; it is a time of special testing. 

The storm is now greater than it has been for many years. 
But he calls his faithful to come out to meet him, and thus 
be separated from the majority of people — from the majority 
of those who have named hi'* name, many of whom are merely 
nominal Christians. He has called us to come out of Babylon. 
We are to manifest our faith in kim by prompt obedience. We 
would surely get into trouble if we should lose our faith \ we 
might sink in the storm, The Lord appreciates even the little 
faith we have. He does not reprove us for not having greater 
faith, hut would encourage it and cheer us on to an increase 
and strengthening of it. So we have stepped out upon the 
billows and have met our Lord; we are to be received into 
the ship. The vessel will soon be at the shore. The Master 
is here with us ; and we shall soon reach the glorious kingdom 
— very soon! 


FULFILLED BEFORE OUR EYES 


By God's favor to the living members of the church, the 
time is past when the prophecies of Jehovah have had to wait 
for centuries or millenniums for fulfilment. No longer can 
there be delay, as spake the Lord through the Prophet concerning
 "that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel [the 
whole world], saying, The days are prolonged," — Ezekiel 12:22. 

Noav by his grace, it is not a "time for waiting, but for 


fruition, and for the divine utterance; "Thus saith Jehovah 
God: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no 
more use it as a proverb in Israel [throughout the world] ; 
but say unto them, The days ftre at hand, and the effect 
[fulfilment], of every vision. For I am Jehovah; I will speak, 
and the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; it shall 
be no more prolonged; for in your days will I say the word, 


[6187] 


(379-23$) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BttOOKLVK, N. Y. 


and will perform it, saith Jehovah God. There shall none of 
my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have 
spoken shall be done, saith Jehovah God." — Ezekiel 12:23, 
25, 28. 

It is something marvelous to us, and a mighty confirmation 
of faith to see the God-given interpretation of Revelation and 
Ezekiel in the Seventh Volume of Studies in the Hcbiptixres 
already in process of fulfilment before our very eyes. 

Concerning the world war, just as the conflict began in 
July, 1914, with only two nations at war, and progressed in 
August and later with many nations involved, so did our 
heavenly Father evidently purpose that the titanic conflict 
should close — not miraculously, all nations at once, but in the 
natural way that Alini^htv God almost invariably does or permits
 things. 

In Volume Seven, page 268, paragraph 3, is written, "The 
close of the war about October 1st, 1917." 

To be fighting h war; to stop righting is peace. The 
fighting actually ceased with the largest nation, Russia, in 
October, 1917; for since October 21st Russia has had peace 
along her entire western front. So far as international conflict
 is concerned Russia ceased her war and passed into peace, 
and now we see the state of peace legally progressing by 
official armistice or treaty. Simultaneously, and overlapping 
the ending of her war, Russia passes into the second divinely 
appointed stage of her trouble — revolution. 

As to other nations, the end of war is not yet. For them 
there is and will be much heavy fighting; but just as some 
were late in getting into the war, some will be late in getting 
into peace. However, peace, the ending of war, began on time, 
according to the divine Word — in the very month indicated 
by our heavenly Father. 

Still another divinely appointed prophecy in Volume Seven 
has seen its fulfilment already. On page 530, in connection 
with Ezekiel 33:21-22, it was written three-quarters of a year 
ago that Ezekiel's dumbness for a year, five months and 


twenty-six days, might be a time feature, to be fulfilled in the 
dumbness of Pastor Russell in death. It was only reasonable 
to make this application, because the Prophet in so many 
respects pictured God's great messenger to the clcsing age 
of the church. Pastor Russell died October 31, 1916, and the 
period indicated will end about April 27, 1918. From the 
language of Ezekiel thi3 is designated as the time of the coming 
of the dread tidings that "the city is smitten"; thit is, that 
Christendom, or ecclesiasticism, is seen to be in desperate 
danger from revolution, if the existing forms o<f government 
shall not by then already have begun to change to such a 
revolutionary, socialistic, or laborite status as is so unhappily 
exemplified in stricken, suffering Russia. 

In Ezekiel 33:22 it is written: "Now the hand of the Lord 
was upon me in the morning, afore he that was e&caped came 
to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was 
no more dumb." In other words Ezekiel's dumbness was removed
 in the evening before the morning when the tidings 
arrived. "It was," says the Seventh Volume, "on the same 
day, for the evening began the day." This signifies that 
perhaps half a year prior to the general realization of Christendom
's downfall, Pastor Russell, though dead, 3I1 all again 
speak through this, the Seventh Volume of his Studies in the 
Scbipttjbes. Half a year before April 27, 1918, was about 
November 1st, 1917. It was about then, as divinely indicated, 
that the sale of the Seventh Volume began to attain the enormous
 proportions it has reached — over 100,000 copies having 
been distributed during .that month alone I Thus Pastor Russell
 began to speak again to Christendom. 

It is for our encouragement and to lift up our hearts to 
the utmost fullness of confidence in the Word of God, that our 
beloved Father in heaven is giving us a strong witness, in the 
interpretations of both Revelation and Ezekiel, of the divine 
guidance of the church in connection with the Seventh Volume 
of Scbipture Studies, 


JESUS AT WORK 


[The first eight paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Laborers in the Harvest/' published in issue 

of February 1, 1912. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled w He Healeth Their Diseases, " 

published in issue of February 15, 1912. Please see the articles named.l 


JESUS BEGINS HIS WORK 


[This article, excepting the paragraphs below, was a reprint of article entitled "Driven Into the Wilderness/' published in issue 

of February 1, 1912, which please see.] 
THE GOSPEL OT THE KINGDOM 


As we saw in our last Study, John the Baptist and his 
disciples had preached and baptized under the announcement 
that the Kingdom of God was at hand, and that all desirous 
of participating in its great blessings should come into full 
harmony with the Mosaic Law, and thus be prepared to be 
transferred from typical Israel to anti typical Israel — from 
membership in Moses the type, to membership in Christ the 
Antitype — the long-promised Seed of Blessing. 

In due time the preaching of John the Baptist was brought 
to a close — when Herod cast him into prison. From that 
time onward Jesus and his disciples became more prominent. 
Their message, however, was the same as John's for we read 
that "Jesus came to Galilee preaching the Kingdom of God 
and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God 
is at hand. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel." ( Veiaes 14, 15. - ) 
Whoever believed this Message recognized Jesus as the Sent 


of God, the Messiah, who in God's due time will be the King 
of Israel and the Monarch of all the earth. "The time is fulfilled
" meant that the foreordained time had arrived when the 
offer of the Kingdom would be made to the Jewish nation. 

God foreknew, however, that Israel would not be ready, 
that only a few would be prepared to become Messiah's bride, 
his associate in the Kingdom work, and that it would require 
eighteen centuries to select the remainder from amongst the 
Gentiles. Hence in Romans 9. 10 and 11 St. Paul points out 
that the Prophets foretold the stumbling of Natural Israel, 
their temporary rejection as a nation, and the fact that a 
remnant of them would form the nucleus of the bride class, the 
remainder of which would be made up of Gentiles. He also 
shows that the remainder of the Jewish nation would be 
blinded "until the fulness of the Gentiles 'has come in" and 
the "elect" class is completed. 


JOHN PREPARES THE WAY FOR JESUS 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Preparation for the Kingdom/' published in issue of January 15, 1906, which please 

see.] 


ENTIRE SUBMISSION 


"God's ways are not as our ways, his thoughts are not as ours ; 
He wounds us sore with cruel thorns, where we have stooped 

for flowers. 
But oh! 'tis from the oft-pierced heart those precious drops 

distil 
That many a life, else all unblest, with healing balm shall fill. 
Then give, oh, give the flower to those who pray it so may be ; 
But I would choose to have the thorns with thee, dear Lord, 

with thee! 


<r Man judgeth man in ignorance; he seeth but in part, 
Our trust is in our Maker, God, who searcheth every heart; 
And every wrong and every woe, when put beneath our feet, 
As stepping-stones may help us on to his high mercy-seat. 
Then teach us still to smile, O Lord, though sharp the stones 

may be, 
Remembering that they bring us near to thee, dear Lord, to 

thee!" 


[6188] 


*7^* I I 




ig^m 




l^TP^2l 


warn 


mv 


2*$* . 


/."'-, 


"V;; 


ROCK : OF ACES 

therfourictation c 

no man lay - 


f/*^ 


-msy.* 


<&.Js&&. 


y t && 


®0U: 


~*r,f? 




[ GW5H?l),lffidS?Jlg{)td^0H9 fl .Zf:iH? 


Val. XXXIX 


No. 1. 


JANUARY 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
A. D. 1918 — A. M. 6046 

CONTENTS 

View* from The Watch Tower . , 3 

The Coal Famine . . . .3 

Labor Seeks Control ... 4 

"That International Nuisance ' 4 

Church Federation .... 5 

A Day of Decision . . . • 6 

Prospects Before Us . . . . 7 

"Our King Is Marching On" (Poem) . , 7 

Jesus Forgiveth Sin 8 

Basic Principles gf God's Government . • 8 

Jesus Lord of the Sabbath ... 9 

The Weekly Day of Rest . . .9 

Jesus Chooses the Twelve . . . 10 

Paul Succeeds Judas . . . .10 

Report of South African Branch . . II 

"Come* Follow Me" (Poem) . * ,11 

Some Interesting Letters . . 12 

Good Hopes for 1918 . . , .13 

Interesting Questions . . . . 14 

"7 will stand upon my watch, and will set my foot ut>on the 
Tower, and will watch to see what He will say unto me, and 
what answer I shall make to them that oppose me." — Hab. 2:1. 


•W 




&=? >^7S?== 


r^SV : --. fc S 


Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity; the sea and the waves (the restless, discontented) roaring: men's hearts failing them for fear 

and for looking forward to the things coming upon the earth (society); for the powers of th e heavens (ecclesiasticism) shall be shaken 

When ye see these things come to pass, then know that the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand. Look up, lift up your heads, rejoice, for your redemption
 draweth nigh, — Luke 21:25-28-31. 


VII— 24 


[6189] 


THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SA CRED MISSION 

This Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments m the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now 
being presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Toweb Bible & Tkact Society, chartered A. &t 1881, "For the 
Promotion of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine
 Word, hufc also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's 
Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with, reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews orf our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, 
and very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), 
which, translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for 
the older Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of tie Christian's hope now being so generally 
repudiated — Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom [a corresponding 
price, a substitute] for all/' {1 Pet. 1:18; 1 Tim, 2:6) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious 
stones (1 Cor, 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of 
the Mystery which .... has been hid in God, .... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold
 wisdom of God" — which in other Ages was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3:5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest
 subjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the 
Lord hath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, Twit confident; 
for we know whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only 
in His Bervice; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment
 of His good pleasure, the teaching of Hi3 Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only 
invite but urge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate 
such testing. TO US THE S CRIPTURES CLE ARLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly * His workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress 

throughout the Gospel Age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, 

through which, when finished, God's blessing shall come 'to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Oor. 3:16, 17; 

Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 
That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses; and when 

the last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring 

all together in the First Resurrection; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between 

God and men throughout the Millennium. — Rev, 15:5-8. 
That the Basis of Hope, for the Church of the World, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for 

every man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which lighteth every man, that cometh into the world," "in 

due time."— -Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:5. 6. 
That the Hope of the Church is that she may be ,like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be "partaker of the Divine nature," and 

share His glory as His joint-heir.— 1 tfohn 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 
That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the Saints for the future work of Bervice; to develop in herself every 

grace; to be God's witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age. — Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14;. 

Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 
That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial 

Kingdom — the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer 

and Hia glorified Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed. — Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

ruBLisHitD by tion. Without doubt, however, most classes will receive the 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY papers on time. In event your shipment is delayed, we sugBrooklyn
, N. Y. f TJ. S. A. g est tnat 7 0U arrange to make distribution on the following 

Sunday after its arrival, making the witness as general and 


The Watch Tower Bditorial Committee: , ^ - , . _„ «„^:wi„ ;„ „«„ a^^ 

This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Com- far-reachmg as possib le in one day. 

mittee, at least three of whom have read and approved aa truth each PASTOR BUSSELL'S SERMONS 

S& V7 y r artiq !f appearing in these column* The names of the These are now in stock at our printers, in cloth and leather, 

Editorial Committee are: J. F. Ruthbmord, W. E. Van Amiurgh, ■* „ . „ „i.^«„«4. i n „ M „„„4. * A t»„„~uv™ txt- „„ ' 

R H. Rom son, Geo, H. Fisher, W. E. Pace. wio. a large shipment is now en route to Brooklyn. We are sure 

annual subscription muck $1.00 iw ADVANCE tn « friends will greatly appreciate this volume. Many of the 

send money by express, bank draft, postal order, or regtsterep sermons have never before been published, but were dictated by 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as follows—An Bible Students who, by Brother Russell for personal use on various occasions. The book 

reason of old age or other infirmity or adversity are unable to pay for contains several full-page halftones. Cloth $1 ; leather, $1.50 


thia journal, will be .supplied free if they send a Postal Card each May nnatnaid 
stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are not only willing yv»i-p»*u, 
hut anxioua, that all such "he on our list continually and in touch with These 


aM . MU « ^» „«„- -»- ^ »„„«« ,„ w «...^. Mt ~ iC « w * <,»*, «t * - - VEST POCKET MANNAS 

nutTnxioua" that aTf su'cYlTe" on'our^iirt'coriSnually'and 'In "touch * wit? These seem to have supplied a long-felt want on the part of 

the Studies, etc. the friends. They are only 2%x5^4 in size, and bound in flexiNOTICB
 TO ALL TOWBR SUBSCRIBERS— 'Please remember that ble covers, round corners. Cloth, red edges, 30c; leather, gilt 

as a rule we no longer send a card of acknowledgment for a renewal ed^es 75c nostnaid 

or for a new subscription. Reoeipt and entry, of renewal are indicated 6 ' ^ ^ 


within a month by change in date of expiration of the subscription on TO FBIENDS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES 

th %^n V r^ueXg P change of address, please give old address a S well 0i . foreign stamps of all kinds are not usable in the United 

as new. This is very important, saving us muqh time and unnecessary States and must be sold at large discounts, if salable at all. 

correspondence. Therefore do not send us foreign stamps for remittances. 

entered as s eco nu -class mail matter at Brooklyn, n. y„ fosto fitch British Postal Notes are not payable in the United States 

ENTERRn as seconp-class MATTER at the postopeice dept., OTTAWA, CAtf. and must be returned to London for collection. Private cheques 

I, b s. A. CONVENTION are no * collectible and drafts on London banks are subject to 

Pittsburgh, Pa., Jan. 2-fi: This five day convention will be heavy discounts. Remittances by regular Government postal 

served by many Pilgrim brethren. A good attendance is ex- money orders are payable at face value. 

pected. Election of the Society's officers for the ensuing year British friends are requested to send their renewals for 

will be held on Saturday, Jan. 5th. Brother Rutherford 'will The Watch Toweb direct to London office. This saves expense 

address the public in Princess Theatre at 3 p. m., Sunday, Jan. and liability of loss in forwarding to Brooklyn and having to 

6th, on "The Fall of Babylon." Address R. H. Bricker. 1323 be returned again to London. Reports of all subscriptions are 

Goebel St., N. S., Pittsburgh, Pa. forwarded to us promptly from London; hence there will be 

CANADIAN BRANCH ^ut Yerj slight delay in our recording y our subscriptions. 

In view of the disturbed conditions and the difficulty of IN RE PUBLIC MEETINGS 

reaching the various classes and serving them throughout the We strongly recommend the classes everywhere to arrange 

Provinces of Canada, we have decided to open a branch office of for one public meeting when a Pilgrim visits your class. Sethe
 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society at Winnipeg, cure a well -located hall and announce an up-to-date subject, 

Manitoba. Competent brethren will be placed in charge to man- such as, "THE WORLD HAS ENDED — Millions now Living 

age the work. All Canadian correspondence, orders, subscrip- may never die!" and give a good public witness to the Truth, 

tions to The Watch Towek, etc., will be cared for by that of- Local brethren who are able to give lectures should be used to 

flee. A more detailed statement will be given later. address public meetings on Sundays. Let us give as wide a 

IN RE THE FAXtli OF BABYLON public witness as possible. Evidences are increasing rapidly 

Due to the congestion in both freight and express shipping, that the dark night is fast approaching when no man can work, 

it is possible that some of the friends may not receive their Let each and every one bestir himself, doing with his might 

shipment of B. S. M. No. 99 in time for the Dec, 30th distribu- what his hands find to do while it is yet called day. 
