Kingdom Hall Construction Program Moves Ahead
1 In 1983 at the “Kingdom Unity” District Conventions in the United States, it was announced that a special fund would be established to support the construction and remodeling of Kingdom Halls throughout the United States and Canada. Little did we realize what blessings would result from such small beginnings. We began to experience more fully what Psalm 92:4 so aptly states: “For you have made me rejoice, O Jehovah, because of your activity; because of the works of your hands I cry out joyfully.”
2 We now rejoice greatly in what is being accomplished. Today an accelerated global Kingdom Hall construction program is under way. In one way or another, all of us have the privilege of sharing in this activity. We do so by making large or small monetary contributions to help finance the construction of more places of worship throughout the world. Many brothers also volunteer the use of their equipment as well as their time, abilities, and skills in connection with such projects. The success of the entire arrangement is due to Jehovah’s guidance, support, and rich blessing upon our united efforts.​—Psalm 127:1.
3 Many branches have followed the pattern originally instituted for congregations in the United States. At Kingdom Halls in many lands, there is a box where publishers put their contributions for the Kingdom Hall Fund. In the United States, Our Kingdom Ministry for March 1997 announced an adjustment in this program. It stated: “Ever since the Society Kingdom Hall Fund was established in 1983, the brothers have contributed generously, thus enabling loans to be made for Kingdom Hall construction. Already some 2,700 congregations in this country have benefited from this arrangement. Many congregations could not otherwise build new Kingdom Halls or renovate those in need of repair. There is now an urgent need to use some of these contributed funds to provide loans to congregations in economically depressed countries. Your continued support of this arrangement is greatly appreciated by the Society and by those congregations that benefit from your contributions.”
4 That announcement served as an invitation to participate in an accelerated Kingdom Hall construction program. The Kingdom Hall Fund would be expanded to embrace the needs of our brothers in other lands while continuing to provide loans for Kingdom Hall construction in this country. A subsequent article in the August 1997 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry stated: “There is an ongoing need for Kingdom Hall construction worldwide. During just the last service year, 3,288 new congregations were formed. Many of these congregations are in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, and Eastern Europe.”
5 What have been the results since that time? The 2001 Yearbook reported: “With this arrangement, in 30 countries, 453 Kingdom Halls have been completed thus far, and another 727 buildings are under construction. Emphasis has been placed on developing standard Kingdom Hall plans for each country that utilize local building materials and methods. In Kenya, quarried stone is used; in Togo it is common to use brick; in Cameroon concrete blocks that are later plastered are popular. In this way, local brothers are quickly able to acquire the skills necessary to fulfill key roles within a national program.”
6 Evidence of Jehovah’s blessings on this program can be found on the great continent of Africa. As you look over the pictures of some of the Kingdom Halls that have been built, imagine the impact that such construction has had on the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses! This is true in three distinct areas​—the unity of our worldwide brotherhood, the effect on the local community, and the increase in attendance at congregation meetings. While this insert highlights Kingdom Halls built in Africa, future editions of Our Kingdom Ministry will focus on how the Kingdom Hall construction program is moving ahead in other regions of the world.
[Pictures on page 3]
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Bimbo, Bangui
Begoua, Bangui
[Pictures on page 4]
Ukonga, Tanzania
[Picture on page 4]
Accra, Ghana
[Picture on page 4]
Salala, Liberia
[Picture on page 4]
Karoi, Zimbabwe
[Pictures on page 4, 5]
Allada, Benin​—former Kingdom Hall
Allada, Benin​—new Kingdom Hall
[Picture on page 5]
Kpeme, Togo
[Picture on page 5]
Sokodé, Togo
[Pictures on page 4, 5]
Fidjrosse, Benin
[Picture on page 6]
Lyenga, Zambia​—former Kingdom Hall
[Picture on page 6]
Lyenga, Zambia​—new Kingdom Hall
[Picture on page 6]
Kinshasa, Congo
[Picture on page 6]
Musambira, Rwanda

