Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting September 9
Song 209
13 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two demonstrations of how to present the September 15 Watchtower and the September 22 Awake! In each case, show a different way to handle the conversation stopper “I’m not interested in Jehovah’s Witnesses.”​—See Reasoning book, pages 17-18.
17 min: “Helping Others to Glorify Jehovah.”a As time permits, mention a practical point or two in the Reasoning book, pages 196-9.
15 min: Why a Lack of Faith? Audience discussion. We often encounter people who have little faith. (2 Thess. 3:2) To reach them with the truth about Jehovah, we should first try to determine what has influenced their thinking about God. Consider the four factors mentioned in the Reasoning book, pages 129-30, that can hinder people from acquiring faith. Invite audience to suggest what approach could be used in each case. Relate an experience of an effective approach, or use the one in the August 22, 1993, Awake!, pages 14-15.
Song 122 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 16
Song 163
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Encourage all to review their notes from the last circuit assembly program in preparation for next week’s Service Meeting.
18 min: How Did We Do Last Year? Talk by the service overseer. Give highlights of the congregation report for the 2002 service year. Commend everyone for the good things accomplished. Focus on how the congregation has done in meeting attendance, in return visit and Bible study activity, and in auxiliary pioneering, outlining practical suggestions for improvement. Set reachable goals for the coming year.
17 min: The Challenges Facing Single Parents. An elder interviews one or two single parents (or those whose mates are not Witnesses) to see how they cope with problems related to training, disciplining, and spiritually guiding their children. How are they able to care for family responsibilities and also get to meetings and out in field service regularly? Highlight some suggestions presented in the Family Happiness book, pages 104-10. As pointed out on pages 113-15, mention practical ways that others can assist.
Song 149 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 23
Song 107
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8, have an elder demonstrate how to present the October 1 Watchtower and have a ministerial servant show how to present the October 8 Awake! After each demonstration, restate the opening sentence or two that was used to arouse the householder’s interest.
10 min: Local needs.
25 min: “Fear God and Give Him Glory.” (Rev. 14:7) Talk and audience discussion reviewing the circuit assembly program that was held during the past service year. Invite the congregation to comment on key points learned and on how they were able to apply them personally or as family groups. (Portions can be assigned in advance.) Feature these program parts: (1) “Help New Ones to Cultivate Fear of God.” How can we assist interested ones who attended the Memorial to progress and become active servants of Jehovah? (2) “Fear of Jehovah Means the Hating of Bad.” (w87 4/15 16-18) How can Proverbs 6:16-19 help us to turn away from things that Jehovah hates​—pride, lying, materialistic pursuits, unwholesome entertainment, misuse of the Internet? (3) “Draw Ever Closer to Those You Love.” We love Jehovah, Jesus, family members, others in the congregation; how does drawing close to them safeguard us from the world? (4) “Fear Jehovah, Not Men.” How has fear of displeasing Jehovah helped you to overcome timidity when preaching, to adhere to godly principles at work or school, or to resist pressure from your employer to miss meetings, assemblies, and conventions? (5) “Do All Things for God’s Glory.” (Ps. 119:37; Heb. 4:13) Why should godly fear prevent us from drinking immoderately, viewing pornography, or practicing other concealed sins? (6) “Keep On Walking in the Fear of Jehovah.” How has Jehovah blessed you for making room for his spirit to operate fully in your life?​—Ps. 31:19; 33:18; 34:9, 17; 145:19.
Song 171 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 30
Song 116
15 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for September. Discuss “Kingdom Hall Construction Program Moves Ahead.”
15 min: What Makes Our Magazines Unique? Talk and audience discussion. During October we will be featuring The Watchtower and Awake! Discuss reasons why the magazines are unique: (1) They exalt Jehovah’s name. (2) They encourage faith in Jesus. (3) They proclaim God’s Kingdom. (4) They direct attention to the Bible as the final authority. (5) They explain fulfillment of Bible prophecy. (6) They explain the real meaning behind world events. (7) They show how to cope with today’s problems. (8) They appeal to people of all walks of life. (9) They stay politically neutral. Present two brief demonstrations, with each showing how one of these points can be used to start a conversation.
15 min: “Show Appreciation for Theocratic Resources.”b To be handled by an elder. Include comments on what has been observed locally and what the congregation can do to make wise use of our literature. Urge all to limit literature requests to what is actually needed. Remember the privilege to contribute financially in support of the worldwide work.​—See “Share With Others According to Their Needs,” in the November 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 3.
Song 21 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 7
Song 129
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Taking a Stand for the Truth at School. Interview one or two young publishers who have returned to school and who realize the need to limit association with unbelieving classmates. How do they plan to deal with challenges and enticements presented by nationalistic ceremonies, school dances and rallies, extracurricular sports, and unclean conduct? Include comments about ways they plan to witness at school.
20 min: “Avoid the Pursuit of ‘Valueless Things.’”c After discussing paragraph 4, include comments on the November 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 30-2. When discussing paragraph 5, include comments on the box in the October 1, 1994, Watchtower, page 8. Along with paragraph 6, read paragraph 18 in the November 1999 insert.
Song 105 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

