Service Meetings for September
Week Starting September 6
Song 190
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
17 min: “Are You Working With a Purpose?” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Include comments on Our Ministry book, pages 88-9. Encourage all to be consistent and thorough in their ministry.
18 min: “Parents​—Set a Good Example for Your Children.” Brief introduction by an elder, followed by a discussion of the article by two brothers who are parents. They express concern about safeguarding their children from the negative traits that they are exposed to at school, by television, and by non-Witness relatives and others. The brothers consider disrespectful attitudes, worldly speech and grooming, and unwholesome entertainment. After reflecting on the need to set a good example, they discuss ways to build up greater enthusiasm for the family study, the congregation meetings, and field service.​—See July 1, 1999, Watchtower, pages 8-22, and September 22, 1991, Awake!, pages 8-9.
Song 101 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 13
Song 171
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: How Did We Do Last Year? A talk by the service overseer. Review highlights from the congregation report for the 1999 service year. Give commendation for good things accomplished. Point out areas where improvement may be needed. Focus on how the congregation has done in meeting attendance and in conducting Bible studies. Outline practical goals for the coming year.
20 min: “What Will You Say to a Hindu?” Questions and answers. Emphasize the advantage of establishing common ground with a person, and point out where we are likely to agree with a Hindu. Show how the suggested presentations can be adjusted to witness to people of any religious background. Demonstrate a well-prepared presentation of witnessing to a Hindu. For more information on Hinduism, see February 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry insert; Reasoning book, page 22; and Mankind’s Search for God, chapter 5.
Song 140 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 20
Song 193
12 min: Local announcements and field service experiences.
15 min: Local needs.
18 min: Make Good Use of the Creator Book. Talk and demonstrations. The April 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry explained that the Creator book may be offered any time we meet people who (1) do not believe in God or (2) believe in God but have no real concept of who he is or what his qualities and purposes are. The thought-provoking questions and comments on the back cover can be used to stimulate interest in reading the book. Or page 152 can be used to good advantage. A publisher might ask: “Where can we find the very best advice on how to solve our most perplexing problems?” He can show the person how noted authorities have praised Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount, ask him to choose one of the seven highlighted points that interests him most, and then read a few of the cited verses. Demonstrate both of these suggestions for offering the Creator book, mentioning the donation arrangement in each presentation. Encourage all to carry the book in the field service, being ready to offer it whenever appropriate.
Song 175 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 27
Song 141
15 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for September. Encourage all to make plans for a full share in magazine distribution during October. Review some of the suggestions that appeared in the October 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8, on how to prepare presentations. Using the current magazines, mention some good talking points and demonstrate one or two brief presentations. Show how to mention the donation arrangement to the householder.
15 min: Question Box. Talk by an elder.
15 min: “True Worship Is Expanding in Eastern Europe.” Elder conducts question-and-answer session. Cite experiences or evidence of increase in countries represented, as reported in recent Yearbooks.
Song 87 and concluding prayer.

