True Worship Is Expanding in Eastern Europe
1 First-century Christians were zealous Kingdom preachers. They rejoiced when the congregations ‘increased in number from day to day.’ (Acts 16:5) Their bold preaching took true worship into Asia, Africa, and Europe, resulting in a rich harvest of believers.
2 In this time of the end, true worship continues to expand, particularly in the lands of Eastern Europe. In countries where we were under government restrictions until the early 1990’s, we are now experiencing outstanding increases. The 1999 Yearbook reveals that two of such countries, Russia and Ukraine, each reported over 100,000 publishers sharing in the public ministry. In the 15 territories of the former Soviet Union, since 1991 over 220,000 persons have dedicated themselves to Jehovah and been baptized! This rapid growth has made it necessary to construct many new Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls as well as to expand a number of branch facilities.
3 As announced in Our Kingdom Ministry of March 1997, a portion of the Society Kingdom Hall Fund is now being used to provide loans to congregations in lands where a very urgent need exists for more Kingdom Halls but where there are limited resources and severe economic problems. Between March 1996 and October 1998, the Society gave approval to 359 Kingdom Hall loan requests from branch offices overseeing 11 Eastern European lands. Contributed funds are being used to purchase land and materials for the construction of new Kingdom Halls and to assist congregations in remodeling existing facilities. The pictures shown here give us an idea of how contributions to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund in the United States and in other countries have benefited our brothers in Eastern Europe.
4 During 1998, Bulgaria experienced a 12-percent increase, and the brothers were thrilled when their first Kingdom Hall was dedicated in April of that year. Croatia enjoyed a 4-percent increase, and at present the brothers there are constructing more Kingdom Halls, to advance true worship. In Hungary some 80 Kingdom Halls are being used by 144 congregations. This means that of the 235 congregations in that country, 61 percent have their own place of worship. In Macedonia the Kingdom Hall construction program has completed two new halls, and more are under way. In the summer of 1999, a double Kingdom Hall was completed in the capital city of Skopje. This hall has the capacity to serve at least six congregations.
5 Last year in Russia, on an average, over 260 persons were baptized each week! Following the model used in other countries, the Russia branch has now organized 12 Regional Building Committees throughout their vast territory, to support future Kingdom Hall construction projects. In the northern part of St. Petersburg, construction is under way on that country’s first Assembly Hall, which will seat 1,600. The facility will also include five Kingdom Halls with 200 seats each. To serve the spiritual needs of our brothers and many interested ones in Ukraine, 84 Kingdom Halls have been completed and 80 are under construction.
6 Does not this increase in Eastern Europe bring joy to our hearts? No matter where we live, the expansion of true worship reminds us that God is not partial and that his patience will mean salvation for “a great crowd.” (Rev. 7:9; 2 Pet. 3:9) What a privilege is ours to have a small share in contributing toward the spiritual growth of others, even those in faraway lands! Proverbs 28:27 assures us that “he that is giving to the one of little means will have no want.” Our willingness to help cover these construction costs results in “an equalizing” of material things, enabling all to experience the happiness that comes from giving and the joy that results from seeing true worship expand worldwide.​—2 Cor. 8:14, 15; Acts 20:35.
[Picture on page 3]
Săcele, Romania
[Picture on page 3]
Maardu, Estonia
[Picture on page 3]
Sevnica, Slovenia
[Picture on page 3]
Tiszavasvári, Hungary
[Pictures on page 4]
Jūrmala, Latvia
[Pictures on page 4]
Tallinn, Estonia
[Picture on page 4, 5]
Taurage, Lithuania
[Pictures on page 4, 5]
Belgrade, Yugoslavia
[Pictures on page 5]
Prievidza, Slovakia
[Picture on page 5]
Mátészalka, Hungary
[Pictures on page 6]
Vranov nad Topl’ou, Slovakia
[Picture on page 6]
Ruma, Yugoslavia
[Pictures on page 6]
Tornakalns, Latvia

