What Will You Say to a Hindu?
1 As you may know, there are many Hindus living in various lands, including this country. This means that sooner or later you may meet a Hindu in the course of your ministry. When you do, how will you handle the call?
2 Remember These Points: Missionaries who have successfully witnessed to Hindus say that it is not necessary to make a deep study of Hinduism in order to give an effective witness. A simple, tactful presentation of the truth often brings a positive response. Ask to speak to the head of the household first. If his response is favorable, it will be easier to witness to other family members. At the outset avoid suggesting that you are bringing a message that is superior to what the householder believes or that you want to discuss the only true God or the oldest sacred writings. Since many Hindus consider the Bible to be a Western book, you can break down prejudice by explaining that it does not promote colonialism or the superiority of one race over another.
3 Use the Right Tools: Two brochures have been prepared specifically with Hindus in mind. Why Should We Worship God in Love and Truth? is printed in Gujarati and Punjabi. Our Problems​—Who Will Help Us Solve Them? is printed in 11 additional Indian languages. Both are available in English. The brochures “Look! I Am Making All Things New” and Does God Really Care About Us? have also proved effective when witnessing to those of Hindu background. The Require brochure and the Knowledge book can be used successfully to conduct Bible studies.
4 Establish Common Ground: It is not difficult to find common ground with Hindus. They believe that we are living in a time when wickedness is at its peak and that God will rid the world of its problems through a great catastrophe to be followed by an era of truth. You can see how easily these beliefs can be related to the Bible’s teachings about the last days, the great tribulation, and the coming new world. Since most Hindus view life as a series of problems for which there are no solutions, they are interested in the topics of family life, crime and safety, and what happens at death. Here are two sample presentations that you might try.
5 This may appeal to a family man:
▪ “I am visiting people who are concerned about the state of family life in many lands today. What do you think will help keep the family together? [Allow for response.] Some people know what the Hindu scriptures say about the family, but they have never had the opportunity to compare this with what the Bible has to say on the subject. I would like to share with you this thought at Colossians 3:12-14.” After reading the scripture, show the householder chapter 15 of the Knowledge book and say: “I would be pleased to spend a little time reading this chapter with you.”
6 A young person might respond to this:
▪ “No doubt you believe in God. What do you think God’s purpose is for us?” Allow for a response. Then read Genesis 1:28, and say: “In many places the earth is overpopulated and plagued with problems. Do you think the Creator would be willing to help us solve our problems?” After hearing the response, turn to an appropriate publication.
7 Enjoy Positive Results: A 22-year-old Hindu man approached a sister who was witnessing in a market and asked for a Bible study. He explained to her that eight years earlier he had overheard a Bible discussion between his mother and her. Although he had been impressed by the Bible’s practical answers to mankind’s problems, his mother was not interested and he had felt that he was too young to pursue the truth on his own. Now as an adult, he wanted to learn more. The young man wasted no time. In only 23 days, he completed his study of the Knowledge book, and just four months after he had met the sister at the market, he asked to be baptized!
8 A brother started a study with a Hindu man whom he met on a train. The man was experiencing difficulties in his marriage. He also had a drinking problem. The man agreed to have the Witness call on him and share the Bible’s advice on family life. The Bible’s moral teachings appealed to him, and he agreed to a Bible study. He and his family began attending meetings together. Later they shared the truth with friends and relatives. So far, six of these people have accepted the truth!
9 God’s will is that “all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) That includes men and women who profess a non-Christian religion, such as Hinduism. If there are Hindus in your territory, why not visit them soon and use some of the suggestions presented in this article?

