VOL. XXXI JULY 15 No. 14 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Foreign Tour Report 227 

Sacrificers Alone Attain Divine Nature 227 

All First-Borns are Antitypical Levites 229 

Harvest Work by Printing Machinery 231 

"Home, Sweet Home" 231 

Mt. Tabor's Parabolic Vision 232 

Forgiving and Being Forgiven 233 

The Memorial— How Many Celebrated 234 

The Sins Borne by the Scape-Goat 235 

The Crying of Justice for Vengeance 235 

The Kind of Atonement the Great Company 

Will Make 235 

From the Edgar Family 236 

The Glory of the Church to Be Perpetual 237 

Attending Nominal Church Services 237 

International Bible Students Association 

Convention 238 

Special Train from New York City 238 

Chicago Special Train with Sleepers 238 

Railroad Rates to Chautauqua Lake 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 



N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTIONS 



MINNEAPOLIS, MINN., JULY 15-17 

CONVENTION HALL, AUDITORIUM ANNEX. 

Discourse for the Public by Brother Russell, Sunday, July 
17, 3:00 P.M., at the Auditorium, corner 1 1th street and 
Nicollet avenue. Topic: "Hereafter." 

WILKES-BARRE, PA., JULY 24 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 
o'clock, Caledonian Hall, 9 S. Franklin street. Service for 
the Public at 3 P.M. in the Irem Temple, N. Franklin street. 
Topic: "The Thief in Paradise; The Rich Man in Hell; 
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." 

SCRANTON, PA., JULY 24 

Discourse for the Public by Brother Russell, Lyceum 
Theater, at 8 P.M. Topic: "Hereafter." 

LYNN, MASS., AUGUST 14 



UTICA, N.Y., AUGUST 21 
FALL RIVER, MASS., AUGUST 28 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPTEMBER 4 



THE "NEW YORK AMERICAN" 

Amongst the most prominent of the world's newspapers is 
the New York American. It published the weekly sermon 
on June 20 with the announcement that it would hereafter 
be a regular Monday feature. 

We hope to turn in soon to the American quite a large 
list of subscribers for its Monday issue— especially from the 
Eastern States. To this end we offer it with THE WATCH 
TOWER for one year for $1.50, or for six months for 75 cents. 
If already a WATCH TOWER subscriber you may send us the 
additional 50 cents or 25 cents. 

Do not forget to encourage the papers publishing the sermons, 
and should any discontinue their publication, promptly 
send a card of regrets and express hope that their publication 
may soon be resumed. Also advise us of such 
discontinuances. 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 

When using the above title, print it as we have it, without 
the apostrophe, and do not add "of Brooklyn." The Association 
is international and your branch of it is of your own city. 
We advise that this simple and appropriate and unsectarian 
name be not added to in any manner. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 

The number of papers publishing the sermons is continually 
increasing, yet for lack of encouragement some are dropping 
them. Your Tract Fund contributions cannot be better used 
than in sending several of the sermon-papers to your friends 
and in writing encouraging letters frequently to the editors. 
If the sermon stops only once write to the editor of your 
disappointment. 

JEWISH HOPES AND PROSPECTS 

This little pamphlet, especially for the Jews, sells at 10c. 
per copy, including postage— three copies 25c, fifteen copies $1. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 



in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered: (1) 267; (2) 46; (3) 14; (4) 191; (5) 
167; (6) 88; (7) 176; (8) 112; (9) 145; (10) 179; 
(11) Vow; (12) 95; (13) 259; (14) 119; (15) 280; 
(16) 7; (17) 121; (18) 105; (19) 23; (20) 128; (21) 
264; (22) 194; (23) 313; (24) 229; (25) 209; (26) 
130; (27) 107; (28) 4; (29) 222; (30) 230; (31) 50. 



For other notices see foot of page 236. 

R4645 : page 227 

FOREIGN TOUR REPORT 

SECTION IV. 

AT THE Edinburgh railway station we were 

met by a delegation of friends; indeed some 

came to Dundee to meet us. We had a very 

enjoyable season. Brother John Edgar, 

M.D., addressed the Edinburgh friends in 

the forenoon on the "Ransom and Sin-Off ering." 

We were not privileged to hear 

the address, but through others learned 

that it was both interesting and instructive. 

In the afternoon we addressed the interested, 

about 140, and endeavored to point out how the 

Church enters into covenant relationship with God, not 

through the work of a mediator, but by "sacrifice." We 

pointed out that the world through the Millennium will 

have the great Mediator appointed of the Father, and 

R4646 : page 227 

promised through the Scriptures, and that the mediation 
will be based upon the New Covenant with Israel. We 
showed that the antitypical Mediator is the Christ, Head 
and Body, and that of this great One, Moses was the 
type. As Moses mediated the typical Law Covenant, so 
the antitypical Moses, The Christ, will put into operation 
the New Covenant with Israel. The Mediator will 
stand between God and the world, and will for a thousand 
years shield the people from the requirements of 
absolute justice; that through him Divine mercy may 
extend through Israel to all, for their blessing and uplifting 
to perfection. 

We showed how this same blessing will extend to all 
people, nations, tongues and kindreds, in that they will 
be permitted to come into and become members of Israel, 
and thus become members of the earthly seed of Abraham, 
and sharers of all the blessings of Israel's New 
Covenant. We showed that thus, in the end of the 



Millennial Age, all the perfect race will be "the seed of 
Abraham." We pointed out that when Satan will be 
loosed out of his prison-house, to test all of them, it will 
be Abraham's seed of all nations that will be tested as 
to worthiness or unworthiness of eternal life, and that 
the whole number of these is to be "as the sands of the 
sea-shore for multitude." We reminded our hearers that 
thus it was written of Abraham, "Thy seed shall be as 
the sands of the sea-shore for multitude." Thus eventually 
all the families of the earth shall be blessed through 
Abraham; as it is written, "I have constituted thee father 
of many nations."— Romans 4:17. 

"AS THE STARS OF HEAVEN" 

Then we looked at the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, 
likened unto the stars of heaven. We perceived that 
Jesus was the first, the Captain, the Forerunner of these. 
We saw that he became the Spiritual Seed of Abraham 
by the sacrifice of himself, as the man Jesus. We heard 
the Apostle urging all of us desiring to be his joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom, saying, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God." (Rom. 12:1.) 
We noted the fact that only by sacrifice could 
any come into this spirit-begotten relationship with God 
as "new creatures in Christ Jesus." We turned to the 
Scriptures which foretold the gathering of the elect 
Church in these words, "Gather together my saints unto 
me, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice"; 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord, when I make 
up my jewels." Here we saw the Church class, the 
jewel class, those being gathered now. 

We noted next the harmony between the Apostle's 
exhortation, that we present our bodies a living sacrifice 
holy and acceptable to God, and the statement of the 
Prophet that all of these enter into covenant relationship 
with God through sacrifice. We noted the fact that none 
except sacrificers can come into this covenant relationship 
with God now; "Now is the acceptable time" when 
such sacrifices will be received by the Lord through, and 
under, and by the imputation of the grace of our great 
Advocate. The world is not accepted in this manner, 
but reversely: Instead of being invited to sacrifice their 
earthly natures, they will be given the privilege of restitution 
to perfection. (Acts 3:19-21.) The privilege of 
sacrifice, therefore, is unique to this age. The Church 
of the First-borns present their bodies living sacrifices, 
accepting the services of the great Advocate, whom God 
has appointed for this very service, and who gladly 
accepts the sacrifices as members of his Body, his Bride, 
his Church, the "First-borns, whose names are written 
in heaven." 

SACRIFICERS ALONE ATTAIN DIVINE NATURE 



This acceptance of the sacrifice of the Church is the 
basis of our acceptance as new creatures, spiritual, and 
these with the Lord constitute spiritual Israel, the spiritual 
or heavenly Seed of Abraham. We noted the fact 
that this Spiritual Seed in no sense took the place of the 

R4646 : page 228 

natural seed of Abraham. Indeed, neither Abraham, nor 
any for four thousand years knew anything about the 
Divine plan in respect to a Spiritual Seed. All the promises 
made to them were earthly. Hence, as the Apostle 
says, the Gospel invitation to become the Spiritual Seed 
by faith was entirely a new proposition— "The Mystery 
hidden from past ages and dispensations, but now 
revealed unto the saints." We saw that the entire matter 
of the Gospel Age and its call might be viewed as an 
interruption in the Divine plan and purpose for Israel 
and the world. This Gospel Age, therefore, is to be seen 
as a parenthesis. As soon as it shall be finished, God's 
dealings with natural Israel will again be resumed, only 
on a higher and loftier plane, through the antitypical 
Mediator, The Christ, as taking the place of the typical 
Mediator, Moses. We reminded the friends that thus it 
is written by the Apostle in Romans 1 1:25-32; 
Acts 3:22,23. 

Israel noted its failure to attain eternal life under 
the Law Covenant. God acknowledged the failure, and 
encouraged them to look forward to the time when Messiah 
would take the place of Moses and institute for them 
an antitypical New Covenant. This New Covenant 
was foretold (Jeremiah 31:31), saying: "After those 
days, saith the Lord, I will make a New Covenant with 
the house of Israel and with the house of Judah." Moses 
prophetically foretold the great Mediator and the better 
work he would accomplish for the people, renewing or 
making new their Covenant. St. Peter calls attention 
to his words, saying, "Moses verily said unto the fathers, 
a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you 
from amongst your brethren like unto me." I am the 
type on a small scale; I am the mediator of this Law 
Covenant, but ineffective. When the antitype shall 
come, the covenant shall be put upon a higher footing by 
means of his better sacrifice, and that will make of it 
really the New Law Covenant. 

Hence the Israelites began to look forward to the 
Messiah who would thus transmute their Law Covenant, 
which they found to be unto death, into a New Law 
Covenant, which would mean to them eternal life and 
all the blessings they had been led to hope for. Eagerly, 
therefore, they watched for the Messiah, but they knew 
not that when he would come he would be a Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham, composed of many members. This 
was the Mystery not permitted to be known to them, or 
to others— and even yet, made known only to the saints. 
They knew not that the development of this antitypical 



Moses would require nearly nineteen centuries for its 
accomplishment. How could they? The mystery was 
not revealed. Nevertheless this was the Lord's message 
to them through the last of their prophets, "Behold I 
send my Messenger,. ..the Messenger of the Covenant, 
whom ye delight in. [You have been hoping for him 
this long time. He it is, who as the Servant of the Law 
Covenant, will make it really effective to you in a manner 
that Moses could not do.] But who may abide the 
day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears? 
For he is like fuller's soap, and like a refiner's fire. He 
shall sit as a refiner to purify the sons of Levi, that they 
may offer unto the Lord an acceptable sacrifice."— 
Malachi3:3. 

PURIFYING ANTFTYPICAL LEVITES 

We pointed out that our Lord came in accordance 
with this prophecy; that he was present with the Jews as 
the Reaper, and with the winnowing-fan he separated the 
chaff from the wheat. As the Refiner he has throughout 
this entire Gospel Age been seeing to it that those who 
came unto the Father, through him, should pass through 
fiery trials and experiences, which would fully test their 
loyalty and their fitness to be associated with him in the 
great Kingdom of Glory as members of his Body, as 
members of his Bride, as members of the great antitypical 
Prophet, Priest, Mediator, King. 

We traced the matter in St. Paul's words in Romans 1 1:27, 
where he assures us that as soon as the Church, 
the Body of Christ, is completed, God's Covenant with 
Israel, the New Covenant, will be instituted. Then their 
sins will be forgiven, their iniquities pardoned, and they 
as God's people will be received back into Divine fellowship, 
through the great Mediator. We pointed out the 
Apostle's words— "They shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy"; that it is God's mercy; that it comes primarily 
through the Lord Jesus. Yet it is "your mercy," the 
Church's mercy— the mercy of God and Christ through 
you to natural Israel and through natural Israel for the 
blessing of whosoever wills of all the families of the 
earth. Oh, the lengths and breadths, and the heights and 
depths of the love of God; how unsearchable are his 
riches, and his secrets past finding out! And yet his 
secrets, his plans are all glorious, generous, loving and 
just. Well may we rejoice, not only in the share which 
the Church will have in the glorious plan of God, but also 
rejoice in the share which Israel restored to Divine favor 
will have, and in the blessings which then will flow to 
all the families of the earth. 

The evening session for the public was in "Queen's 
Rooms." Again the weather was unfavorable, but notwithstanding 
there was a good attendance of about 600. 
We had excellent attention; our topic was, "Where are 
the Dead?" 

On account of the King's funeral, the running of 



trains was disturbed and thus our purposed visit to Middlesborough 

was interfered with. We regretted the disappointment, 

yet could readily see in it the Divine 

providence, for the day was quite needful to us in London 

to get caught up with some of our literary work for the 

press. 

PREACHING FROM WHITEFIELD'S PULPIT 

On Sunday morning, May 22, we again occupied the 
old pulpit of George Whitefield at the "Whitefield Tabernacle," 

R4647 : page 228 

London. About 700 of the friends were present. 

These included London friends and some who had come 

considerable distances. Our text was found in Colossians 2:6-8. 

We exhorted the friends to faithfulness, and 

reminded them that the great test of our Lord Jesus 

was his loyalty to the Father— to the Father's will— to the 

Father's way— to the Father's time— to all of the Father's 

arrangements. We reminded them that Jesus showed 

his own loyalty in that he ignored his own preference 

that in everything he might know and do the will of the 

Father who sent him. We pointed out that we needed to 

be rooted, grounded and built up in our Lord and Master 

in all these respects. We showed that the various tests 

permitted to come upon the Church of God from time 

to time, from first to last, will be tests of these various 

qualities of heart and mind— tests of heart loyalty. 

Obedience to the Lord in thought as well as in word and 

in deed means overcoming selfish propensities or tendencies, 

which are ours in common with the whole world 

of mankind in its fallen condition. We pointed out that 

this involves a battle, a strife, and the battle is not 

against the Father, nor against the Brethren, nor against 

the Truth, nor against the Lord, nor against the World, 

nor against the Devil. The fight is against the old nature 

with its perverted tastes, appetites and will. As new 

creatures we are to fight the good fight of faith against 

R4647 : page 229 

our natural tendencies, and to keep ourselves in the love 
of God, fully submissive to his will. 

In the evening the third and last of the London public 
meetings was held in the Royal Albert Hall. In respect 
to the audience, judged by its appearance, there was 
a steady improvement in the three Sundays— good, better, 
best. The numbers, however, were in the reverse ratio, 
7,500, 6,000 and 5,000. Considering the excitement in 
the city incidental to the King's death and funeral 
obsequies, and the public agitation connected therewith, 
we think the results were remarkable. 

Liberal extracts from the sermons were published in 
several of the large journals, and reached probably a 



million people. Responses to the "Peoples Pulpits" given 
our amounted to about a thousand, while the responses 
from the readers of the newspapers amounted to over 
four thousand, before we left for home, with heavy mails 
still coming in. Altogether we considered that the Lord 
greatly blessed the ministry of his Truth in connection 
with the London and associated meetings. We cannot, 
of course, hope for many more thousands to be reached 
with "Present Truth," but we were quite content to 
colabor with our British friends to the extent of our 
ability, and to leave the results with the Chief Reaper. 
We doubt not he will bless his message of Grace and 
Truth to all who are in condition of heart-readiness 
for it. 

On Monday, May 23, we visited Luton, and had a 
very enjoyable afternoon with the friends of the Truth 
there to the number of about 50, discussing with them the 
terms of the high calling, the value of it, the conditions 
upon which we are accepted of God in Christ, as members 
of his Body, and granted covenant relationship as 
"new creatures in Christ." We pointed out that this 
condition must be maintained by patient perseverance in 
well doing and watching unto prayer; and that failure 
to develop the fruits and graces of the Spirit, and to 
become "copies of God's dear Son," would mean the 
loss of everything. Thus God's message of grace once 
accepted must be considered either a message "of life 
unto life or of death unto death." In the evening we 
had a public service which was well attended by a very 
intelligent class of people to the number of about 650. 
Our topic was, "Man's Past, Present and Future in the 
Light of the Bible." We discussed it after the usual 
manner. Many gave close attention and evidenced considerable 
interest. May the Lord bless the interests of 
his cause there! 

OUR FAREWELL AT LONDON 

We spent Tuesday, the 24th, in further search for 
suitable quarters for the London Church and the Society's 
Offices, with apparent success, but nothing definite. 

As per appointment we met with the London Church 
in the afternoon. At our invitation the congregation took 
Tea with us, as our guests, dividing the number among 
various Tea-Rooms in the vicinity. Subsequently we 
regathered at the Whitefield Tabernacle. There we gave 
the friends a family talk, telling them of our appreciation 
of their efforts in connection with the meetings 
recently concluded; telling them also what we knew of 
the results, and expressing our hopes for the future— 
that some others might be found, and that at all events 
the activities of the Church had surely drawn all of its 
members still more closely together in love and unity of 
the spirit and in the bonds of peace. 

After an address of about an hour, as we were closing 
the session, one of the Elders of the congregation 



remarked that while all of them recognized Brother Russell 

as a Pastor, and indeed voted for him every year, 

when they subscribed for THE WATCH TOWER, nevertheless 

he thought it would be both wise and proper to nominate 

him and elect him in a formal manner as Pastor 

of the London Assembly. The matter was seconded, 

and when the vote was put, by Brother Hemery, it was 

unanimously carried. We thanked the congregation for 

this another evidence of their love and confidence, and 

assured them that we always had their interests close to 

our heart, and doubted if we could do more for them as 

Pastor than we had already previously done, but that 

in any event they might be sure that they would continue 

to have our love and prayers and best endeavors. 

We knew not whether the Lord would now permit us to 

see them twice a year or not, but would leave that to his 

Providential guidance of the interests of his work. At 

our request the Elders and Deacons met with us at the 

Society's Offices from ten to eleven p.m., during which 

time we came more closely into touch with the various 

meetings of the London Church, and their leaders. Our 

session closed with prayer for the Lord's blessing upon 

his work everywhere, and particularly in the metropolis 

of Great Britain. 

LIVERPOOL-BELFAST-DUBLIN 

Although the Truth had been established in Liverpool 
for some years, it never seemed to properly flourish until 
quite recently. The cause of this was apparently an 
attempt to run the meetings on the lines of "mission 
work," rather than as Bible Study Classes. Considerable 
progress has been made within the past two years, until 
now the class averages about sixty, well informed, consecrated, 
and, so far as we could judge, "Sound in the 
faith." At the afternoon session about 1 10 were present, 
and we had the closest attention while we endeavored to 
set forth some features of "the Mystery, hidden from 
past ages and dispensations"— Christ in you [the Church] 
the hope of glory, and you, the Church, in Christ, as 
members, heirs of glory. 

We endeavored to make clear the fact that the entire 
Church of the First-borns includes the "Little Flock," 
the "Royal Priesthood," and also the "Great Company," 
who will be their companions on the spirit plane in the 
Kingdom work. All of these, we showed, belonged to 
"the Church of the First-borns," and were typified in 
Israel's first-borns who were passed over, or spared "in 
that night," when the first-borns of the Egyptians were 
slain. We showed that the night preceding the day of 
their deliverance from Egypt typified this Gospel Age, 
which precedes the Millennial Day of deliverance. All 
people of God will be fully delivered from the power of 
Sin and Death, and from the power of Satan, and from 
all of his malevolent hosts in the coming Millennial Day. 
But now, in advance, the first-borns are passed over and 



spared. The antitype of those first-borns of Israel, or 
the Church of the First-borns, have all been begotten 
of the holy Spirit to spirit nature and sonship during 
this Gospel Age. 

ALL FIRST-BORNS ARE ANTITYPICAL LEVITES 

As God caused the first-borns of Israel to be exchanged 
for the one tribe of Levi, so thereafter all Levites represented 
"the household of faith"— the spirit begotten 
ones of this age. We showed that these in the antitype 
divided into two classes— a "Little Flock" of priests, 
the "Royal Priesthood" under Jesus, and a "Great Company," 
who will eventually come up out of great tribulation, 
washing their robes and making them white in the 

R4647 : page 230 

blood of the Lamb. The latter will be the associates of 
the Church in the Heavenly Kingdom, though without 
the crown and seat of honor in the throne. They will 
be "before the throne" and have palm branches of victory. 
We saw these also in Psalm 45, where the Bride of 
Christ is pictured as being brought in before the King 
in raiment of fine needle-work and gold, and then following 
her into his presence "the virgins her companions." 
We saw the same class pictured in Revelations 19. At 
the fall of Babylon they will be fully set free from the 
timidity which has restrained them, and be glad to acclaim 
the Bride, and to say, "Let us be glad and rejoice, and 
give glory to God, because the marriage of the Lamb has 
come and his Bride hath made herself ready." More 
than this, they will hear eventually an invitation that 
they may participate in the glorious celebration or 
Nuptial Feast or "Marriage Supper." Again we saw 
these represented in Rebecca and her damsels, or maids, 
who accompanied her, when she went to become the 
bride of Isaac. 

We noted that those received of God during this 
Gospel Age are "all called in the one hope of their 
calling," all drawn in one manner; the terms for each and 
all are the same, namely, "If any man will be my disciple, 
let him deny himself, take up his cross and follow me." 
Let him present his body a living sacrifice, holy and 
acceptable to God. Thus all now called and received of 
the Lord enter into covenant relationship with the Father 
by sacrifice, to follow the example of the dear Redeemer. 

R4648 : page 230 

To each and every one of these covenanters by sacrifice 
Jesus as their Advocate first of all appropriated a 
sufficiency of his merit to cover their blemishes. 

The difference between those who will constitute the 
great mass of the household of faith and the "Little 
Flock" of the "Royal Priesthood" will be that the latter 



will manifest more zeal, more of the spirit of the Head 
in their faithfulness to lay down their lives in the service 
of the Lord, the Truth and the brethren. All must 
prove loyal in the end, else they will not be in either 
class, but die the Second Death. We are not to esteem 
the "Great Company" ignoble and traitorous toward 
the Lord and his cause, for none such will be acceptable 
for eternal life on any plane. They have the 
same love for truth and righteousness and for the brethren 
as the "Little Flock," the "Royal Priesthood" have, 
but in less degree; they show less zeal. Hence "through 
fear of death they are all their lifetime subject to bondage"; 
for fear of the cost, they hold back their sacrifice 
until too late. Finally the test will come to determine 
whether or not they will repudiate the Lord, the Truth, 
and the Brethren. Such as will be unwilling to repudiate 
their earthly rights will be unworthy of further covenant 
sonship under any condition. But such as will, when put 
to the test, prove loyal, will be counted as companions, 
servants of the Bride, and be her associates in the work 
of the Kingdom. 

NOT JUSTIFIED BY THE PHILOSOPHY 

We urged the friends, however, to remember that 
many of us were justified and in fellowship with 
God, and had presented our bodies living sacrifices, had 
received an imputation of Christ's merit, and our sacrifices 
had been accepted of the Father and the holy Spirit 
of adoption had been imparted, before we understood 
much of anything concerning the philosophy of the 
Atonement or the significance of the Ransom, or anything 
about its application. Not only was this true of us, but 
it has been true of all Christians during this Gospel Age 
for centuries. We exhorted, therefore, that none consider 
the mere knowledge of the Ransom and the philosophy 
of the Atonement as the all-important matter. 
Rather we should recognize that our trust in Christ, and 
our consecration to do the Father's will and our faithfulness 
in so doing, even unto death, constitute the terms 
of our acceptableness and the basis of our hope of joint-heirship 
with our Lord in his Kingdom. 

We are now granted special light from the Word of 
God on the Philosophy of the Atonement, as an offset to 
the vain philosophies of human tradition, which are 
springing up around us— Theosophy, Christian Science, 
Evolution, etc. Were it not for this God-given Light in 
the harvest time, many of us might have fallen away 
from the Lord and his gracious arrangements entirely. 
Our knowledge of the Ransom is to be esteemed a special 
and very great blessing of the Lord to his people during 
this harvest time. But, while we are to esteem the knowledge 
of the Ransom a special mark of Divine favor and 
guidance and blessing in connection with the Truth, we 
should not think of making that knowledge a test of 
brotherhood or fellowship. For aught we know, some of 



the Lord's people today may be as fully in God's fellowship, 

as fully in covenant relationship with him, without 

an appreciation of this philosophy, as were some of our 

forefathers. 

Likewise, let us beware of how the Adversary might 
seek to ensnare us and to mislead us in the study in 
respect to the Great Company. If he could get us sufficiently 
interested in this, or in any similar question, so 
as to make of it a point of dispute in the Church and to 
cause a division amongst the brethren and the stumbling 
of some, we may be sure that it would be pleasing to our 
Adversary in proportion as it would be injurious to God's 
people. If, therefore, some say to us that they cannot 
see the "Great Company" as we do— that it is a spirit 
class, spirit-begotten, etc.— we answer, "Very well, you 
cannot be blamed for what you do not see! If later the 
Lord shall grant you a still further opening of your eyes 
of understanding that will be a cause for still further 
rejoicing, but now rejoice in what you can see." 

In any case, let us remember that no one was "called" 
to be of the "Great Company" Class. Let us remember 
that we were called in the one hope of our calling, namely, 
to the Bride class. Let us seek to make our calling 
and election sure. Let us know assuredly that we shall 
never advance our interests as new creatures by contentions 
and divisions amongst the Body-members of Christ, 
the "little flock," the self-sacrificing priests. Doubtless 
there are many points similar to this which the Adversary 
has endeavored to make stones of stumbling and 
rocks of offence for the separating of the Lord's people. 
"We are not ignorant of his devices," and to be forewarned 
is to be forearmed against them. It is ours to 
preserve the unity of the spirit in the bonds of peace. 

Let us be thankful for whatever things God in his 
providence has revealed to us; and "let us all mind the 
same things," as the Apostle urges, and be knit together 
in love and make increase of the Body. Those whom the 
Adversary is turning aside from the harvest work to 
dispute over who found the jewels of truth and who 
showed them most to others are not wise, neither can 
they be happy. The harvest work is great, the laborers 
are few, the Master has consented that we may serve! 
What a privilege is ours! How we should rejoice in the 
opportunity afforded us for manifesting to our Lord and 
to our Redeemer our love and our zeal for Him, for the 
Truth, for the Brethren who are in the light of the 
Truth, and for still others who are yet in Babylon and 
darkness! 

R4648 : page 231 

HARVEST WORK BY PRINTING MACHINERY 

We called attention to the fact that the harvest work 
for a time was confined almost exclusively to the Brethren, 
but that latterly the Lord is opening up other channels. 



For instance, he is using the newspapers in all 
parts of the world, as his agencies for carrying the message 
of glad tidings to all who are still in darkness, but 
who are really at heart, and through consecration, his 
people. To us this indicates that the supply of consecrated 
harvesters is not sufficiently large, or that the 
Lord's people, blessed with a knowledge of "Present 
Truth," are not as zealous as they should be. For one 
of these reasons, doubtless, God is using unconsecrated 
talents and channels, rather than allow the harvest time 
to go by— rather than allow any of the brethren to be 
without the necessary light and assistance. We urged 
more love, more zeal, more of the spirit of self-sacrifice 
and devotion to the Lord, and to our precious privileges 
as co -laborers with him. 

The evening service at Liverpool was extremely well 
attended for a week-night meeting, the number being estimated 
at 1,600. Had the large hall been more centrally 
located doubtless many more would have been present. 
The attention was excellent, the faces earnest and intelligent. 
Our topic was "Man's Past, Present and 
Future." The results are with the Lord. The literature 
at the door was taken with great avidity. 

The dear friends to the number of about sixty sang 
to us from the pier, and waved to us goodbye, as we journeyed 
by the night boat to Belfast, Ireland. Our recollections 
of our visit are very precious and stimulating. 

At Belfast about a dozen awaited our arrival. We 
were most hospitably entertained and enjoyed the meetings 
there. In the afternoon we met with the little class 
of about twenty, and spoke to them along the same lines 
as at our other stops, showing the difference between 
God's dealings with the Church during this age, introduced 
into covenant relationship to the Father by the 
great Advocate, and his dealings with Israel and the world 
during the thousand years of the great Mediatorial Kingdom 
and his ultimate acceptance of all the perfected and 
worthy of humanity to be his sons in full covenant relationship 
for eternity. 

In the evening we addressed about 400 very intelligent-appearing 
people of reverent and Christian demeanor, 
the majority of whom were men. Our topic 
was "The Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; 
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." We had a most earnest 
and attentive hearing, and, knowing that an opportunity 
for questions would surely be desired, we opened the 
way. Fully one half of the audience remained, for the 
questions were good ones, well to the point, and indicated 
earnestness and thoughtfulness respecting the subject 
discussed. The Lord blessed us in the answers to 
these questions by refreshing our memory with the appropriate 
Scriptures, which seemed to be convincing to 
the hearers. 

The next morning we took the train for Dublin, accompanied 
by several of the brethren. At Dublin we 
were welcomed by as many of the friends there as could 



be spared from their business engagements— about eight. 
Soon we were with them in the little hall. About thirty 
were present. Again we rehearsed the precious things 
of the Divine Plan, especially the terms and conditions 
of our high calling to joint-heirship with our Redeemer 
in his Kingdom. Subsequently many of our number took 
tea together at a restaurant. From thence we went to 
the public service at the Ancient Concert Rooms, where 
an audience of about 400 assembled. Our topic was, 
"Man's Past, Present and Future in the Light of the 
Bible." Many evidently were quite deeply interested. 
We trust that some hearts were touched with a greater 
appreciation of the "love Divine, all love excelling," and 
that to these the Father's character was to some degree 
cleared of the aspersion cast upon it by the creeds of the 
dark ages. 
After the meeting closed an opportunity was granted 

R4649 : page 23 1 

for questions. The secretary of the Y.M.C.A., who 

was present at our meeting a year ago, was present this 

time also, and with more questions, and with about half 

a dozen ministerial looking associates. They all gave 

precedence, however, to a Dublin rector widely known 

as a man of ability, we were told, and also a College Professor, 

and also a religious disputer. He plied us with 

a number of questions, which we were very glad to answer. 

The force of our answers lay in their Scripturalness, 

and indeed, so far as possible, we answered in 

Scripture language. The questions continued for about 

an hour, and the entire service for about three hours. 

We considered that the Truth had vindication, and that 

the eyes of some were more widely opened. We thanked 

the Lord for the ministry of his Word, and thus closed 

our last discourse on British soil. 

The next day, Saturday, we left for Liverpool, reaching 
our homeward-bound steamer in ample time. About 
thirty of the friends got passes to come aboard the vessel, 
but about ten others failed to get them and waved 
us goodbye from the landing. As our vessel steamed 
seaward, the company of about fifty joined in singing, 
"Blest be the Tie that Binds," and "God be with you 
till we meet again"— a happy and inspiring conclusion 
to our European visit! 



R4649 : page 231 

HOME, SWEET HOME 

SECTION V. 

OUR homeward journey was uneventful. It 
afforded opportunity for literary work in 



conjunction with Brother Jones, our faithful 
stenographer. Such of you as desired 
have already through the newspapers a report 
of our sermon for the Sunday we were 
on the Atlantic. 

Arriving at the pier early Friday morning, 
June 3d, we were warmly greeted, 
especially by the Bethel family. (We learn 
that the date of our arrival was measurably kept 
secret from others.) Our attention was drawn to a 
schooner yacht, "The Angel." As soon as possible we 
were taken on board of her. In a brief and neat speech 
the vessel was presented to us and the papers handed over. 
We replied briefly, expressing our appreciation of the 
gift and accepting it as Trustee for the Peoples Pulpit 
Association. We expressed a hope that the vessel might 
be used and blessed of the Lord in connection with the 
service of the Truth in New York Harbor. There is 
room on the deck for an audience of about one hundred 
and, in stormy weather, the cabin will accommodate about 
seventy. The vessel is fitted with sails and also with 
gasoline engines and an electric light plant. Her outfitting 

R4649 : page 232 

was not quite complete at the time of presentation. 

It is hoped that she will be ready for service soon. The 

endeavor will be to use her for the preaching of the 

Gospel in various languages to the sailors from all parts 

of the world, to whom also literature will be freely supplied. 

The different evenings of the week will be divided 

amongst the various nationalities of the port, "The Angel" 

lying at some suitable dock convenient for those of the 

nationality to be addressed. Pray for the Lord's blessing 

upon this, another opening for the service of the 

Truth. 

We were glad to get back to "Bethel" and to the 
Tabernacle. Prior to our arrival the New York congregation 
arranged to give us a reception on Saturday evening, 
June 4, at the Tabernacle. The house was well filled. 
The congregation included some from surrounding cities. 
We had a happy time together. We rehearsed some of 
our foreign experiences. Next we showed that the evidences 
on every hand indicated that the harvest work is 
nearly completed, but that, nevertheless, more remains 
for willing reapers to do. In conclusion we shook hands 
with the friends and they were careful not to demonstrate 
all of their good wishes by pressure of the hand. 

On the Sunday following, June 5, we had a grand 
public service at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. The 
attendance was estimated at 2,800. Several hundred 
more waited in vain in the corridors, hoping for a chance 
to get a seat. Other hundreds were turned away, but 
received literature. As our topic was "Jerusalem," quite 
a number of Jews attended. Indeed, a great amount of 
interest seems to be stirring amongst the Hebrews. They 



are surprised to have kind words from Christians, and 
especially surprised that we should proclaim the ultimate 
realization of their hopes as to Messiah's Kingdom and 
channel of blessing for the world. Reports of our discourse 
were published in prominent Jewish papers and 
went all over the world. One thing which seemed to 
astonish the Jews was the fact that we made such particular 
reference to the writings of their prophets. Many 
Jews have become Higher Critics and lost all their faith 
in the Bible. One of these, a prominent newspaper man, 
called at our study to inquire our motive for kind words 
to his people. We told him that it was not because we 
appreciated the Jews as better or nobler than the remainder 
of mankind, but our loyalty to God's Word, 
which we believe makes us proclaim its testimonies. We 
recited to him some of the prophecies showing the restoration 
blessings soon to come to his people. We pointed out 
to him that we were not endeavoring nor expecting to 
make Christians of the Jews; that to our understanding 
the Bible teaches that God has an earthly blessing in 
reservation for the seed of Abraham— not a heavenly one 
—although a few have accepted Christ and been begotten 
of the holy Spirit to the spiritual inheritance. We 
pointed out that God's blessings mentioned to Israel 
from Genesis to Malachi are all earthly and they are 
shortly to begin to be fulfilled. Upon leaving the study 
the gentleman said that he had entered it an agnostic, but 
that he left it contrariwise, a believer in the inspiration of 
the Bible. 



R4649 : page 232 

MOUNT TABOR'S PARABOLIC VISION 

-MATTHEW 17:l-8;14-20.-JULY 24.- 

Golden Text:— "This is my beloved Son, in 
whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." 

CONCLUDING our last study, our Lord, 

six days afterward, took Peter, James and 

John, three of his favorites among the 

disciples, into a high mountain. There he 

was transfigured before them; that is to 

say, his appearance changed, his face shone 

like the sun, his garments were white like 

the light. Then the vision grew and Moses 

and Elijah appeared to be holding conversation 

with the transfigured Jesus. The impulsive 

St. Peter, anxious to serve, inquired whether or 

not it was the Master's will that they build three tabernacles, 

one for him, one for Moses and one for Elijah, on 

the top of the mountain. One of the evangelists says, 

"He knew not what he said." Another account shows that 



the three disciples were for a time overwhelmed by something 
like drowsiness but later became fully awake. 

It was on this occasion that they heard a voice from 
the heavens, saying, "This is my beloved Son in whom I 
am well pleased, hear ye him." It required our Lord's 
kind words and touch to relieve the Apostles of their 
fright, and looking up they saw no one but Jesus. His 
transfiguration had vanished, and it was the Master, just 
as before. If, momentarily, they thought that Jesus had 
entered into glory, they now perceived that they were mistaken. 
Another account tells us that as they were coming 
down the mountain side Jesus charged them that they 
should not tell the vision to any one until after his resurrection 
from the dead. He thus explained to them that 
the whole matter was a vision, an apparition. This was 
a fulfillment of what he had told them in his last words 
of our lesson of a week ago, "There be some standing 
here which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of 
man coming in his Kingdom." These three disciples had 
been standing in his presence at the time those words were 
uttered, and now they had seen the Son of man in his 
Kingdom glory— in vision. The reality of that vision has 
not yet come to pass, although it is surely nigh, even at 
the door. 

St. Peter himself declares that they accepted the vision 
as a corroboration of our Lord's assurance of his coming 
Kingdom. In his Epistle he says, "We have not followed 
cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you 
the power and coming of our Lord Jesus, but were eye 
witnesses of his majesty (his Kingdom), when we were 
with him in the holy mount. (2 Peter 1:16,18.) Yet 
the Apostle proceeds to tell us that this vision, helpful as 
it was at the time, became secondary as he came to a 
better understanding of the prophecy which more particularly 
describes our Lord's second coming and Kingdom. 
He says, "We have a more sure word of prophecy 
[a more sure evidence than the vision] to which we do 
well to take heed as unto a lamp that shines in a dark 
place until the day dawn"— until the Millennial morning 
dawn.— 2 Peter 1:19. 

Before leaving the story of the transfiguration, which 
symbolized our Lord's Kingdom glory, we note his 
gracious words to the affrighted disciples, "Arise, and be 
not afraid." On several occasions he thus addressed 
them. It would appear that by nature many of us have a 
consciousness of our own imperfections and a realization 
of our unworthiness of Divine favor, and fears are likely 

R4650 : page 233 

to grasp us and torture us. This is because we do not 
know our heavenly Father. The more we learn of him 
the more does the love of God cast out fear from our 
hearts, and assure us that he who created us is sympathetic 
towards all who are striving for righteousness. He is a 
great God, not a little one. True, he will not give his 



greatest blessings to any except those who come into harmony 
with him, but, on the other hand, he is not a demon 
that he should be feared as such. He takes no pleasure 
in the suffering of his creatures and will not permit that 
any should suffer eternally, therefore his provision that all 
shall have, through Christ, an opportunity for regaining 
perfection and eternal life, and that whosoever will not 
avail himself of this great privilege must die the second 
death— must be annihilated. 

While Jesus and the three favored Apostles were in 
the mount of transfiguration, supposed to have been Mount 
Tabor, at the foot of the mountain was a man whose son 
was a lunatic, whom he had brought that the Lord might 
expel the demon. The Apostles had already been out, as 
the Lord's representatives, in various parts of the country 
of Palestine, curing the sick and expelling demons in his 
name, so they assayed to cast out this demon, but could 
not. The Revised Version speaks of the sufferer as an 
epileptic. Indeed, all higher criticism disputes that there 
is such a thing as obsession by evil spirits. It is a common 
saying today among the Higher Critics that what 
our Lord and the Apostles mistook for demon possession 
was merely insanity, epilepsy, etc. Of course, the word 
disease is broad enough to cover any kind of ailment, 
whether it be a direct affection from the Adversary, or an 
indirect one through heredity. In either case there is loss 
of ease, dis-ease, discomfort. We, however, have more 
confidence in the wisdom of the Lord and his chosen 
Apostles and mouthpieces than we have in all the doctors 
of theology and doctors of medicine in the whole 
earth. We therefore accept this narrative just as it reads, 
that Jesus rebuked the "devil" and cast him out of the 
boy, who was cured from that very hour. 

The disciples who had been unsuccessful in casting out 
this demon, called the Master away from the hearing of 
the multitude and asked him why they had failed when 
they attempted to cast out the demon. He replied, Because 
of your little faith. Another account says that he 
stated, "This kind cometh not out except by fasting and 
prayer." In other words, the lesson to the Apostles was 
that their greatest power would result from their living 
very near to God, living lives of self-denial and prayer. 
Of course, fasting to be seen of men is not here inculcated, 
nor do we suggest that the works of penance on the part 
of disciples would make them more efficient in the understanding 
of the Lord's mystery; rather the thought is, the 
nearer one lives to God the more of the Divine power may 
be exercised by and through him. 

It is perhaps difficult for us to understand our Lord's 
reference to their having little faith, for they surely 
exercised considerable faith in making an attempt to cast 
out the demon. Faith, to be successful, must be backed 
by spiritual power, and our Lord assures us that even with 
a small amount of faith we would be able to remove a 
mountain and nothing would be impossible. We are not 
to suppose that our Lord meant that his followers should 



try to remove mountains as a diversion, nor as a proof of 

their faith, for by so doing they would be seriously interfering 

with the interests of others who would be more 

convenienced by having the mountain remain. This they 

would have no right to do. We assume, therefore, that 

the thought must be that if in the fulfillment of the 

Divine command it should be necessary to have a mountain 

removed, and if the commission had been given to 

one of the Lord's followers to remove the mountain, and 

if he could exercise the faith to obey the command, the result 

would correspond to the faith exercised. All that 

the majority of us could do would be to exercise as much 

faith as possible and ask the Lord for more, and also seek 

to cultivate a greater degree of faith. 



R4650 : page 233 

FORGIVING AND BEING FORGIVEN 

--MATTHEW 18:21-35.~JULY31.~ 

"If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly 
Father will also forgive you."— Matthew 6:14. 

ST. PETER'S query, "Lord, how often shall my 

brother sin against me and I forgive him; 

until seven times?" is a query that comes to 

many. It is a question that at some time and 

in some manner or form is quite sure to 

come to all the followers of Christ. Imperfect 

ourselves and surrounded by others who 

are imperfect, we continually have need to 

exercise mercy, benevolence, forgiveness. 

There is something in the human mind which 

naturally appreciates justice and takes special note of injustice 

done toward us. It is also remarkable how many 

people take a delight in meting out justice to an offender 

against the law. It is this spirit which has been noted in 

mobs. Men and women and children work themselves 

into a very frenzy, as advocates of justice, in expressions 

against a guilty wretch who escapes the clutches of the 

law and a just penalty, and insist upon taking vengeance 

into their own hands. It would appear that many of those 

who participate in mobs have at times been guilty of 

nearly or quite as great crimes as those which they reprehend 

in another and would punish. It would appear that 

there is a craving in the fallen flesh to do violence to 

another, or to see violence done, if only there could be an 

excuse for it on the score of justice. Alas, poor creatures, 

how wrong such a condition of heart, how reprehensible 

in the sight of God! And yet those who thus wrongfully 

give loose rein to their passions, quiet their own consciences, 

at least, by concluding that they are viewing the 

matter like God, loving justice and hating iniquity. 



It is true that Justice is the foundation of Divine 
Government— that God is just; but it is also true that God 
is loving and kind, and that he accepts to himself the very 
name of love, for "God is love." Such should learn that 
to be in the Divine likeness is to govern one's self and 
one's course by the rules of justice, but to measure the 
course of others by the rule of love and sympathy, generosity 
and forgiveness. 

In answer to St. Peter's question, our Lord said that 
we should forgive a brother not only seven times, but 
seventy times seven. What a breadth of generosity is 
here suggested! How it tells us of the loving mercy and 
forgiveness of him with whom we have to do! But let 
us remember another statement of this same matter, where 
it is implied that before the forgiveness is granted, it is 
to be at least desired, if not sought. "If thy brother 
trespass against thee seven times in a day and seven times 
a day shall say, I repent'; thou shalt forgive him"— or 

R4650 : page 234 

to the extent of seventy times seven. We must even assume 
that the Lord meant that in our hearts we should 
already forgive the brother his trespasses, even though we 
might wisely wait to express our forgiveness until his attitude 
manifested some desire for it. The disciples of 
Christ are to be continually in the attitude of generosity 
and filled with the spirit of forgiveness as is the heavenly 
Father— ready and waiting to be gracious, and under 
proper conditions, to manifest that readiness. 

To illustrate this matter the Master spoke a parable. 
He said, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain 
King which would take account of his servants" (v. 23). 
But, as we understand him, he meant that the church at 
the present time is the embryotic Kingdom and is being 
dealt with by the Lord after the manner of the illustration 
in this parable. It is not therefore an illustration of 
God's dealing with the world. He is not dealing with the 
world at all. He is not calling them his servants in any 
sense of the word— only believers, consecrated ones, 
occupy this favorable position of Divine relationship and 
only these are meant in the parable. Furthermore, the 
parable does not even consider the church on the score 
of original sin. It is not the thought that original sin 
may be cancelled on account of prayer. The penalty for 
original sin needed to be satisfied, not by the prayer of the 
sinners, but by the precious blood of Christ. But after 
having our sins forgiven through turning from sin and 
faith in Christ, and through consecration to the Lord and 
begetting of the holy spirit, then we are his servants, and 
the parable relates to these only. 

The first servant mentioned in the parable had been 
very derelict as a servant of God. As a follower of 
Christ he had come far short. The time of reckoning 
came. He realized it and besought Divine favor and 
mercy, promising to do all he could to make up for the 



deficiencies. He was heard; the sentence upon him was 

stayed. But when he went forth to find a fellow-servant 

who owed him a trifling sum and would have no mercy 

upon him, his master was very angry and declared that he, 

too, must be harshly dealt with and receive no mercy, because 

he had shown none to his fellow-servant. His 

Lord's words were, "Shouldest not thou also have had 

compassion (mercy) upon thy fellow-servant even as I 

had mercy on thee?" And he "delivered him to the tormentors 

until he should pay all that was due." The 

amount due would not include any part of the penalty of 

R4651 : page 234 

original sin, but merely the penalty for the shortcomings 
of the transgressor as respects his covenant relationship, 
as a servant who was also a debtor from the time he became 
a servant. 

The Lord's words concluding the parable are, "So shall 
also my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your 
hearts forgive not every one his brother his trespasses." 
In another text our Lord inculcates the same thought in 
different words, saying: "If ye forgive men their trespasses 
your heavenly Father will also forgive you." 

The purpose and object of our heavenly Father in thus 
dealing with us seems not clear to all. It is not that he 
wishes to retaliate. It is not that he would say to us, "If 
you are mean towards others I will be mean towards you." 
Rather the lesson is this, "I am kind to the unthankful; I 
have been very gracious to you in the forgiveness of your 
original sin and in accepting your consecration to be my 
servant and in bringing you into my family, but I have 
called you into this position for a special purpose and you 
will not be fit nor be prepared for the service I desire for 
you unless you learn the lesson of forgiveness and generosity; 
hence, for your sake I make the rule that I will 
be no more generous to you and your imperfections than 
you are generous toward your brethren in their imperfections. 
I do this in order to teach you a great lesson which 
cannot be so well learned in any other way. What I am 
seeking in you as my servant is perfection in my 
character-likeness. 

You are too inclined to look at the justice of my 
character and to copy it and to deal severely with others 
who are your debtors. I wish to make clear to you that 
the grandest elements of my character are illustrated from 
the standpoint of my love and sympathy, my kindness and 
forbearance. Because I desire you to progress in this 
character-likeness and so come to the position where I can 
use you in my service more abundantly, therefore I rule 
that you must be forgiving and gracious one toward 
another even as I have already been gracious toward you, 
and even as I propose yet further to be gracious to you, if 
you will abide in harmony with my spirit of love and seek 
to walk in my way. I am ready to forgive the loving and 
generous who are seeking to copy my character; I am 



ready to be kind and generous and forgiving to the greatest 
degree." 



R4651 : page 234 

THE MEMORIAL--HOW MANY CELEBRATED 

THE number reported to have participated in 

the Memorial Supper this year amounts to 

9,664. We confess some disappointment of 

this, for it is only 419 more than is reported 

for 1909. At first we were disposed to 

think that many had neglected to send the 

post-card with particulars, as requested. 

But we afterward concluded that quite probably 

all in full harmony with THE WATCH 

TOWER presentations of the Truth responded. 

Anyway we are glad to note that there are 

"more than 7,000 who have not bowed the knee to Baal." 

We would not be misunderstood. It is not our thought 
that all who are the Lord's people, that all who have 
been begotten of the holy Spirit, have already come to 
a knowledge of the Present Truth to the extent of fully 
appreciating it. Daily we are finding these— or rather 
the Lord is finding them. Indeed, never since the harvest 
began has the outlook for the spread of the Truth 
throughout Christendom been so grand and so hope-inspiring 
as now. Thousands are getting their eyes of 
understanding opened and making rapid progress towards 
the light. Nor do we think that these thousands on the 
way are to take the crowns of those who held the Truth 
for a time without proper appreciation. On the contrary, 
it is our understanding that the majority of those who 
will constitute the "great company," losing the crowns 
and getting instead palm branches, have been in Babylon 
and under Divine inspection for years as to their worthiness 
of greater light. 

We are free to confess, however, a measure of disappointment 
in connection with this matter. Our list 
of nearly 30,000 TOWER subscribers should represent twice 
that number of deeply interested readers— 60,000. And 
we would expect that every one of these would have been 
anxious to celebrate the Memorial of the Redeemer's 
sacrifice and his own consecration to participate in the 
same. 

We are not forgetting that the standard lifted in these 
columns is a very high one; that not many could be 

R4651 : page 235 

expected to leave all and take up the cross and follow 
in the Master's footsteps; not many could be expected to 
present their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 
to God; not many could be expected to appreciate the 



privilege of being members of the one loaf, the one body 
now being broken; not many could be expected to rejoice 
in the privilege of sharing in "his cup." We surely were 
disappointed in that there were not more than reported. 



R4651 : page 235 

THE SINS BORNE BY THE SCAPE-GOAT 

"The Scape-Goat shall be presented alive before the 
Lord to make an atonement with him."— Lev. 16:10. 

NOT fully may we comprehend the method by 

which the accounts of Justice are kept, but 

apparently murder, the taking of life, is 

one of the most serious of crimes from the 

Divine standpoint, whether this be murder 

in the actual sense, or only the hatred of 

another, which the Lord denominates to be 

murder of the heart. He declares that 

"precious in his sight is the death of his 

saints." This means that he takes special 

note of their death. Throughout the period preceding 

our Lord's first advent righteous blood was shed, from 

Abel down to Zachariah. 

So far as Cain is concerned, he was guilty of his 
brother's death, guilty of his brother's blood; others who 
slew righteous people whom God approved were held 
guilty of their death; and those who slew Jesus were held 
guilty of the blood of Christ. God's proposition is that 
through the merit of Christ, he purposes a general forgiveness 
of all Adamic sin; but there is a measure of 
sin which is beyond anything that could properly be considered 
as resulting from Adamic weakness, and for 
which there is a measure of responsibility. 

THE CRYING OF JUSTICE FOR VENGEANCE 

According to the Scriptures the blood of Abel "cried" 
from the ground to the Lord. In other words, Justice 
cried out for vengeance. The merit of the death of 
Christ, which will ultimately be applied as the redemption-price 
for the sins of the world, would apparently not 
cover such transgression to the full. It would cover 
such portion as belonged to Adamic weakness or heredity, 
but a certain portion would be uncovered. We may presume, 
therefore, that a certain amount of obligation would 
continue to attach to those individuals who committed 
the murders, and that more or less retribution will be due 
them on account of their wrong-doing and misdeeds. But 
apparently the Lord has purposed that, since some needed 
to suffer, he would allow a certain liquidation of this 
murder account, as we may call it, to be visited upon the 
Jews in the end of the Jewish Age. Since they would, at 



the close of their Age, have a great time of trouble anyway, 
he purposed to allow this added suffering to come 
upon them, even upon many that were innocent. 

It would seem that he permitted this punishment of innocent 
ones to offset in a measure the account of Justice 
against those who had committed special murders, etc., 
and in this light we would understand the statement, "At 
the hands of this generation will I require all the righteous 
blood which was shed on the earth from the days 
of righteous Abel down to the days of Zacharias, the son 
of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the 
altar." (Matt. 23:45.) This was the "wrath to the uttermost" 
which came upon Jerusalem and that seems to 
have squared up the account so far as the past was concerned. 
A new beginning was made there, just as a new 
dispensation began. The Antitypical Priesthood and the 
Antitypical Levites then came on the scene, and throughout 
this Gospel Age also the Lord has taken cognizance 
of the death of all his consecrated people. If anyone is 
guilty of the death of one of the Lord's saintly, consecrated 
ones, he brings himself under a special obligation 
and responsibility. There seems to be a special charge of 
Justice against whoever is culpable, or responsible for the 
death or persecution of his saints. There is a suggestion 
along this line (Rev. 6:9,10), where the souls of those 
who were beheaded for the witness of Jesus and the testimony 
of the Word of God are said to cry out, "How long! 
How long! oh Lord, dost thou not judge and avenge our 
blood on them that dwell on the earth." This seems to 
symbolically picture, not the crying of any individual, for 
these individuals were dead and had no knowledge, no appreciation 
of the things at all— "the dead know not any 
thing"— but it was justice that cried, as in Abel's case, 
after he was dead. They had nothing to do with the crying 
of their blood. It was the voice of Justice. 

That there has been quite a large class of this kind 
all through this Gospel Age of more than 1,800 years, will 
be freely admitted by all. Many suffered for the cause of 

R4652 : page 235 

righteousness, for the namesake of the Lord; and apparently 

the Lord purposes that in the end of this Age 

he will do as he did in the end of the Jewish Age— have 

a summing up or accounting, as it were, and a satisfaction 

of Justice. This is not the satisfaction of Justice 

which Jesus will accomplish with the merit of his own 

blood, satisfying all claims that would come under the 

head of Adamic condemnation and weakness, but a satisfaction 

of Justice as respects these special trespasses 

against "the Body of Christ, which is the Church"— 

"Whosoever shall offend one of the least of these, my little 

ones, it were better that a millstone were hanged about his 

neck and he were drowned in the depths of the sea." 

THE KIND OF ATONEMENT THE GREAT COMPANY 



WILL EFFECT 

In the end of this age, there will be a class, which we 
term the Great Company, which must needs die, because 
it was their covenant that they would do so. It is on this 
condition that they received the begetting of the holy 
Spirit. Hence, if God will complete this work of grace 
in them by giving them a spirit nature, the death of the 
flesh must take place. There is no alternative, no escape 
from it; and since they have failed to carry out the sacrifice 
in the full sense, failed to go forward with the zeal 
and alacrity that would be required of such as would be 
footstep followers of him, they are disassociated from 
the Little Flock class; but instead of being cast into the 
Second Death, they are allowed to complete their death. 
And since their death is not applied, as is the death of the 
members of the Body of Christ— in the sacrificial sense, 
as it was originally proposed that it should be— the arrangement 
seems to be that these will go into death in a 
kind of substitutionary way, as an offset to some of the 
trespasses of those who did violence to the members of 
the Body of Christ throughout the age. And thus the accounts 
of Justice will be in part squared by these and to 
a certain extent, therefore, there will be a corresponding 
release granted, we may say, to those who have committed 
murder in the past. 

R4652 : page 236 

For instance, the words of the angel to Daniel (Dan. 12:2) 
imply that when Nero will come forth in the resurrection 
he will come forth to shame and lasting contempt. 
All will know about the details of the man's life; it will 
be an open book to the whole world. People will say, 
"That is Nero! There he is!" It will be a terrible ordeal 
to be thus looked upon as the murderer of his own 
mother and the murderer of hundreds of God's saints; and 
his shame and contempt will continue until he shall have 
risen out of that condition of degradation and shall have 
shown by a reformation of character that he is a 
thoroughly changed man. But there will be a certain 
great responsibility against Nero because of the death 
of all those saints of the Lord; this we might think would 
almost preclude any possibility of his having mercy from 
God. If the death of one saint would bring a punishment, 
the death of many saints would, we think, properly bring 
much punishment. We may suppose, therefore, that he 
will have a great deal of shame and contempt; but nevertheless, 
the merit of Christ's death will apply to Nero as 
well as to the remainder of mankind. 

Possibly many people have lived in the world who had 
minds and hearts no better than Nero's, but who did not 
have the same opportunity for manifestation of this 
wicked propensity. Perhaps there were many they 
would have liked to kill, but since they were not emperors, 
they would themselves have been amenable to the 



law and to punishment, and were thereby deterred. We 
are, therefore, not competent to judge how particularly 
responsible Nero was for all his course or how much more 
guilty he was than some others of the race. 

The suffering and death of the Great Company is, 
we have seen, necessary, and the application of this suffering 
and death in a substitutionary manner for the 
special transgressions against the "Body of Christ" seems 
to be a particular provision on the Lord's part. In this 
way the "souls under the altar" and their blood cry for 
vengeance; and in this way the vengeance will be met. 
The cry of Justice will be satisfied in connection with the 
death of these innocent persons of the Great Company 
class in the time of trouble. The death of Nero's victims 
will be recompensed, we may suppose, by those who 
may suffer innocently. The accounts of Justice, in this 
respect, will be satisfied. 



R4652 : page 236 

FROM THE EDGAR FAMILY 

Glasgow, June, 1910. 

BELOVED BROTHERS AND SISTERS IN CHRIST: 

—It is with feelings of deep gratitude 

to you that we write to thank you for 

your many comforting messages, tokens and 

letters of love and sympathy with us in 

our great trial. We not only thank you all 

warmly but also desire to praise and thank 

our Heavenly Father for the precious bonds 

of love in which all the members of the 

body are bound one to the other, and which 

in a time of mutual sorrow like this we are enabled the 

more highly to appreciate. Your prayers on our behalf 

are answered— God has sustained us all by His grace. 

Though our hearts are sore because we miss the 
loved one's presence in the flesh, yet we have a deep joy 
in the assurance that he has entered into that presence 
where there is fulness of joy and pleasures for evermore. 
Throughout his brief illness our dear one was blessed 
with the confident hope that he was so soon to see his 
blessed Lord face to face, and he urged us, if we loved 
him, to rejoice because he was going to the Father. 

The night before he died he requested his love to be 
sent to all the Churches, not only in this country, but 
elsewhere, and to each member of the Church, "without 
one exception." 

He spent his last remnants of strength in exhorting, 
counselling, and comforting us all. If the Lord will, we 
hope to give you more details of his last hours, but would 
now repeat the main thought he impressed upon us with 
his dying breath: "Daily renew your covenant of sacrifice 
to the Lord, and daily seek to fulfil it. God will 



strengthen you daily not only to will to do, but to do this 
one thing— sacrifice daily your all to the Lord." "What a 
glorious day is this to me!" he said, while his eyes shone 
like stars of blue, "so soon to see my Lord face to face, 
and our dear God! So soon to enter into my reward!" 

Dear Brothers and Sisters, Our earnest prayer for 
you and ourselves is that the memory of his sacrifice, so 
joyfully consummated on 9th June, 1910, may be blessed 
of God to us all in encouraging us to press on in the race, 
delighting to do, daily, the Father's will. 

With much love in the Lord. 

Yours in our Glorious Hope, THE EDGAR FAMILY. 



R4652 : page 236 

ITEMS TO BE REMEMBERED 

THE LAW RE DISTRIBUTION OF PEOPLES PULPIT 

We must be law-abiding regardless of whether we 
consider the laws just or unjust, wise or unwise. In 
many cities there are laws against the distribution of 
handbills, etc., because, thrown away, they litter the 
streets. This law should not, however, be construed to include 
PEOPLES PULPIT, which is a regular monthly religious 
newspaper and entitled to any respect and privilege 
accorded secular journals. However, if interfered 
with, after doing all in our power to secure just rights 
from officials, and being refused, it is generally wise to 
submit to those in position of authority, rather than to 
challenge their interpretations of the law by a suit in 
court. In some cities there is a law hindering the placing 
of any matter in private mail boxes unless the same bear 
the address of the box-owner. The janitor acting for the 
box-owner may be willing to place these for you, but 
otherwise, they would best be folded to a proper size and 
have the address written upon them on the spot, before 
putting into the box. 

SMALL CONVENTIONS NOT ADVERTISED 

The newspaper syndicate handling Brother Russell's 
sermons advise that it would be unwise for him to attend 
any small local conventions that are advertised as such. 
They may be conventions in the sense that they would be 
gatherings of the friends, but may not be advertised to 
the public as such, because they would appear too insignificant. 
The only public advertising sanctioned on 
such occasions would be Brother Russell's one public address. 
Please remember, therefore, that it would be 
necessary to cancel any of Brother Russell's appointments 
not in line with this suggestion. The general interests of 
the work demand it. 



R4652 : page 237 

THE GLORY OF THE CHURCH TO BE PERPETUAL 

IT IS our thought that the divine nature, the 
divine plane, has been promised only to the 
Anointed One, and when the Anointed 
One shall be complete it will be impossible 
to add to his members. To suppose additions 
would be as unreasonable in our judgment, 
as to think that after a man had 
grown up and become a king he should 
develop another foot. When the Body of 

R4653 : page 237 

Christ shall be complete— when the "Elect" 
number shall be full— we understand there will be no 
additions to it, just as there will be no deficiency in that 
Body when it shall be glorified. This nature of glory, 
honor and immortality of the Kingdom plane seems to 
appertain only to the Father, to the Son and to the 
"Bride, the Lamb's Wife." We know of nothing in the 
Scriptures nor in analogy that would imply that it could 
be shared by any others at any time; but of course what 
God has not clearly revealed we may not know of a 
certainty. We may be sure of one thing, however, and 
that is that Christ will always be "Head over the Church 
which is his Body"; that he will always be Head over 
all things. 

Another thing we may be quite sure of is that the 
Church thus honored by the Father as members of The 
Christ will have still other glories; as the Apostle declares, 
"that in the Ages to come, God might show the 
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us 
through Christ" (Eph. 2:6,7), implying not only that the 
glory of Christ is to be perpetual, but that the glory of the 
Church is also to be perpetual— not confined to the Millennial 
Age. 

DOES THE DEGREE OF SUFFERING DETERMINE 
THE DEGREE OF REWARD? 

We agree that our Lord's statement respecting John 
the Baptist, "He that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven 
is greater than he" (Luke 7:28), applies to the entire 
class of Ancient Worthies; and further, that it refers 
not merely to the earthly status of the Gospel Church as 
being superior, but marks the Church as a superior class 
in the future. 

This question might arise: In view of the statement 
of the Apostle James, "Take, my brethren, the Prophets, 
as an example of suffering affliction and of patience" 
(Jas. 5:10), and in view also of our Lord's words referring 



to the suffering of the Church, "So persecuted they 

the Prophets which were before you," and also of the detailed 

statement of these sufferings of the Ancient 

Worthies furnished us by the Apostle Paul (Hebrews 11), 

what should we say as to the degree of their sufferings 

in comparison with those of the Church and the reward 

that would justly be due them as compared with the 

reward of the Church? 

THE GOSPEL AGE THE "ACCEPTABLE DAY" FOR 
SACRIFICES 

We answer that if the Lord intends to reward his 
people in proportion to their suffering, some of us seemingly 
will get a very small reward. We have neither 
been stoned to death, nor sawn asunder, nor have we 
wandered in sheepskins and goatskins; nor have we been 
without any place to lay our head. We might say, however, 
that some of our sufferings may be of a different 
kind from theirs: It is possible to endure figurative 
scorching or stoning, and to have our names cast out 
as evil, etc. But on the whole we cannot say that, so 
far as merit is concerned in the matter of suffering, there 
is any advantage that the Church can claim over the 
Ancient Worthies even among those of our number who, 
in the early Church, were burned as torches by Nero. 
It would seem that we must make allowance for Divine 
"election"; that it pleased God to call us with this High 
Calling. During the Millennial Age even some may perhaps 
become as loyal to the principles of righteousness 
as any of the Ancient Worthies or any of the Church, 
and yet not be rewarded with either their distinction 
or ours. We are favored, we believe, only in that we 
live at this particular time of blessing— "the acceptable 
day of the Lord"— in which the Lord is ready and willing 
to accept our sacrifices; and this acceptable day could not 
begin until our Lord Jesus had made his sacrifice and 
opened up "the new and living way," whereby we might 
follow in his steps. 

John the Baptist had a very honorable work to perform, 
but that work was to be accomplished before our 
Lord's death and before the opening of this "acceptable 
day." Therefore he could not be of the Gospel Age 
Church and did not come under our "High Calling"— 
joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom of Heaven. 



R4653 : page 237 

ATTENDING NOMINAL CHURCH SERVICES 

WE INFER that our suggestion relative to attendance 

at nominal church services was not 

fully grasped by some of our readers. We 

had no thought to encourage membership in 



any human institution. We had no thought 

to encourage in any manner these institutions. 

We merely wished to suggest that 

some dear friends, in our judgment, incline 

to go to an extreme in that they fear to 

set foot inside nominal church edifices. 

Our thought is that these should be recognized as gathering 

places of those who profess some knowledge of and 

some love for our Savior— the world's Savior. While 

we cannot agree with all that they stipulate in their creeds, 

we can sympathize with them in the sense that we realize 

how they got into the darkness and bondage they are 

in, because we were once in the same ourselves. We 

have reason to believe that some of them are as honest 

as were we. 

Our suggestion is that while the first duty of the 
Lord's people who are in the light is to "forget not the 
assembling of themselves together"; while it is their 
duty to "build one another up in the most holy faith" 
and to "grow in grace" themselves; while, therefore, it is 
their duty to attend to their own spiritual nourishment by 
Scripture study, etc., nevertheless there may be times 
when nothing more important or more pressing or more 
opportune would present than a visit to some prayer-meeting 
or other meeting of Christian friends of the 
nominal systems. Our suggestion was not so much that 
nominal churches should be attended, but rather that none 
of us should feel afraid to attend one if favorable opportunity 
offered, peradventure we might there find some 
truth-hungry, and some good might be accomplished. 
These remarks are specially applicable to such as have 
husbands or wives who would desire their company occasionally, 
and be willing in return to accompany them to 
International Bible Students Meetings. 



page 238 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTION 

CELORON, NEAR JAMESTOWN, N.Y.-JULY 30-AUGUST 7 

WE ANTICIPATE a large attendance at this 

Convention, and advise friends intending to 

be present to send at once to us for reservations 

at the rate of $9, $1 1, or $14 each, 

for food, shelter and electric car or steamboat 

service to and from Celoron Auditorium. 

The $9 rate is usually for four in 

a room. Where a room is occupied by but 

two the rate will be not less than $11 each. 

Those paying in advance for the full nine 

days will naturally have the preference over those making 

a shorter stay. Remit to us at once. For less than 

the nine days the rate will be a little higher, $ 1 .25 to 



$1.50 per day inclusive. The higher prices represent 
choicer accommodations, with only one or two in a room. 
The cheaper terms represent generally four in a room. 
Hotel accommodations at Jamestown will be scarce at 
any price. We have adopted the plan of making all the 
arrangements, believing it will be to the comfort and 
advantage of those in attendance, who will be considered 
as the Society's guests. Following will be found a table 
of rates showing cost of railway transportation which, 
from some points, is very reasonable. 

Write to us at Brooklyn what accommodations you desire, 
and for how many, enclosing money order or draft 
for the same. We will immediately forward to you a 
memorandum with full description of the cottage, room, 
etc., apportioned to you, so that, on your arrival, you 
can proceed forthwith to your lodging place and find it 
ready and waiting for you. Along with this receipt 
and order we will send you programme for the Convention 
and a map showing the Lake, etc., and such further 
particulars as may seem necessary for your guidance. 

On the list following, the cities marked * have regular 
Summer Excursion rates. These tickets should be purchased 
to Jamestown, N.Y. Other quotations noted are 
for the "Chautauqua Excursion," July 29. If you come 
from the West continue in the electric car to Celoron, 
paying an additional fare. If you come from Eastern 
points via Jamestown, get off at that place or at Celoron, 
about five miles westward, and do not go on to Chautauqua. 
Chautauqua tickets needing endorsement will be 
attended to by our Committee at Celoron. 

It appears that there is no very special rate granted 
from Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Philadelphia, Harrisburg, 
Savannah, Jacksonville, etc. We believe that 
friends in those parts will do well to purchase their tickets 
to New York City via Penna. R.R.— on the customary 
"ten-or-more-to-the-party" plan, or on New York 
excursion plan— whichever is the cheaper. Then in 
New York they can easily transfer by the Subway to the 
Erie R.R. station and there secure the very favorable 
terms mentioned in our list as the rate from New York 
(July 29) to Jamestown and return ($1 1.75). 

The "party-of-ten-or-more" rate is always available on 
all railroads. One ticket is sold for an entire party at an 
excursion rate. This is known as a theatrical rate. 
Friends in various parts of Northern Pennsylvania, not 
far from the Erie R.R. lines, will find it to their advantage 
to buy their tickets to some point on the Erie R.R. 
From points on the Erie R.R. there are special excursion 
rates to Chautauqua on July 29. 

SPECIAL TRAIN FROM NEW YORK CITY 

A special daylight train has been arranged for friends 
of New York City and vicinity, Friday, July 29, leaving 
via 23rd Street Erie Ferry at 7:40 a.m., Chambers 
Street Erie Ferry at 8 a.m. From Brooklyn take the 



Perm. R.R. Annex Ferry (at the foot of Fulton Street) 
at 7:15 a.m. for Jersey City. From the Pennsylvania 
Railroad Station in Jersey City take the Hudson Terminal 
Subway for the Erie Railroad Station. 

The train starts from Erie Railroad Station in Jersey 
City, N.J., at 8:15 a.m., arriving in Jamestown at 7 p.m. 

All who desire to be accommodated on this train, or 
would care to join the party from intermediate points 
between Jersey City and Jamestown, should at once communicate 
with the Celoron Convention Committee, 17 
Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 

CHICAGO SPECIAL TRAIN WITH SLEEPERS 

On Friday, July 29, at 6 p.m., a special train over 
the Erie R.R. will leave the depot, corner Dearborn and 
Polk Streets, Chicago, due to arrive at Celoron 7 a.m., 
July 30. The train will be composed of day coaches and 
Standard and Tourist sleeping cars. A berth in the 
Tourist Sleeper will cost $1.25; in the Standard Sleeper, 
$2.50. Two moderate-sized persons could occupy a lower 
berth comfortably. 

Friends from beyond Chicago desiring to join this 
Excursion Train should at once notify Brother Dr. Jones, 
3003 Walnut Street, Chicago, so that sufficient car space 
may be secured early, and should see to it that their tickets 
from Chicago read via the Erie Ry. Such as desire 
sleeping car accommodations should enclose the money at 
the above-mentioned rates. 

OTHER SPECIAL TRAINS 

There will probably also be special trains from points 
mentioned below, and inquiries should be made at once of 
those whose addresses are given:— 

Pittsburg, Pa., N. S., Dr. W. E. Spill, 1002 Cedar Ave. 

East St. Louis, 111., Horace E. Hollister, Box 54. 

St. Paul, Minn., Charles L. Dick, 515 Charles Street. 

Cincinnati, Ohio, Horace K. Blinn, 228 E. 4th St. 

Cleveland, Ohio, W. D. Soper, 5647 Broadway, S. E. 

Toledo, Ohio, Ernest Kuehn, 24 Produce Exchange. 

Columbus, Ohio, C. B. Shull, 170 North 22nd Street. 

Indianapolis, Ind., C. A. Owens, 1 1 19 West 29th Street. 

Baltimore, Md., C. H. Anderson, 119 S. Calvert St. 

Washington, D.C., J. T. D. Pyles, 1727 Columbia Rd., 
N.W. 

Boston, Mass., A. M. Graham, 165 Tremont Street. 

Philadelphia, Pa., N. F. Sears, 3038 North Darien St. 

MAKING MELODY IN YOUR HEARTS 

All who have learned the New Song of Moses and 
the Lamb are earnestly invited to come to this Convention, 
"Singing and making melody in their hearts unto 
the Lord." Thankful for the blessings already received 
from the hand of the Lord, let us come together glad to 



communicate to others of that grace which we have so 
freely received of our Father through our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ— our Advocate. Let us leave the 
world behind and enjoy a season of spiritual fellowship 
and refreshment— in considering the "things freely given 
to us of God," and the "things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him, which eye hath not seen 
nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the heart of 
man." Whoever thus comes is sure to receive a blessing, 
as well as sure to dispense one. 

Decide promptly what you believe will be to your advantage 
and the Lord's will concerning you in respect to 
attending this Convention. If you decide to come, secure 
accommodations through us promptly; for the outlook 
is that otherwise there will be confusion and trouble for 
both you and us. 

page 239 

RAILROAD RATES TO CHAUTAUQUA LAKE 

The following is a list of railroad fares to "Chautauqua" 
and return, on sale Friday, July 29, only, excepting 
from points in Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee, from which States 
tickets will be sold on July 28. Tickets are good returning 
at any time within thirty days of the date on 
which they were purchased. 

Rates marked with a * are Summer-Tourist fares, on 
sale any day with return limit October 3 1 , and should 
be purchased direct to Jamestown. All tickets permit 
those from New York City and vicinity and from points 
east of Hornell on the Erie Railroad, as well as all 
whose tickets naturally read through Buffalo, to include a 
visit to Niagara Falls without extra charge:— 

ALABAMA Terre Haute $13.95 

Anniston $25.25 Wabash 10.90 

Birmingham 26.00 

Boaz 24.30 IOWA 

Carbonhill 26.45 Burlington 25.80* 

Mobile 31.30 Cedar Rapids 26.80* 

Montgomery 28.90 Clinton 23.30* 

Pell City 26.10 Council Bluffs 37.00* 

Piedmont 25.15 Davenport 24.50* 

Sulligent 26.45 Des Moines 31.50* 

Dubuque 24.90* 

ARKANSAS Keokuk 20.15 

Fort Smith 36.90 Sioux City 38.00* 

Little Rock 34.40 

Pine Bluff 35.90 KANSAS 

Fort Scott 32.50 

CALIFORNIA Leavenworth 29.40 

Los Angeles 90.00* Wichita 36.80 

San Francisco 90.00* 

KENTUCKY 



COLORADO Bowling Green 18.45 

Denver 54.40 Burnside 16.60 

Hopkinsville 20.20 

CONNECTICUT Lexington 14.00 

Bridgeport via New York. 12.95 Louisville 15.50 

Hartford via Owensboro 16.75 

Springfield 12.50 Paducah 19.60 

New Haven via 

Springfield 13.25 LOUISIANA 

New Haven via New York.. 13.30 Baton Rouge 32.55 

Waterbury via Shreveport 46.70* 

Springfield 13.35 New Orleans 32.55 

Waterbury via N.Y 13.60 

MARYLAND 

DELAWARE Annapolis 18.50 

Wilmington 18.00* Baltimore 18.00* 

Cumberland 14.00* 

DISTRICT COLUMBIA 

Washington 20.00* MASSACHUSETTS 

Boston 12.70 

FLORIDA Fall River via Fall 

Jacksonville to New York 35.00* River Line and New 

New York to Jamestown... 11.75 York 14.75 

St. Petersburg 58.05* North Adams 11.95 

Tampa 58.05* Springfield 10.60 

Worcester 11.95 

GEORGIA 

Atlanta 25.80 MICHIGAN 

Augusta 40.25* 

Cedartown 24.60 Ann Arbor 11.35* 

Rockmart 24.70 Detroit 18.65 

Rome 24.05 Grand Rapids 12.40 

Savannah 43.85* Jackson 9.40 

Muskegon 17.43* 

ILLINOIS Saginaw 13.70* 

Bloomington 15.55 

Cairo 19.60 MINNESOTA 

Chicago 14.00 Duluth 34.70 

Danville 13.65 Mankato 34.30* 

Decatur 16.10 Minneapolis 32.50* 

East St. Louis 18.75 St. Paul 32.50* 

Jacksonville 18.35 

Peoria 16.10 MISSISSIPPI 

Springfield 17.35 Biloxi 32.55 

Gulfport 32.55 

INDIANA Jackson 31.00 

Anderson 11.00 Meridian 30.55 

Evansville 18.80 Vicksburg 31.40 

Fort Wayne 9.65 

Frankfort 12.30 MISSOURI 

Hammond 13.35 Carthage 32.80 

Huntington 10.35 Hannibal 20.25 

Indianapolis 12.00 Kansas City 32.50* 

Lafayette 12.35 Sedalia 27.90 

Muncie 10.50 St. Joseph 29.40 

Rochester 11.30 St. Louis 19.25 



SouthBend 11.60 Springfield 29.95 

NEBRASKA Dubois $5.50* 

Lincoln $31.80 Easton 11.75 

Omaha 29.60 Erie 1.85* 

Harrisburg 14.75* 

NEW JERSEY Indiana 6.75 

Newark 11.75 Johnstown 9.25* 

Paterson 11.75 McKeesport 6.50 

Mauch Chunk 11.10 

NEW YORK Pittsburg 8.00* 

Albany 9.90 Pittsburg 16 Day Ex. 

Auburn 6.65 (Tues., Fri., Sat.).... 6.00 

Binghamton 8.35 (Fri. or Sat. until 

Buffalo 3.00 Monday) 4.00 

Elmira 6.85 Philadelphia 17.00* 

Goshen 11.45 Scranton 9.75 

Ithaca 7.05 York 16.10* 

Malone 12.00 

Newburgh 11.75 RHODE ISLAND 

New York City 11.75 Providence via 

Oneonta 12.35 Worcester 13.95 

Oswego 7.40 

Plattsburg 14.33 SOUTH CAROLINA 

PortKent 13.91 Charleston 44.15* 

Poughkeepsie 10.75 Columbia 40.25* 

Saratoga Springs 11.07 Greenville 40.25* 

Syracuse 6.75 

Utica 7.85 SOUTH DAKOTA 

Westport 13.13 Sioux Falls 39.10* 

Watertown 8.60 

TENNESSEE 

NORTH CAROLINA Chattanooga 21.70 

Charlotte 37.85* Knoxville 19.90 

Fayetteville 36.30* Memphis 24.80 

Henderson 30.95* Murfreesboro 21.55 

Raleigh 33.30* Nashville 20.55 

Wilmington 38.00* 

TEXAS 

NORTH DAKOTA Austin 53.40* 

Fargo 42.80* Dallas 47.10 

Grand Forks 46.40* Galveston 49.10 

Houston 47.10 

OHIO San Antonio 56.35* 

Akron 4.70 Waco 52.30* 

Ashtabula 3.50* 

Canton 6.20* UTAH 

Cincinnati 11.30 Ogden 87.50* 

Cleveland 4.25 

Columbus 7.95 VIRGINIA 

Dayton 9.60 Alexandria 20.30* 

Elyria 5.05 Charlottsville 23.45* 

Findlay 7.50 Fredericksburg 22.65* 

Galion 6.55 Lynchburg 26.45* 

Kent 4.40 Norfolk 32.00* 

Kenton 7.90 Richmond 25.60 



Lima 8.40 

Mansfield 6.55 WASHINGTON 

Marion 7.15 Seattle 90.00* 

Miamisburg 9.85 Tacoma 90.00* 

Springfield 9.00 

Toledo 7.45 WEST VIRGINIA 

Zanesville 9.70* Wheeling 9.30 

(See Pittsburg.) 
OKLAHOMA 

Guthrie 42.50 WISCONSIN 

Muskogee 37.60 Fon du lac 23.50* 

Oklahoma City 41.10 La Cross 28.40* 

Milwaukee 20.90* 

OREGON Oshkosh 24.20* 

Portland 93.50* 

WYOMING 

PENNSYLVANIA Cheyenne 57.50* 

Allentown 11.75 CANADA 

Bethlehem 11.75 Hamilton, Ont 5.60 

Braddock 6.40 London, Ont 9.70* 

Bradford 3.15* Montreal, Ont 20.60* 

Carbondale 9.75 Ottawa, Ont 19.10* 

Clearfield 6.90* Toronto, Ont 6.25* 



page 239 

RAILROAD RATES TO AHAUTAUQUA LAKE 

The following is a list of railroad fares to "Chautauqua" 
and return, on sale Friday, July 29, only, excepting 
from points in Alabama, Georgia, Kenticky, 
Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee, from which States 
tickets willbe sold on July 28. Tickets are good returning 
at any time within thirty days of the date on 
which they were purchased. 

Rates marked with a * are Summer-Tourist fares, on 
sale any day with return limit October 31, and should 
be purchased direct to Jamestown. All tickets permit 
those from new York City and vicinity and from points 
east of Hornell on th Erie Railroad, as well as all 
whose tickets naturally read through Buffalo, to inlcude a 
visit to Niagara Falls without extra charge: - 

ALABAMA Terre Haute $13.95 

Wabash 10.90 

Anniston $25.25 

Birmingham 26.00 IOWA 

Boaz 24.30 

Carbonhill 26.45 Burlington 25.80* 

Mobile 31.30 Cedar Rapids 26.80* 

Montgomery 28.90 Clinton 23.30* 

Pell City 26.10 Council Bluffs 37.00* 

Piedmont 25.15 Davenport 24.50* 

Sulligent 26.45 Des Moines 31.50* 



Dubuque 24.90* 

ARKANSAS Keokuk 20.15 

Sioux City 38.00* 

Fort Smith 36.90 

Little Rock 34.40 KANSAS 

Pine Bluff 35.90 Fort Scott 32.50 

Leavenworth 29.40 

CALIFORNIA Wichita 36.80 

Los Angeles 90.00* KENTUCKY 

San Francisco 90.00* 

Bowling Green 18.45 

COLORADO Burnside 16.60 

Hopkinsville 20.20 

Denver 54.40 Lexington 14.00 

Louisville 15.50 

CONNECTICUT Owensboro 16.75 

Paducah 19.60 

Bridgeport via New York. 12.95 

Hartford via Springfield 12.50 LOUISIANA 

New Haven via 

Springfield 13.25 Baton Rouge 32.55 

New Haven via New York.. 13.30 Shreveport 46.70* 

Waterbury via Springfieldl3.35 New Orleans 32.55 

DELAWARE MARYLAND 

Wilmington 18.00* Annapolis 18.50 

Baltimore 18.00* 

DISTRICT COLUMBIA Cumberland 14.00* 

Washington 20.00* MASSACHUSETTS 

FLORIDA Boston 12.70 

Fall River via Fall 
Jacksonville to New York 35.00* River Line and New 

New York to Jamestown .. 11.75 York 14.75 

St. Petersburg 58.05* North Adams 1 1.95 

Tampa 58.05* Springfield 10.60 

Worcester 11.95 

GEORGIA 

MICHIGAN 

Atlanta 25.80 

Augusta 40.25* Ann Arbor 11.35* 

Cedartown 24.60 Detroit 18.65 

Rockmart 24.70 Grand Rapids 12.40 

Rome 24.05 Jackson 9.40 

Savannah 43.85* Muskegon 17.43* 

Saginaw 13.70* 

ILLINOIS 

MINNESOTA 

Bloomington 15.55 

Cairo 19.60 Duluth 34.70 

Chicago 14.00 Mankato 34.30* 

Danville 13.65 Minneapolis 32.50* 

Decatur 16.10 St. Paul 32.50* 



East St. Louis 18.75 

Jacksonville 18.35 MISSISSIPPI 

Peoria 16.10 

Springfield 17.35 Biloxi 32.55 

Gulfport 32.55 

INDIANA Jackson 31.00 

Meridian 30.55 

Anderson 11.00 Vicksburg 31.40 

Evansville 18.80 

Fort Wayne 9.65 MISSOURI 

Frankfort 12.30 

Hammond 13.35 Carthage 32.80 

Huntington 10.35 Hannibal 20.25 

Indianapolis 12.00 Kansas City 32.50* 

Lafayette 12.35 Sedalia 27.90 

Muncie 10.50 St. Joseph 29.40 

Rochester 11.30 St. Louis 19.25 

South Bend 11.60 Springfield 29.95 

NEBRASKA Dubois $5.50* 

Easton 11.75 

Lincoln $31.80 Erie 1.85* 

Omaha 29.60 Harrisburg 14.75* 

Indiana 6.75 

NEW JERSEY Johnstown 9.25* 

McKeesport 6.50 

Newark 11.75 Mauch Chunk 11.10 

Paterson 11.75 Pittsburg 8.00* 

Pittsburg 16 Day Ex. 
NEW YORK (Tues., Fri., Sat.).... 6.00 

(Fri. or Sat. until 

Albany 9.90 Monday) 4.00 

Auburn 6.65 Philadelphia 17.00* 

Binghamton 8.35 Scranton 9.75 

Buffalo 3.00* York 16.10* 

Elmira 6.85 

Goshen 11.45 RHODE ISLAND 

Ithaca 7.05 

Malone 12.00 Providence via Worcester 13. 95 

Newburgh 11.75 

New York City 11.75 SOUTH CAROLINA 

Oneonta 12.35 

Oswego 7.40 Charleston 44.15* 

Plattsburg 14.33 Columbia 40.25* 

Port Kent 13.91 Greenville 40.25* 

Poughkeepsie 10.75 

Saratoga Springs 11.07 SOUTH DAKOTA 

Syracuse 6.75 

Utica 7.85 Sioux Falls 39.10* 

Westport 13.13 

Watertown 8.60 TENNESSEE 

NORTH CAROLINA Chattanooga 21.70 

Knoxville 19.90 

Charlotte 37.85* Memphis 24.80 

Fayetteville 36.30* Murfreesboro 21.55 



Henderson 30.95* Nashville 20.55 

Raleigh 33.30* 

Wilmington 38.00* TEXAS 

NORTH DAKOTA Austin 53.40* 

Dallas 47.10 

Fargo 42.80* Galveston 49.10 

Grand Forks 46.40* Houston 47.10 

San Antonio 56.35* 

OHIO Waco 52.30* 

Akron 4.70 UTAH 

Ashtabula 3.50* 

Canton 6.20* Ogden 87.50* 

Cincinnati 11.30 

Cleveland 4.25 VIRGINIA 

Columbus 7.95 

Dayton 9.60 Alexandria 20.30* 

Elyria 5.05 Charlottsville 23.45* 

Findlay 7.50 Fredericksburg 22.65* 

Galion 6.55 Lynchburg 26.45* 

Kent 4.40 Norfolk 32.00* 

Kenton 7.90 Richmond 25.60 

Lima 8.40 

Mansfield 6.55 WASHINGTON 

Marion 7.15 

Miamisburg 9.85 Seattle 90.00* 

Springfield 9.00 Tacoma 90.00* 

Toledo 7.45 

Zanesville 9.70* WEST VIRGINIA 

OKLAHOMA Wheeling 9.30 

(See Pittsburg.) 

Guthrie 42.50 

Muskogee 37.60 WISCONSIN 

Oklahoma City 41.10 

Fondulac 23.50* 

OREGON La Cross 28.40* 

Milwaukee 20.90* 

Portland 93.50* Oshkosh 24.20* 

PENNSYLVANIA WYOMING 

Allentown 11.75 Cheyenne 57.50* 

Bethlehem 11.75 

Braddock 6.40 CANADA 

Bradford 3.15* 

Carbondale 9.75 Hamilton, Ont 5.60 

Clearfield 6.90* London, Ont 9.70* 

Montreal, Ont 20.60* 

Ottawa, Ont 19.10* 

Toronto, Ont 6.25* 



page 242 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). India paper edition 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five volumes; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek, three vols.; French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 241 



SEMI-MONTHLY 