VOL. XXXIII FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A.D. 1912-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

The Babe of Bethlehem 43 

Why Was This Babe Expected? 43 

What Results Have Followed? 44 

Shall None Be Lost? 45 

The Body of Christ 45 

Typical and Anti-typical Atonement Day 
Sacrifices 46 

All Offering Must be Done by the High 

Priest 46 

"Some Better Thing"— "Our Heavenly 
Calling" 47 

The First-Borns Passed Over 47 

What Constitutes Spiritual-Mindedness? 49 

Driven Into the Wilderness 50 

Jesus' Three Temptations 51 

Laborers in the Harvest 52 

"A Savior and a Great One" (Poem) 53 

Interesting Questions 54 

Some Interesting Letters 54 

Berean Questions in "Scripture Studies" 55 

page 42 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. 
Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please 
address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



"SCRIPTURE STUDIES" IN KARATOL BINDING 

The thin Bible paper edition of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
bound in limp Karatol, red burnished edges, is again in 
stock, all volumes. Orders for this edition will now be filled 
promptly. The price has been made uniform for all Karatol 
volumes— 25c. each postpaid. Any one of these volumes 
can be carried in a coat pocket without inconvenience. 



CO-OPERATION OF FRIENDS APPRECIATED 

Our dear readers can save much of our time: 

By writing their letters plainly. 

By putting their full address at the head of the letter. 

By putting their orders on a separate piece of paper from 
their correspondence. 

By giving our file reference in replying to any communications 
from our office. Write "File A," "File B" or "File R," 
as the case may be, on face of your addressed envelope or 
postal-card and at beginning of your letter. 

Some, we notice, are using a small rubber stamp for their 
address. This is convenient and may also be used for stamping 
return address on your envelopes. 

We thank you for interesting clippings sent in, but request 
that you give name and date of the publication. If 
you send the paper be sure to mark the articles distinctly so 
we will have no difficulty in locating the desired part. 



R4963 : page 43 

THE BABE OF BETHLEHEM 

"For unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, 
which is Christ, the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you: 
Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling 
clothes and lying in a manger."— Luke 2:11,12. 

WHY WAS THIS BABE EXPECTED? 



WHY WERE all men in expectation of Him at 

the time of His birth? What was to be 

peculiar about Him to lead Israel to expect 

His birth? The answer to this question is 

that God had made a certain promise centuries 

before and the promise had not been 

fulfilled. This promise contained the 

thought that a holy child would be born, and 

that in some way, not explained in the 

promise, this child would bring the blessing 

the world needed. Therefore every mother amongst the 

Israelites was very solicitous that she might be the mother 

of a son rather than a daughter, that perchance she might 

be the mother of this promised child. Thus the matter 

went on for years until, finally, the child was born. 

The promise back of the expectation was that which 
God made to Abraham, saying, "In thee and in thy Seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." From that 
time forward Abraham began to look for the promised 
Seed— the promised child. He looked first of all to his 
own children, and was finally informed that it would not 
be one of his children direct, but that through their 
children, at some remote date, this child should be born— 
the Seed of Abraham. From that time onward, all the 
Israelites were waiting for the birth of the child that 
should bring the blessing. 

But why was a Messiah necessary? Why wait at all 
for the birth of the child? The answer to this question 
is that sin had come into the world; that God had placed 
our first parents— holy, pure and free from sin— in the 
glorious conditions of the Garden of Eden with every 
favorable prospect and everlasting life at their command 
if they continued in harmony with God. But by reason 
of their disobedience they came under Divine displeasure 
and sentence of death. This sentence of death has brought 
in its wake aches, pains, sorrows, tears, sighing, crying 
and death— all of these experiences as the result of sin. 

Our heavenly Father said to our first parents— and 
this was the first intimation that He gave them of a deliverance 
—that "The Seed of the woman shall bruise the 
Serpent's head." The serpent in this expression means 
Satan— all the powers of evil, everything adverse to humanity, 
everything adverse to the blessings which God had 
given them, and which they had lost by disobedience. 
But the promise was vague and they understood little 
about the "Seed of the woman" and "bruising the Serpent's 
head." It merely meant in an allegorical way a 
great victory over Sin and Satan, without explaining how 
it should come. 

So mankind continued to die; they continued to have 
aches and pains and sorrows; they continued going down 
to the tomb. They realized that what they needed was 
some Savior to come and deliver them from the power 
of sin, to deliver them from the death penalty of sin— a 
Savior who would be, in other words, a Life-giver. They 



were dying and needed new life. This is the meaning of 
the word Savior in the language used by our Lord and 
the Apostles. They were hoping and expecting that God 
would send a Life-giver. 

It was on this account that they were so greatly concerned 
regarding the promise made to Abraham— "In thee 
and in thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed"— they shall be granted a release from sin and 
death. In no other way could mankind be blessed. It 
would be impossible to bless mankind except by releasing 
them from sin and death. Hence, the Scriptures tell us 
of God's sympathy; that God looked down from His holy 
habitation, and beheld our sorrow, and heard, figuratively, 
"the groaning of the prisoners"— humanity— all groaning 
and travailing under this penalty of death— some with few 
aches and pains, and some with more aches and pains; 
some with few sorrows, and some with greater sorrows, 
but all groaning and travailing in pain. 

But God's sympathy was manifested; and we read that, 
"He looked down and beheld that there was no eye to 
pity and no arm to save" and with "His own Arm He 
brought salvation." This is what was promised to 
Abraham— that one should come from his posterity who 
would be the Savior of the world; and because this promise 
was made to Abraham and to his Seed, they were 
marked out as separate from all other nations and peoples. 
To the Jewish nation alone belonged this great honor- 
that through them should come this salvation. Hence, 
from that time onward the Jews spoke of themselves as 
God's people, the people whom God had promised to bless, 
and through whom He would bring a blessing to all 
others. Therefore, all other people were called heathen 
(or nations, which the word means). Israel was thus separated 
because God's Covenant was with them, and not 
with the others. But God's Covenant with Israel was for 
the blessing of all the others: "In thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." Now, we have the 
"Why" of this wonderful babe's being born. 

R4964 : page 44 

HOW WAS THIS BABE PECULIAR-HOLY, HARMLESS, 
UNDEFILED? 

How could He be a Savior? In what way could He 
be different from any other babe? Why not use some 
other babe as the one through whom salvation should 
come? The answer of the Bible is that salvation could 
not come to mankind unless there should be a satisfaction 
of Justice on account of Original Sin. That must be the 
first consideration. The penalty, "Dying, thou shalt die," 
pronounced against the first man, must be met before the 
world could be blessed. 

Why not let any man die? Because all were under the 
sentence of the original condemnation, and none could be 
a Ransom-price or a substitute. Hence the necessity for 



a specially born babe, different from any other babe. In 
what way was this One differently born? The Bible 
explains to us very distinctly that He was not begotten 
of an earthly father. Although Joseph was espoused to 
Mary, yet this child was not the child of Joseph. The 
Bible explains that this child was specially begotten by 
Divine power, in the mother, though she was still a "virgin" 
when she brought forth the child. 

This is the Scriptural proposition; and while it may not 
seem clear to some, yet the Word of God standeth sure. 
If the Redeemer was not perfect then He could not be the 
Savior of the world. The promised redemption implied 
that Jesus would be perfect; it implied that He would be 
as the first man was before he sinned. "For since by man 
came death, by man shall come also the resurrection of the 
dead"; "As all in Adam die, even so shall all in Christ be 
made alive." 

So this one must be, as the Apostle declares, "holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners." (Heb. 7:26.) 
He must be entirely distinct and separate from humanity 
so far as sinful features were concerned. If we 
had time it would be interesting to go into the scientific 
features— of how a perfect child could be born from an 
imperfect mother. If we can have a perfect life germ we 
can have a perfect child from an imperfect mother. If 
a breeder of stock wishes to raise the standard of his 
stock, he selects a fine bull, a male goat, or a male ram, 
and thus he improves the entire herd. And so, if we had 
perfect fathers, we would soon have a perfect race. But 
there is no father who can produce a perfect child. Hence 
it was necessary in this case (and the Scriptures declare it 
was accomplished) that God should beget this Son by 
power from on high. Therefore, that which was born of 
the "virgin" was separate and distinct from all humanity. 
His life came not from an earthly father, but from His 
Heavenly Father. 

WHO WAS HE THUS BORN? 

It is written that before He became flesh Jesus had an 
existence; as He declared, "Before Abraham was, I am." 
Again, in one of His prayers He said, "Father, glorify 
Thou Me with the glory that I had with Thee before the 
world was." The Revelator tells us that "He was 
the beginning of the creation of God," and Paul says that 
"by Him all things were made." And so our Lord Jesus 
was not only the beginning, but also the active agent of 
the Father in all the creative work in the angelic world 
and in the creation of humanity, and in all things that 
were created. 

The whole matter is summed up by the Apostle John. 
We will give a more literal translation of "In the beginning 
was the Word." [This expression, Word, in the 
Greek is Logos. The thought behind the word Logos is 
that in olden times a king, instead of speaking his commands 
directly to his people, sat behind a lattice work, and 



his Logos, or messenger, or word, or representative, stood 
before the lattice work, and gave the message of the king 
to the people in a loud tone of voice. The king himself 
was not seen by the people— the Logos was the one seen. 
So this is the picture the Scriptures give us of how Jesus 
was the express representative of the Heavenly Father, 
the One through whom the Heavenly Father made Himself 
known— the Word, or the Logos. So we read in the 
first chapter of John], "In the beginning was the Logos, 
and the Logos was with the God, and the Logos was a 
god. The same was in the beginning with the God. By 
Him were all things made, and without Him was not anything 
made." 

In other words, Jesus was the direct Creator of all 
things. He was the Divine Power, Agent, Word, Messenger, 
the Logos of Jehovah. He did all the great work of 
creation; but He Himself was the first of God's direct 
creation, the First-born of all creatures, that in all things 
He might have the pre-eminence— the first place. 

When the time came that our Heavenly Father made 
known His great purpose that He would bless the world, 
He gave opportunity to this First-begotten One— this One 
begotten of the Father— to be the servant in this great 
work He intended to accomplish for mankind. Consequently, 
the Scriptures state that "for the joy set before 
Him He endured the cross, despising the shame." And 
now He has sat down at the right hand of the Majesty 
on high. He has this great reward because of His obedience 
even unto death, the death of the cross. 

The Apostle speaks of Him as having been rich, but 
for our sakes becoming poor, that through His poverty 
we might be made rich. He tells us how He left the 
glory which He had with the Father and humbled Himself 
to the human nature. Why? Because, as already stated, 
it was necessary that some one should become man's Redeemer; 
an angel could not redeem man, neither 
could an animal redeem man. The Divine law is 
"an eye for an eye; a tooth for a tooth; a man's life for 
a man's life." This was to teach us a great lesson: that 
perfect human life having been condemned to death, it 
would require a perfect human life to redeem it. It was 
therefore necessary that Jesus should become the "Man 
Christ Jesus," in order "that He, by the grace of God, 
might taste death for every man." 

WHAT RESULTS HAVE FOLLOWED? 

The results that have followed have been that He Himself 
proved His own faithfulness. "Being found in fashion 
as a man, He humbled Himself and became obedient 
unto death, even the death of the cross"— the most ignominious 
form of death. It pleased the Father thus to 
prove Him, not only by Death, but by the most ignominious 
form of death— dying as a culprit, being crucified 
between two thieves. What a terrible ignominy to die 
thus! 



It would be ignominy enough for us in our imperfection, 
but for Him, perfect, "holy, harmless, undefiled and 
separate from sinners," it must have been a cause for 
deep and poignant sorrow. Having completed the laying 
down of His life, at the end of the three and a half years, 
He cried, "It is finished!" What? Not His work, for 
much of that lay before Him! He merely finished this 
part of the work, finished laying down His life a 
ransom-price. 

What next? After His death came His resurrection; 
and we read that "God raised Him from the dead on the 
third day." According to the Scriptures He was raised 
up from death a glorious being— "sown in corruption, 
raised in incorruption; sown in dishonor, raised in glory; 
sown in weakness, raised in power; sown a natural body, 
raised a spirit body"; "Wherefore God hath highly exalted 

R4964 : page 45 

Him and given Him a name that is above every 
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, 
those in heaven, and those on earth, and those under the 
earth; that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ 
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."— Phil. 2:10. 

But we see not yet all knees bowed to Him. Why not? 
The Scriptures tell us that before He begins His great 
work for the world of mankind, He first does a work for 
the elect, the Church, those who desire to walk in His 
footsteps, to gather out of the world a Bride, to be co-workers 
with Him in all the great work of the Father. 
This is the only work yet in process of accomplishment, 
and this has been going on now for over eighteen centuries. 
We see how He gathered out the saintly ones from 
amongst the Jews, "Israelites, indeed, in whom there was 
no guile." Not finding enough to make the desired number, 
He proceeded to gather them from all nations, kindreds, 
tongues and peoples. 

The Apostle tells us that when this Bride class is 
united with Him they shall be parts of the Seed of 
Abraham; as we read, "And if ye be Christ's then are 
ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs of the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 
This statement relates to the promise made to 
Abraham, that through him and his Seed all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed. Thus we see the work that 
Christ is accomplishing now. 

The invitation to become the Bride of Christ is a very 
special invitation and those who would be His must walk 
in the "narrow way." If they will sit in His Throne, 
they must suffer with Him. If they suffer with Him they 
shall also share His glory. So "the sufferings of Christ, 
and the glory that shall follow," were not only to be 
accomplished in our Lord Jesus, personally, but He was 
an example for all the Church who are justified through 
faith in His blood. They have a share with Him in His 
sufferings, and will share in His glory; they have also a 
share in the First Resurrection; as the Revelator declares, 



"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the First Resurrection, 
on such the Second Death hath no power; but 
they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall 
reign with Him a thousand years."— Rev. 20:6. 

Saint Paul says, "I count all things but loss for the excellency 
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord," 
"that I might know Him and the power of His resurrection" 
(the special resurrection) to the divine nature. 
How? By being made conformable to His death; for, "If 
we suffer with Him we shall also reign with Him." 

WHAT ABOUT THE FUTURE? 

All the families of the earth are to be blessed, as originally 
promised in Eden: "The Seed of the woman shall 
bruise the Serpent's head." Also, as St. Paul states in 
the 16th chapter of Romans, "The very God of peace 
shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly." So, then, the 
next thing in order in the outworking of God's Plan will 
be to bruise Satan and destroy sin. 

R4965 : page 45 

When and how will this be done? Just as soon 
as this Age shall end; because this Age is merely for the 
development of the Bride class; then will come the promised 
Free Grace to all the families of the earth. Messiah's 
Kingdom shall come. He has promised that when 
He shall reign, all His faithful shall reign with Him: "To 
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My 
Throne, even as I overcame and am set down with My 
Father in His Throne." All the Church will be associated 
with Him in His great Messianic Kingdom; and "He 
shall reign from sea to sea, and from the river to the 
ends of the earth"; and "Unto Him every knee shall bow 
and every tongue confess, to the glory of God the Father"; 
"The knowledge of the glory of God shall fill the whole 
earth." The whole earth will become as the Garden of 
Eden. Paradise Lost will be Paradise Restored. The Divine 
Image lost in Adam will be restored to man. Human 
nature will be brought to perfection. But the glorious 
reward to the Church will be the divine nature, 
to be like her Lord, to sit at His right hand, and to bless 
the world of mankind. Man will become not only perfect, 
having all that Adam had, but will have additional 
knowledge and character; and there is every evidence that 
this shall be an eternal blessing. 

SHALL NONE BE LOST? 

Yes, the Scriptures tell us that some will be lost, and 
that the loss they shall sustain will be loss of life, and 
therefore all the pleasures of life. "They shall be as 
though they had not been"; "They shall be destroyed 
from amongst the people." St. Peter says, "They shall 
be destroyed as brute beasts."— Acts 3:23; 2 Pet. 2:12. 



When? When the eyes of their understanding shall 
have been opened to see the Lord and to understand His 
glorious character, and they shall have had opportunity to 
appreciate and enjoy His blessing. When such intentionally 
reject the grace of God, they shall die the Second 
Death, from which there is no resurrection, no hope of recovery. 
But, thank God, there shall be no knowledge of 
suffering for them; they shall be destroyed as brute beasts. 

In proportion as we believe in this Babe of Bethlehem 
shall we rejoice today. In proportion as we believe He 
was manifested on our behalf; in proportion as we believe 
He died for our sins; in proportion as we recognize 
Him as the glorified Savior; in proportion as we have 
surrendered our hearts to Him and seek to do the things 
well pleasing to him shall we have the peace of God. 

Our hope on behalf of mankind in general is that in 
God's due time His blessing shall reach all— not the same 
as that for the Church, but as St. Peter tells us in Acts 3:19-21, 
"Times of refreshing shall come from the presence 
of the Lord, and He shall send Jesus Christ, who 
before was preached unto you, whom the heavens must 
retain until the Times of Restitution of all things spoken 
by the mouth of all the holy Prophets." 



R4965 : page 45 

THE BODY OF CHRIST 

QUESTION.-Is the "body" mentioned in 
Hebrews 10:5 and Hebrews 7:27 the same? 

Answer.— The body which God prepared 
for sacrifice may properly be viewed 
from two standpoints: First, the Father 
prepared the body of Jesus, in that He was 
born holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners, and of the human family 
through His mother. This is the foundation 
of the whole matter. But the Apostle 

Peter and also the Apostle Paul inform us that God foreknew 
the Church, "the Body of Christ," and, therefore, 
foreknew the sufferings of the Body as well as the sufferings 
of the Head— foreknew our share in the sufferings 
and also in His glory. 

In speaking therefore of the body which God prepared 
we should properly enough think how the Father prepared 
a body for Jesus which was actually, physically 
perfect and corresponding to the body of Adam, who was 
afterward condemned, and also prepared the way by which 
the "Body of Christ" should be justified from the sinfulness 
of the flesh, that thus He might offer not only Himself, 

R4965 : page 46 

the Head, but also "the Church, His Body," a "living 



sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God." 

TYPICAL AND ANTITYPICAL ATONEMENT DAY SACRIFICES 
FOR SIN CONTRASTED 

In Hebrews 10:10 the Apostle is contrasting the atonement 
day sacrifice of the typical high priest with the 
antitypical atonement day sacrifice of the antitypical 
High Priest, Jesus. The typical high priest needed once 
every year, repeatedly (not daily), to offer up sacrifices. 
The first part of the sacrifice was for his own sin, and the 
second part of the sacrifice was for the sins of the people. 
The first part was the bullock, and the second part 
the offering of the goat. These two offerings constituted 
the one sacrifice for sin on the day of atonement! And 
so, in the antitype, the offering of our Lord Jesus, when 
He offered up Himself, was for "himself," that is, for His 
Body, those who are to be His Church, the household of 
faith. And then, a further part of His sacrifice has been 
the offering up of these members of His Body, in harmony 
with their wills and in harmony with the Divine 
provision. 

Thus the antitypical atonement day sacrifices for sin 
have been in progress for eighteen hundred years. The 
special merit of the sacrifice was that which our Lord 
Himself offered, through which our offerings are made 
acceptable. It is one sacrifice in the sense that it is all 
one Body of one Priest that is offered, for the Apostle 
said, "We are partakers of the sufferings of the Anointed," 
and, "if we suffer with Him we shall reign with Him"; 
"if one member suffer all members suffer." 

ALL OFFERING MUST BE DONE BY THE PRIEST 

In Hebrews 7:27 the Apostle said, "This He did 
once when he offered up Himself." The question arises, 
To whom does this refer? Does it mean Jesus, and the 
members of His Body offering up Himself? We answer, 
No. The members of the Body do not offer up themselves; 
they present themselves; but the offering, so far 
as God is concerned, must be done by the Priest, Jesus, 
the "High Priest of our profession." The Apostle says 
that this He did once, and we answer, Here the thought 
is one fulfilment of the one type. In the type there were 
two sacrifices offered, and it is here called His sacrifice. 

Our Lord offered up Himself at Jordan, and He offered 
up all the members of His Body, the Church, at 
Pentecost. The offering of Himself personally at Jordan 
was accepted of the Father, and the remainder of Christ's 
sacrifice was merely the fulfilling of the terms of the sacrifice. 
So the presentation of the Church before the 
Father was accomplished at Pentecost, though it has required 
the entire Gospel Age to complete the sacrifice. 

This, too, was shown in the atonement day type: The 
high priest, after offering up the bullock, took the blood 
into the Holy and later into the Most Holy and sprinkled 



it on behalf of himself and his household— the members 
of his body and the household of faith— the underpriests 
and the Levites. 

Next the high priest came to the door of the Tabernacle 
and slew the goat, representing the acceptance of 
justified believers as His Body and their consecration to 
death. In the type this did not represent the second coming 
of Christ, but merely His manifestation in connection 
with the sacrifice of the Body, which is the Church. In 
the antitype our Lord as the High Priest manifested His 
power in the Church at Pentecost by sending the Holy 
Spirit upon them and thus giving the intimation that their 
sacrifice was made and acceptable in the Father's sight. 
All of the Church who have since come in were counted 
in there— just as in our Lord's prayer He said, "Neither 
pray I for these alone, but for those also who shall believe 
on Me through their word." Similarly the acceptance 
of the Church at Pentecost as joint-sacrificers, as 
part of Christ's sacrifice, has continued ever since and 
we are members of His Body, each in his turn being sacrificed 
until the entire sacrifice of the Great High priest 
once for all shall have been accomplished, and that accomplishment, 
we believe, is near. 

The expression, "If one member of the Body of 
Christ suffer, all the members suffer with it" (1 Cor. 12:26), 
does not, of course, signify that the dead members 
of the Church would suffer with the living members, 
nor that those not yet begotten of the Spirit would 
suffer with the Apostles, nor that members in different 
parts of the world would suffer with the other members 
of whom they were ignorant. It merely means that there 
is such a sympathy and union and fellowship in the Body 
of Christ that each is intimately and deeply interested in 
each other member, so that the interests of one are the interests 
of all. As, for instance, where there are two or 
three of the Lord's people in fellowship, as a little ecclesia 
or class, they are, in this sense of the word, a Body of 
Christ and are interested in each other, and suffer with 
each other in the tribulations, persecutions and difficulties 
of life. And, in a larger sense of the word, any of the 
members of the Body of Christ, in any part of the world, 
learning of the sufferings of other members of the Body 
would correspondingly feel an interest, a sympathy and 
fellowship in their sufferings, or in their joys. 

NOT A PART OF THE RANSOM 

In the statement, "A body hast thou prepared me," 
we must be careful not to read in what is not stated. It 
is not stated, "A body hast thou prepared me as a ransom-price," 

R4966 : page 46 

but, "A body hast thou prepared me" (Heb. 10:5), 

"for the suffering of death." (Heb. 2:9.) The 

suffering of death on the part of our Lord Jesus constituted 



the ransom-price for the sins of the whole world. 
But the Body, which is the Church, the Father prepares 
through justification for association with Jesus in the "suffering 
of death," but this does not constitute the Church 
partakers in the ransom-price. Only one ransom-price 
was necessary, and that was one perfect man's death, and 
that had already been arranged for before the Church was 
invited to become joint-sufferers and joint-heirs with the 
Redeemer as His members. 

The word "sacrifice" seems to be confusing to some. 
We are exhorted to present our bodies living sacrifices, 
but our presentation of our bodies to the Lord should not 
be confounded with the Lord's presentation of us. Going 
back to the type we find that two goats were presented 
to the Lord at the door of the Tabernacle. They were 
presented to be sacrificed, and so, when speaking of them, 
one might properly say, Those are the sacrificial goats; 
and whoever presented the goats might in one sense of the 
word be said to be the sacrificer. 

But the word sacrifice, when used in the sense of 
devotion, or setting apart for sacrifice, should not be confounded 
with the sacrificing work by the high priest. The 
goats were not sacrificed merely because they were presented 
or devoted. God dealt not with the people, but 
with the priest, and only when the priest had slain the animal 
was it sacrificed, from the Divine standpoint. Then, 
and only then, was it really acceptable to God as a sacrifice. 

Applying this, then, we may desire to come to God 
and learn that now is the acceptable day, now is the time 
when the Body of Christ may be devoted, or presented to 
the Lord. But something more is necessary than our 
presentation, and that further thing is the work which is 

R4966 : page 47 

accomplished for us by the High Priest, Jesus; namely, 
His acceptance, or His endorsement of our consecration, 
and the presentation of our offering as a part of His sacrifice. 
When the High Priest presents us with His merit 
imputed, then, and not until then, does our offer become 
a "sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God." 



R4966 : page 47 

"SOME BETTER THING"-"OUR HEAVENLY CALLING" 

LIKE MANY of our Christian friends, for a 
long time we did not understand how to 
"rightly divide the Word of Truth." (2 Tim. 2:15.) 
We did not comprehend that God's 
Plan provides, first, a heavenly salvation 
for the Church, and then an earthly salvation 
for mankind in general. The study 
of the Bible along Dispensational lines 



clears away all of our difficulties. It shows 

us that the promise that the redeemed 

"shall sit every man under his own vine and fig tree," 

and "long enjoy the work of his hands" (Mic. 4:4; Isa. 65:22), 

is God's provision for Israel restored to Divine 

favor, and for all the families of the earth, but not for the 

Church. Of the true Church, the Bride of Christ, it is 

declared that her members shall, in the resurrection, be 

like unto the angels— heavenly or spirit beings. 

St. Paul distinctly says of these, "Flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." (I Cor. 15:50.) Jesus 
tells these that He has gone to prepare them a place in 
the Father's house on high. (John 14:2,3.) But the 
place for man, the earth, already provided from the foundation 
of the world (Matt. 25:34), is a very different one 
from ours, of which we read, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the 
things which God hath prepared for them that love Him." 
-I Cor. 2:9; Isa. 64:4. 

THE CALL TO THE SPIRIT NATURE 

Now we understand why it is that from Genesis to 
Malachi there is not one suggestion of a heavenly or 
spiritual hope for any natural man. Every promise is 
earthly. In Abraham's case, for instance, we read, "The 
Lord said unto Abram, Lift up now thine eyes, and 
look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, 
and eastward, and westward, for all this land which 
thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed forever. 
And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, so that 
if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy 
seed also be numbered. Arise, walk through the land in 
the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it 
unto thee. "-Gen. 13:14-17. 

St. Paul refers to this difference between the hopes 
of the spirit-begotten Church, founded at Pentecost, and 
those of all others. Pointing to the faithful of the past, 
he declares that although they had God's testimony to 
their faithfulness, nevertheless, they "received not the 
promise, God having provided some better thing for us, 
that they, without us, should not be made perfect."— 
Heb. 11:38-40. 

As soon as we get our "better thing," our higher reward 
of "glory, honor, and immortality," in joint-heirship 
with our Lord as figuratively His Bride— then the worthy 
ones of ancient times will get their reward of resurrection 
to human perfection. Under Messiah's Kingdom, those 
perfect men will be "princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 
Then from the spiritual to the perfected earthly 
ones the blessings and instruction will descend for the 
poor, ignorant, selfish and superstitious world to help 
them, to uplift the obedient to the perfections illustrated 
in the perfected Worthies. 

We have heard of the Sunday School teacher who told 
her class about heaven, about its pianos, harps, organs, 



horses and carriages, fruits and flowers, etc. We see 
that she was merely thinking of the blessings God has 
provided for the faithful and obedient of the world— "in 
due time." She had no conception of the "heaven of 
heavens" promised to the faithful followers of Jesus in 
the "narrow way." The Great Teacher explains that it is 
impossible to describe heaven with its beauties and 
charms. He said to Nicodemus, "If I have told you of 
earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe 
if I tell you of heavenly things?"— John 3:12. 

In line with this, the Bible makes no attempt to describe 
heaven itself, nor its inhabitants. We are merely 
told that "God is a Spirit," "dwelling in the light which 
no man can approach unto, whom no man hath seen, nor 
can see"— personally. (John 4:24; I Tim. 6:16.) Men 
must discern God in His works— the noblest of which is 
the perfect man-made in His moral likeness, on the 
earthly plane, "a little lower than the angels" on the 
spirit plane. The most that His Word declares of our 
heavenly inheritance is that "Eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the 
things which God hath prepared for them that love Him." 
-I Cor. 2:9. 

But while refusing to inform us of the heavenly condition, 
God gives us a soul-satisfying portion. Through 
the Apostle He declares (I John 3:2), "It doth not yet 
appear what we shall be; but we know that when He 
[the glorified Jesus] shall appear [at His second advent, 
in power and great glory] we shall be like Him; for we 
shall see Him as He is." Others, not thus changed from 
human to spirit nature by the First Resurrection power, 
will not "see Him as He is," but only as He shall be revealed 
in His providences and judgments, which every eye 
shall recognize. 

How satisfactory! Beyond all that we could have 
asked or thought! "Like Him!"— what more could we 
ask? "Like Him" whom God hath highly exalted "Far 
above all principality and power and might and dominion, 
and every name that is named!" (Eph. 1:21.) We stand 
amazed at such grace! Moreover, we can realize that 
He who called us to become "partakers of the divine nature" 
and joint-heirs with the Redeemer in His Mediatorial 
Kingdom has provided for our every comfort and 
joy in that heavenly state, the details of which we may 
not now grasp. Prophetically of these it is written, "I 
shall be satisfied, when I awake with Thy likeness."— 
Psa. 17:15. 

It is the hope, the desire, the aim of every one of us 
to make our calling and election sure— to so run that we 
may obtain that great "prize" of participation in the First 
Resurrection. Of that resurrection we read, "Blessed and 
holy is he that hath part in the First [chief] Resurrection; 
on such the Second Death hath no power, but they 
shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign 
with Him a thousand years." (Rev. 20:6.) Let us have 
this in mind, dear friends, that our participation with our 



Lord in the glories of the Kingdom is dependent upon our 

faithfulness here in following Him through evil report 

and through good report; through honor and through dishonor; 

in the bearing of the cross along the way of 

self-denial. 

THE FIRST-BORNS PASSED OVER 

When God would bring typical Israel out of Egypt, the 
first-borns had a peculiar salvation, or preservation, first. 
The night before the deliverance all the first-borns were 

R4967 : page 48 

in danger of death, and were saved only when under the 
blood of the passover lamb. We see the significance of 
this beautiful type. St. Paul tells us that Christ is our 
Passover Lamb, slain for us. We each have appropriated 
His flesh, His human nature, which He sacrificed on our 
behalf. We recognize His sacrifice, the blood of 
Atonement. We see that this entire Gospel Age is the 
antitype of that night. We are hoping to belong to the 
First-borns (begotten of the Holy Spirit) who, during 
this night-time of sin and death, will be passed over and, 
on account of the blood without and the lamb within, be 
accounted worthy of being passed over— accounted worthy 
of eternal life on the spirit plane as members of the 
Church of the First-born— participants in the First Resurrection, 
to glory, honor and immortality, with our Lord 
and like Him. 

All of the first-borns of Israel passed over typified all 
of the Lord's people, in all denominations and outside of 
all denominations, who are now passing from death unto 
life. In the type, however, the first-borns of every tribe 
were exchanged for the one tribe of Levi— the priestly 
tribe— which thereafter typified the Church of the First-borns 
—the "Household of Faith." Further, the Lord 
divided that tribe into two classes. A little handful were 
made priests and occupied a special position of favor and 
relationship and nearness to God. The remainder of that 
tribe were honored in being used as the assistants or servants 
of the priests. This is an allegory, or type. 

The Church of the First-borns will consist of two 
classes, a "little flock" of priests, and a "great company" 
of the "household of faith," antitypical Levites, who will 
serve. The "little flock" of priests do their sacrificing 
now and, if faithful, will shortly be made a Royal 
Priesthood, a reigning Priesthood, joint-heirs with the 
great King of Glory and High Priest of our profession- 
Jesus. The "great company," however, typed in the ordinary 
Levites, will not be in the Throne, but serve before 
the Throne. They will not be "living stones" of the Temple, 
but will serve God in the Temple. They will not wear 
crowns of glory, though they will be granted palms of 
victory. 

Which place will you or I occupy in the resurrection, 



in the General Assembly of the Church of the First-borns? 
Shall we be of the Royal Priesthood, or of the 
less honorable, but still blessed servants? Shall we be 
of the Bride class, or of the less honored "virgins, her 
companions, that follow her"? 

It is for us to make our calling and election sure by 
our zeal, our earnestness, our devotion to the great King 
and His cause. He has called us to the highest plane of 
existence. It rests with us, under His wonderful and gracious 
arrangements, to determine whether we shall be 
passed over or not passed over; and if passed over, to determine 
whether we shall accept the place to which we 
are called, or the inferior place, which will be granted to 
those who do not keep their garments unspotted from the 
world and who, therefore, must come through "great 
tribulation" in order to enter into the Kingdom at all. 

We exhort, therefore, that we strive, not only to be 
present at the Great Convention, the "General Assembly 
of the Church of the First-borns," but to make our "calling 
and election sure," that we may be of the Bride class, 
the Royal Priesthood class, the members of the Body of 
the Great Prophet, Priest and King of Glory! Let us 
encourage each other and be encouraged to maintain the 
good fight of faith, and to gain the victory, so far as our 
hearts are concerned, over the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary. Let us be so filled with the spirit of the 
Truth, the spirit of meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering 
brotherly-kindness and love, that we shall be a 
blessing to those in our homes, that they may take knowledge 
of us that we have been with Jesus and have learned 
of Him; and that this blessing may thus overflow and 
abound to many hearts. 

BURNING AND SHINING LIGHTS 

One of old was declared to be "a burning and a shining 
light." There is force in this expression. Some 
lights are cold, austere, unsympathetic; but the kind approved 
of the Master was the burning kind— warm, glowing, 
sympathetic, helpful, intensive! The Master Himself 
furnishes the best of all illustrations of the principle 
enunciated. He was the Light which came down from 
heaven— undimmed, resplendent, shining forth to the 
utmost the light of Divine Truth! Not a cold, forbidding 
recluse was He, holding Himself aloof from the people 
with a haughty and disdainful spirit, telling coldly "Wonderful 
words of life." On the contrary, His entire life 
was sympathetic, whole-souled. One of the charges 
brought against Him by the cold Pharisees was, "He receiveth 
sinners and eateth with them." Even His disciples 
were shocked that He should converse with a woman of 
Samaria. But the common people heard Him gladly. 
While recognizing that He was far above their plane- 
while beholding in Him the glories of the "Only-begotten 
of the Father," they nevertheless were drawn to Him because 
He was the burning as well as the shining light. 



And they declared, "Never man spake like this man."— 
John 7:46. 

Bible students are all Christians; though, alas! all 
"Christians" are not Bible students. True, God's Book 
may even be read through by some who are unbelievers; 
and it may be scanned critically by opponents who seek to 
find fault with it and to entrap it, as they sought to find 
fault with the Master. These, however, are not Bible 
students in the proper sense of the word. Only those who 
have made a consecration of their lives to the Lord and 
are anxious to know the Divine will that they may conform 
their lives to it, and who, to attain this end, have 
entered the School of Christ to be taught of Him— only 
these are Bible students from our standpoint, searchers 
after the secrets of the Lord, because they love Him, and 
are appreciative of His glorious Plans and desirous of 
understanding them fully. 

Such Bible students should be burning and shining 
lights in the world and amongst our fellow-Christians of 
all denominations, many of whom, alas! have much of the 
spirit of the world and are lacking in the spirit of the 
Truth itself— because they are not sufficiently Bible 
students. 

"Let your light so shine before men that they may see 
your good works and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven." We are not enjoined to make a show of carrying 
our Bibles everywhere in an ostentatious manner. We 
are exhorted to show forth in our daily lives the lessons 
we learn from its precious pages. As the Bible is the 
Lamp provided by the Lord to all those who walk in His 
footsteps, so each of these in turn is a lamp which should 
shine forth upon others the light, the knowledge, the 
Spirit of the Truth, for their satisfaction. In other 
words, the Holy Spirit is not poured out upon the world of 
mankind, but merely upon the Lord's servants and handmaidens. 
It is an anointing for these, and upon these, 
evidencing to them that they have been begotten again, to 
the new nature, and making of them light-bearers for the 
benefit of others— burning and shining lights, sympathetic 
and helpful lights, "that they might show forth the 
praises of Him who hath called them out of darkness into 
His marvelous light." 

R4967 : page 49 

"THE LIGHT SHINETH IN DARKNESS" 

While keeping the lamp trimmed and burning— while 
seeking to glorify God as burning and shining lights in 
the world, we must not forget that the Bible assures us 
that we shall be no more successful in converting the 
world than was our Master. His great light shone in 
darkness, "and the darkness comprehended it not." And 
the religionists of His day instigated His crucifixion. 

The Master's prophecy concerning His followers will 
prove true to the end of the Age. The darkness hateth 



the light. "Marvel not, My brethren, if the world hate 
you"; "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me 
before it hated you." (I John 3:13; John 15:18.) It is altogether 
a mistake, therefore, to suppose that the Lord's 
consecrated people, letting their light shine faithfully before 
men, could convert the world. Such was not God's 
intention. It is the Church, not the world, that is being 
tested at the present time. The opposition of the world 
and all the powers of darkness serve to test us as New 
Creatures— to test our loyalty to God and to His Truth. 

Whosoever receives the light of Truth intelligently 
must rejoice in it; and, rejoicing in it, he must let it shine 
out upon others, or, by covering his light with a bushel, 
he will demonstrate his lack of courage, lack of appreciation, 
lack of earnestness— qualities which the Lord is now 
specially seeking amongst those whom He has invited to 
be sharers with Jesus in the glories of the Mediatorial 
Kingdom about to be established amongst men. It is important, 
therefore, that we let our light shine before men; 
that we be willing, nay, glad, if need be, to suffer 
for our loyalty to the Lord and to His message. And 
we have His Word for it that whoever is ashamed of Him 
or of His Word now, of such He will be ashamed by and 
by. He will not own them as members of His Bride class, 
will not accept them as assistants with Him in His 
glorious Throne. 

"The Light of the world is Jesus"; "That was the true 
Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the 
world." (John 1:9.) Thus far Jesus has not been dealing 
with the world, but merely with the blessed ones who have 
the eye of faith and the ear of faith. "Blessed are your 
eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear." (Matt. 13:16.) 
The time for the enlightenment of the world 
will be after the special call of the elect. Then the 
Church, as the Bride, will be with the heavenly Bridegroom 
in His Throne. Then all now found faithful in 
the matter of letting their light shine will be associated 
with the great Light, Jesus, as members of His Body. 
Altogether they will constitute the great Sun of Righteousness, 
which will then arise with healing in its beams 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth; "Then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom 
of their Father; who hath ears to hear, let him hear." 
(Matt. 13:43.) He that hath a desire of heart, let him be 
obedient and thus make his "calling and election sure" to 
this glorious, chief salvation. 



R4968 : page 49 

WHAT CONSTITUTES SPIRITUAL-MINDEDNESS? 
"To be spiritually-minded is life and peace."— Rom. 8:6. 
ABILITY TO UNDERSTAND the Scriptures, 



to talk fluently upon them and to expound 

them clearly is a qualification which we 

think should follow in the wake of spiritual-mindedness; 

but some might be able to 

expound Scripture very well, and to express 

truths in very good form who are not 

necessarily very spiritually-minded. A 

parrot can repeat certain words and 

phrases; but no one would accuse a parrot 

of being spiritually-minded. So there are some people 

who can repeat certain spiritual truths, apparently with 

a good deal of zest. 

To be spiritually-minded is to have a mind in harmony 
with the Spirit of God, and fully surrendered to the Divine 
will— fully consecrated to the Lord. It would not be 
enough merely to have a preference for good, saying, "I 
prefer not to do any gross sin; I prefer to live a life that 
will be honest and decent." This attitude would not be 
spiritual-mindedness. Adam was not spiritually-minded, 
but in his perfection he had a mind to do right. He had 
the mind of God in the sense that he had a balanced mind, 
not one having a preference for sin, or one that was 
weak. He was sound-minded and could appreciate things 
from the standpoint of righteousness and justice. But 
even in his perfection Adam had not a spiritual mind, in 
the highest, or Scriptural sense of the word. 

In Romans 8:6 the Apostle Paul uses the expression 
"spiritually-minded" in describing a certain class who 
have become followers of Christ, who have made a full 
consecration of their lives to the Lord and who, in 
harmony with this consecration, have been begotten of 
the Holy Spirit. These are spiritually-minded. These are 
granted a spiritual insight into Divine things. 

OUR LORD BECAME SPIRITUALLY -MINDED AT JORDAN 

This was true of our Lord Jesus. Having left the 
glory which He had with the Father, and having humbled 
Himself to take the human nature, He was found in 
fashion as a man. We read that He was not an imperfect 
man, but "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners." (Heb. 7:26.) Yet with all these special qualities 
He did not have the spiritual mind to which the 
Apostle has reference. Our Lord had a mind such as 
Adam had before the fall— a mind in perfect harmony, 
perfectly balanced. Our Lord received the spiritual mind, 
however, at the moment when He was begotten of the 
Spirit, when He made full consecration at baptism, and 
as a consequence the Holy Spirit descended and lighted 
upon Him in bodily form like a dove. 

Following that begetting, the Lord had an enlargement 
of understanding and was granted to see certain deep 
things of God which He had not seen before His consecration; 
so we read in that very connection that "the 
heavens were opened" to Him— the higher things became 
clear to Him— the more spiritual things. These things 



St. Paul calls "the deep things of God." "The natural 
man," St. Paul says [the natural man would be a perfect 
man; fallen man is imperfect, unnatural], "receiveth not 
the things of the Spirit of God,. ..neither can he know 
them, because they are spiritually discerned." (I Cor. 2:14.) 
Then he proceeds to say that we have received 
the Spirit of God through the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit; and that having the new mind, this spirit begetting, 
we are enabled to understand the deep things of God. 
"The things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of 
God; and we have received... the Spirit which is of 
God, that we might know the things that are freely given 
to us of God." Thus to us is it given to know the deep 
things of God.-I Cor. 2:11,12. 

NO NATURAL MAN IS SPIRITUALLY -MINDED 

So, then, the one who has been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit is spiritually-minded. He sees things from the new 
standpoint which God specially brings to the attention 
of the spirit begotten. As the Apostle John says, "Ye 

R4968 : page 50 

have an unction from the Holy One, and ye all know it." 
(I John 2:20.) Whoever receives this begetting of the 
Holy Spirit, this anointing, has an understanding of 
heart and of mind which is different from that which any 
natural man would have, a quality that will progress with 
him. He has the privilege of growing in grace and in 
knowledge and in the appreciation of the deep things of 
God; and he should grow. 

The Apostles Peter and Paul go on to explain (I Peter 2:2,3; 
Heb. 5:13,14; 6:1,2) that one thus begotten of 
the Spirit of God is at first only a babe, and, as a babe, 
should desire the sincere milk of the Word— the first 
principles of the doctrine of Christ; but as he goes on, 
he should feed upon the strong meat of God's Word. 
Some of those who have the begetting of the Spirit may 
be blessed with the special gift of language, so that they 
can make the matter very clear to others; some others 
who have also received the begetting of the Spirit may 
not be blessed with this gift. But all certainly would 
have the desire to tell forth the blessings which they have 
received from the Lord, that others might know and 
might glorify God in their bodies and spirits, which are 
His. 

As these spiritually-minded ones would thus endeavor 
to tell the good tidings, we have no doubt whatever that 
the Lord's blessing upon them would more and more 
qualify them as ambassadors and representatives, that 
they might tell the Message to others— if not in one form, 
then in another. We have noted, however, that some who 
speak with stammering lips have sometimes accomplished 
very wonderful things, while some with a great deal of 
eloquence have failed to obtain the same results. The 



victory is not always to the strong nor to the swift; for 
the Lord may grant His blessing with the feebly spoken 
word, particularly if the whole life be in harmony with 
the message given out. 

We have been surprised at times to find that some who 
have apparently considerable understanding of spiritual 
things, in the sense of being able to tell about them, do 
not always give the best evidence in their lives that they 
really have the Spirit of the Lord. Sometimes in their 
private lives there is that which is quite contradictory. 
This condition surprises us; causes us to wonder how it is 
that those who apparently understand the Truth should 
be without the power, or manifestation of the power of 
the Truth in their daily lives. We should bear in mind 
that whoever speaks the words of the Lord with his 
mouth, should uphold it in his every act, word, thought, in 
private life as well as in public. 

THE LIFE, NOT THE WORDS, A TRUE INDEX 

The Truth should be the standard. Everything else 
is certainly quite contrary to the Divine will; and that 
person who fails to uphold the Truth in his daily life 
gives evidence that he has not the Spirit of the Lord in 
the proper degree. If, therefore, any of us should find 
that in our daily lives we have not been living in conformity 
with the message of our lips, it would be a matter 
of serious concern, for we cannot doubt that whoever is 
out of harmony with the Lord in his heart, will sooner 
or later get out of harmony in his utterances. 

We think, therefore, that if in a congregation of the 
Lord's people any one were proposed as an Elder or a 
Deacon who outwardly had ever so great ability as a 
teacher, but who did not in his daily life give good 
evidence of being fully consecrated to the Lord, and of 
seeking to walk, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, 
he should be regarded as a very dangerous person to put 
into the high position of Elder or Deacon. The sooner 
he is left quite by himself the better. For the more such 
people are put forward in public, the worse it will be for 
them and for the congregation whom they are supposed 
to serve. 



R4969 : page 50 

DRIVEN INTO THE WILDERNESS 

-FEBRUARY 25. -MARK 1:9-11; MATT. 4:1-11.— 

'For in that He Himself hath suffered being tempted, He 
is able to succor them that are tempted."— Heb. 2:18. 

OUR STUDY for today is a most interesting 
one. It points to the time when Jesus 



reached the age of thirty and consequently 

was permitted to offer Himself without spot 

to God as the world's Sin-offering. Saint 

Paul quotes as applicable to Him the words 

of the Prophet, "Lo, I come to do Thy will, 

oh God," as it is written in the volume of 

the book concerning Me. I now present 

myself to be the Antitype, the fulfiller, of 

every prophecy that Divine wisdom has caused to be recorded, 

and the Antitype of every feature of the Law 

applicable to Me. 

There the Redeemer became the antitypical Passover 
Lamb, the antitypical bullock of the Atonement Day Sin-offering 
There He gave up His life to the doing of the 
Father's will; there He as the Man Jesus died; there He 
as the antitypical bullock was slain; there He was begotten 
of the Holy Spirit and became the antitypical 
Priest— the Sacrificer. Through the following three and 
a half years of His ministry He carried out this consecration 
and completed it at Calvary, crying, "It is finished!" 

R4970 : page 50 

LED OF THE SPIRIT-INTO TEMPTATION 

When Jesus received the begetting of the Holy Spirit 
at His baptism it was the begetting to the divine nature, 
and with it came great enlightenment to His mind, as 
represented in the words, "And the heavens were opened 
unto Him," literally, rent asunder. Forthwith He could 
see clearly into the Divine arrangements and purposes 
respecting Himself in a manner not possible to Him prior 
to His consecration. And so it is with all those who 
follow in His steps. The deep things of God are revealed 
to them gradually, as they are able to receive them, but 
never until after they have made their consecration vows 
to the Lord. With His followers as with Himself, the 
trial or temptation or testing as to loyalty comes more 
particularly after consecration than before. Hence the 
importance of Jesus' injunction: "Sit down first and count 
the cost."-Luke 14:28-33. 

But with us as with Jesus the Father provides not only 
a clearer appreciation of our trials and responsibilities, but 
also a clearer perception of the glories which will follow 
to the faithful. In Jesus' case the opening of the heavens 
—the enlightenment of His mind respecting the Divine 
Plan— was a much more wonderful matter than it is with 
us, because with His perfection of brain and of heart 
He was able to realize instantly the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of His undertaking, in a manner 
only partially attained by us after years of progress and 
study. At once the Master realized the full import of the 
Day of Atonement sacrifices, of the Passover Lamb slain, 
of the prophecies that spoke of Himself as being led as a 
lamb to the slaughter, and of the type which pictured 



R4970 : page 51 

Him as the Antitype of the brazen serpent, lifted on high 
for the healing of Adam's sin-bitten race. 

As these thoughts began to rush into the Savior's mind, 
He was first of all pressed of the spirit (His own spirit 
or mind) to go apart for awhile and to study out afresh 
the full import of the Law and the Prophets and His 
own obligations according to the covenant He had just 
made. For forty days and nights His intense earnestness 
made Him oblivious to almost everything else. Apparently 
He neither ate nor slept until the forty days were ended; 
and He "afterward hungered." Then it was that the 
Adversary appeared as a tempter— at the moment of His 
physical weakness as the result of fasting— at the moment 
when His soul was overwhelmed with the realization of the 
importance of the great contract He had made and of 
what it would cost Him to fulfil its terms. It was the 
severest test imaginable. Would the Redeemer prove Himself 
loyal to God— to the Divine Program— to His 
covenant of consecration, unto death? Or would He 
feel that the Father had poured too bitter a cup for Him 
—that God had made the tests of loyalty and obedience 
too severe— that it was neither just nor loving to allow 
Him to enter into such a contract? 

How glad we are to note the loyalty which triumphed 
over every temptation! With the angels we acclaim, 
"Worthy is the Lamb who was slain!" Not merely in 
the sense of consecrating His will, but in maintaining 
His full submission and deadness, according to the flesh, 
faithfully even to Calvary and the death of the cross. To 
Him be glory, honor, dominion and might everlasting ! 

TEMPTED AS WE ARE 

The Savior was not tempted with the habits of a 
drunkard nor with the weaknesses of a debauchee or a 
libertine, neither are those the temptations which come to 
us— His footstep followers. We are to remember that the 
Scriptures clearly differentiate between us and the world: 
"Ye are not of the world even as I am not of the world." 
"Tempted like as we are" therefore signifies that the 
temptations or trials which Jehovah permits to come upon 
His consecrated people are of the same kind that He 
permitted to come upon our Redeemer. 

It is important, therefore, that we notice the character 
of our tests. God is not testing us to see whether or not 
our flesh is perfect, for He knew all along that amongst 
men there is none righteous, no, not one. The Father's 
tests for those whom He receives as sons are tests of 
loyalty to Him, loyalty to the principles of righteousness, 
loyalty to the Truth, loyalty to the Divine methods— a 
refusal to take our own way or to seek our own glory or 
our own ease at the expense of Truth or of the Divine 
method. 



JESUS' THREE TEMPTATIONS 

When the Master was weakened through fasting, at 
the end of the forty days of Bible study, the Adversary 
appeared— not as an enemy and a fiend of darkness, but 
as a friend, "as an angel of light." (2 Cor. 11:13-15.) 
Professing interest in the Savior's welfare and an interest 
also in His work, he said, You are hungry, man, and 
unnecessarily so. Do you not know that the holy power 
which came upon you forty days ago is more than 
sufficient for your every need? Do you not know that 
now you may command even these stones to be made 
bread, and therefore have no need to be hungry? Do 
so, at once, please, before we have a conversation, for I 
have a great interest in you. I remember you well from 
the long ago when we were in fellowship, before my 
deflection. 

But Jesus replied, The power received was not to be 
used for ministering to My own flesh. It was received, 
rather, because I had made a consecration of My flesh 
to death. The Divine power which I possess I may use in 
any manner for the Father's glory, but not for self-gratification, 
however apparently legitimate. Besides, 
My eternal life is not dependent upon bread, nor upon 
the maintenance of this physical body. Rather, My hope 
is in God and in His promise that, if faithful in the use 
of this holy power which He has committed to Me— if 
faithful in My consecration unto death— He will give Me 
a crown of life— glory, honor, immortality. 

That temptation failing, Satan tried another. We 
assume that He took our Lord in mind to Jerusalem and 
the temple, saying, If you will go to the pinnacle of the 
temple and cast yourself down therefrom, it will be a 
means of proving to the people that you are the Son of 
God, and it will be the quickest method by which you can 
convince them of your mission and gain their adherence 
and loyalty and make them your disciples and thus accomplish 
your mission. I will quote you the prophecy in 
proof that this was God's intention for you: "He shall 
give His angels a charge concerning Thee and in their 
hands they shall bear Thee up, lest Thou dash Thy foot 
against a stone." (Psalm 91:12.) But Jesus declined this 
proposition also. 

If He had been thrust off the Temple pinnacle by the 
hands of an angry mob before His time was come, surely 
the Father's power would have interfered that He should 
not be injured; but to deliberately defy the laws of nature 
and to expect Divine protection from the natural consequences 
of His own course would have been to tempt 
God; this Jesus refused to do. 

The third temptation also was a mental presentation. 
A high mountain, in symbol, is a high kingdom. From no 
mountain on earth could all the kingdoms of the world be 
seen, since the world is round; but Satan's own kingdom 
was called to the attention of Jesus. Satan said, "You 
realize, of course, that I am the Prince of this world, 



that I am the God of this world and that I now have 
practical control, through ignorance and superstition, of 
the masses. I have a proposition to make to you. I confess 
to you that I am weary of the reign of sin and death 
which has progressed in the world because of my domination. 
I would rather share the Kingdom and have it 
uplifted and blessed. In other words, I propose to you a 
federation— that together we shall unite in the bringing 
of humanity out of sin and death conditions. What do 
you say? I on the spirit plane and you on the human 
plane will be quite masters of the situation, for you see 
I have the power in my hand and can easily turn the thing 
to our favor, and quickly the world will be blessed. Thus 
you will attain the glorious consummation of your hopes, 
and that without the awful trials, sufferings, experiences, 
etc., which you are now anticipating through following 
God's arrangement outlined in the prophecies. Come, let 
us federate and co-operate. Speedily I will turn things 
your way; victory will begin to come from the very hour 
of our federation ! 

Our Lord was indignant that it should be thought for 
a moment that, having left the heavenly glory to do the 
Father's will, He would now prove traitor to His covenant, 
and for fear of the cross and the shame and the death 
He would enter into a confederacy with the great Arch-enemy 
of righteousness— Satan. He answered, "Get thee 
hence, Satan, for it is written: Thou shalt worship the 
Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve." I will 
not serve you nor co-operate with you in any sense of the 
word. "Then the Devil leaveth Him." So far as we 
know, Satan never thought it worth while to return to 

R4970 : page 52 

the attack on the Savior. Then by Divine arrangement 
angels came to the famished Overcomer and ministered 
unto Him— strengthened Him, revived Him. 

The Lord's followers are to note how these same 
temptations are the very ones by which the Adversary 
assails them: (1) He would be their friend and helper 
and would thereby induce them to violate their covenant 
of sacrifice by requests for physical healing, physical 
blessings, which they have agreed to sacrifice. (2) He 
would suggest to them some wild, foolish way of capturing 
the world for God by some great exploits or prayer 
tests. (3) He would have them compromise with the 
world and its spirit and its methods by Church Federation 
and otherwise. We are to resist the Adversary courageously 
that he may leave us permanently, seeing no hope 
of winning us. 



R4968 : page 52 

LABORERS IN THE HARVEST 



--MARCH 3. --MARK 1:14-28.- 

Text.— "The Harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few. 
Pray ye, therefore, the Lord of the Harvest, that He will send 
forth laborers into His Harvest."— Matthew 9:37,38. 

EVERYWHERE the New Testament teaches 
that the work done by Jesus and His 
Apostles amongst the Jews eighteen centuries 
ago was a harvesting work. Thus 
Jesus said, "I send you forth to reap that 
upon which you have bestowed no labor. 
Other men labored and ye have entered into 
their labors"— ye are reapers of the fruits 
of their labors— gatherers of the "harvest" 
of the fruitage of the Jewish Age. 

The ripe characters of that Dispensation were ready 
to receive Messiah and His Message upon terms of full 
devotion of their time, talents, influence and lives as 
servants of the New Institution— the New Covenant— 
which God purposes to inaugurate with Israel in due time, 
and under which all the families of the earth will be 
blessed. The service of the present time is sacrificial— 
the preparation of the Royal Priesthood, after the order 
of Melchizedec, to stand as Mediator between God and 
men— the world. 

The labors of Jesus and the Apostles found about five 
hundred brethren worthy of the garnering during His 
ministry. Subsequently, at Pentecost and after, several 
thousand more Jews were harvested— brought into the 
Spirit Dispensation— begotten of the Holy Spirit as New 
Creatures, Members of the Body of the Anointed, members 
of the Royal Priesthood. But of these there were not a 

R4969 : page 52 

sufficient number to complete the Divine foreordination; 
hence, after all the "Israelites indeed" had been harvested, 
the Jewish people were thrust aside from Divine favor 
for a time, and God's Message of Grace was sent to the 
Gentiles, "to take out of them a people for His name"— 
to be associated with the Jews as members of the great 
Mediator of the New Covenant, under the Headship of 
the glorified Christ. 

GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM 

Today's lesson relates to our Lord's inauguration of 
the "harvest" work amongst the Jews. John the Baptist 
and his disciples had preached and baptized many under 
the announcement that the Kingdom of God was at hand, 
and that all desirous of participating in its great blessings 
should come into full harmony with the Mosaic Law, and 
thus be prepared to be transferred from typical Israel to 
antitypical Israel— from membership in Moses, the type, 



to membership in Christ, the Antitype. In due time the 
preaching of John the Baptist was brought to a close- 
when Herod cast him into prison. From that time onward 
Jesus and His disciples became more prominent, but 
their Message was the same as John's; as we read, "Jesus 
came to Galilee preaching the Kingdom of God and saying, 
The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at 
hand; repent ye, and believe the Gospel." Whoever believed 
this Message recognized Jesus as the "Sent of 
God," the Messiah, who, in God's due time, will be the 
King of Israel, and the Monarch of the earth. "The time 
is fulfilled" meant that the foreordained time when the 
offer of the Kingdom would be made unto the Jewish 
nation had arrived. 

But God foreknew that Israel would not be ready- 
that only a few would be prepared to become the Bride 
of the Messiah, His associate in the Kingdom work, and 
that it would require eighteen centuries to select the remainder 
from amongst the Gentiles. 

Hence St. Paul points out in Romans 9, 10 and 1 1 
that the Prophets foretold the stumbling of Israel, their 
temporary rejection as a nation, the fact that a remnant 
of them would be the nucleus of the Bride class, and that 
the remainder would be made up of Gentiles. St. Paul 
declares, "Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh, 
but the election obtained it and the rest were blinded"— 
"until the fulness of the Gentiles has come in" and the 
"elect" class is completed. 

However, God proceeded with His portion of the 
proposition just as though He had not known in advance 
the course the Israelites would take. The Gospel was 
preached to them first and all the saintly ones were 
found in advance of any move being made to open the 
door of this special favor to the Gentiles. 

"TO BECOME FISHERS OF MEN" 

The Wisdom of God is foolishness with men, and the 
wisdom of men is foolishness with God— say the Scriptures. 
This is exemplified in our Lord's choice of the 
twelve Apostles, the calling of four of whom is noted in 
this study: Simon, Andrew, James and John. However 
able they were as men, they lacked the polish or education 
which people were accustomed to expect in religious 
teachers. The Bible record of them is, "People perceived 
that they were ignorant and unlearned men." 

This reminds us that the Apostle declared that this 
"high calling" of God to joint-heirship with Jesus reached 
and influenced merely the poor of this world, rich in faith; 
that amongst the "elect" will be found "not many great, 
not many rich, not many wise, not many learned, not 
many noble." (I Cor. 1:26,27.) Success in life leads to 
more or less of self-confidence, self-esteem, self-will, 
whereas the Gospel Message appeals to those who feel 
their own weakness and imperfection and unworthiness, 
and who correspondingly with great earnestness lay hold 



upon the Divine promise— the Divine aid, giving God the 
glory. 

The words of Jesus, "Woe unto you rich" (in 
wisdom, property, fame, in learning, in nobility of character) 
must not be understood to mean that the great, 
noble, wise and rich are all or nearly all condemned to 
eternal torment, or to any punishment, on account of their 
riches of education, character, etc. 

Rather, we must remember the standpoint of the Great 
Teacher's Message— "Woe unto you" as respects the Kingdom 

R4969 : page 53 

—you are less likely to gain this wonderful "high 
calling" of God than if you were in humbler circumstances. 
You have your consolation now, and correspondingly 
have less interest in the glorious things of God's 
Message. You are so well satisfied with the things of 
this present life that it will be the more difficult for you 
to sacrifice all these for the prospect of a share in 
Messiah's Kingdom. But, said the Master, "Blessed are 
you who are poor in spirit," humble-minded, and therefore 
the more teachable, for the more you will look out 
for the great Gift of God— the "pearl of great price," 
a share in the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

TAUGHT AS ONE HAVING AUTHORITY 

The first five verses of our study tell how the fishermen 
forsook their earthly all for the prospect of sharing 
with Messiah in His Kingdom. Verse 21 shows that the 
Redeemer was recognized in Capernaum as a great 
Teacher and a man of learning, to whom others gave 
place in the synagogue; and the people marveled, saying, 
"How knoweth this man letters, having never learned at 
school?" 

Moreover, they were astonished at His teaching, "for 
He taught them as one having authority and not as the 
scribes." The Jewish scribes and rabbis then, as today, 
were evidently quite perfunctory and quite unable to give 
the people any understanding of the teachings of the Law 
and the prophecies. Jesus had a thorough grasp of the 
Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, and His applications 
and interpretations therefore were convincing to His 
hearers. 

Had the Scribes and Pharisees and Priests accepted 
Him, the whole nation would have done so. But this would 
not have outworked the Divine Program. Hence the 
Master's works and teachings were largely parabolical 
and in dark sayings, because it was the Divine intention 
that only the saintly Jews should fully appreciate the 
Teacher and become His followers. The same principle, 
under God's providence, has applied to the Message and 
the messengers of the Kingdom throughout the entire 
Gospel Age. Hence at no time has the real Message been 
attractive to any except the saintly— others were content 



with forms of godliness devoid of power and out of accord 
with the Word. 

EVEN DEMONS OBEY HIM 

While Jesus was teaching in the Capernaum synagogue 
a young man, obsessed by a demon, "an unclean 
spirit," cried out. The demon recognized Jesus and His 
teaching and used the young man as his mouthpiece, his 
medium, saying, "Art Thou come to destroy us? I know 
Thee who Thou art, the Holy One of God." 

The demons cast out of human beings by our Lord 
and the Apostles, the Bible tells us, were once holy angels. 
They fell from Divine favor through their sinful relationship 
to humanity in the days of Noah. (Gen. 6:1-5.) 
These fallen spirit beings still desire human relationship, 
and are styled "unclean spirits," because, however they 
may begin by presenting themselves as angels of light, 
they later reveal their true characters by unchaste, impure 
suggestions. 

As St. Paul refused to allow a young woman medium 
to proclaim him and Silas servants of God (Acts 16:16-18), 
so Jesus refused to allow this demon to give testimony 
respecting Himself— even though it was complimentary. 
He commanded the demon to come out of the man. In 
leaving the man the demon caused him great pain so that 
he cried aloud. The effect upon the congregation at the 
synagogue was amazement. Not only the teachings of 
Jesus captivated them, but also His power to deal with 
the evil spirits, corroborating His authority as a Teacher 
sent from God. His fame began to spread throughout all 
the region of Galilee. 



R4967 : page 53 

"A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE" 

"A ghastly sight shows in the shivering air 

On Calvary's brow; 
The Savior of mankind, in love, hangs there, 

While followers bow 
The head low on the breast and sadly sigh, 
'How can He be Messiah— if He die?' 

"A jeering mob surrounds the cursed knoll 

And mocks the Lord; 
Yet to His lips and from His stricken soul 

Cometh no word 
Of vengeance or reproach— ah, no; and when 
In anguish came the final moment, then 

"Tis finished!' rings in triumph through the sky; 

He bows His head; 
And, while the querying soldiers mark the cry, 



The Lord is dead. 
All anguish past, His triumph doth begin, 
The world is saved, a death blow dealt to sin. 

"Jerusalem, amazed, hears fishers tell, 

With courage bold, 
How Christ has vanquished Satan, death and hell, 

As He foretold. 
Humble disciples forcefully proclaim, 
'There is Salvation in no other name.' 

"A Sabbath's journey from the city gate, 

With sorrow shod, 
Two sad disciples bear their sorry weight 

To their abode. 
The Christ appears, while holden are their eyes, 
And doth expound wherefore Messiah dies. 

"Emmaus reached, the Lord would further go; 

They gently chide— 
'Thou hast beguiled our grief and tears, and so 

With us abide.' 
He brake their bread— then vanished from their sight— 
Their hearts did burn with holy joy that night. 

"Still thus He comes; and though the faulty sight 

Of clouded eyes 
Perceives Him not, He makes the burden light, 

And stills our cries; 
For, like weaned babes, we mourn, the while He would 
Our hearts sustain with stronger, richer food. 

"The tale is old, but ever sweetly new, 

Why Jesus died. 
The nail prints, doubting one, He shows to you, 

And in His side 
A spear thrust gapes— a passage rent apart, 
For easy access to your Savior's heart. 

"It was for you, my brother, that He shed 

His life so free; 
For you, for me, He bowed His godlike head 

On Calvary's tree, 
That, trusting in the merit of His name, 
We might be saved from sorrow, sin and shame. 

"The past sufficeth, surely, to have spent 

In sinful deeds. 
Come, join our band; and be our footsteps bent 

Where Jesus leads. 
So, in His righteousness serenely dressed, 
We'll meet Him face to face among the blest." 



R4971 : page 54 



INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
USE DISCRETION AND WISDOM 

Question.— We are told that from him who would borrow 
of us we should not turn away. (Matt. 5:42.) How 
shall we understand this? 

Answer.— There is nothing in this Scripture that says 
that we should lend to everybody who wishes to ask for 
a loan, either of goods or money; but we should not turn 
away with a deaf ear from those in need. The Scriptures 
say, Do good and lend, hoping for no recompense. (Luke 6:35.) 
We should also have that beneficent disposition 
which desires to do good to all men, especially those of 
the household of faith. But we should use discretion and 
wisdom. Often the very best thing to do to a person is 
to lend him something, even if sure that he would not 
return it; for thus the way to his coming any more would 
be barred to some extent at least. 



WE FIND WHAT WE SEEK 

Question.— Please give the meaning of the text, "Seek 
and ye shall find."— Mark 7:7. 

Answer.— The above text illustrates a principle to 
which we have frequently called attention. We find what 
we seek! Those who approach the Bible with earnest 
desire to find in it God's Message, will be guided of the 
Lord. As it is written, "Blessed are they which do 
hunger and thirst after righteousness [Truth], for they 
shall be filled. "-Matt. 5:6. 

On the other hand, those who approach the Bible from 
the standpoint of cavil, unbelief, antagonism, are equally 
sure to find what they seek— flaws, contradictions, etc. 
Note how Thomas Paine and Robert Ingersoll illustrated 
this principle; and compare their experiences and findings 
with the blessedness of those who feast upon the Bible as 
the Lord's bountifully spread table of good things— 
"Meat in due season" for "the household of faith."— 
Luke 12:42. 

The same principle holds true with the SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES. As those who so desire can pick flaws with 
the Bible and turn and twist its statements into unreason, 
so the same class would surely be successful in similarly 
picking to pieces "The Divine Plan of the Ages." 



"ONCE IN GRACE, ALWAYS IN GRACE," CONTRADICTED 

Question.— What is meant by the Scripture which 
says that if one who has been righteous shall depart from 
his righteousness, his former righteousness shall not 



count, but that he shall die for his sin? And also the 
statement that one who was unrighteous and turned from 
his unrighteousness shall be saved?— Ezek. 33:13-16. 

Answer.— This Scripture emphatically contradicts a 
doctrine held by some Christian people, "Once in grace, 
always in grace"; or that one who has been favored of 
God can never lose His favor. The principle of this 
Scripture applies, at the present time, to those who pass 
from death unto life as New Creatures. They are on 
trial for life or death. Adamic sin no longer counts in 
their cases. If they remain faithful to the Lord they will 
get the blessing of eternal life; if unfaithful, they will 
die. If one should make a covenant with God and then 
fail to keep that covenant, he would lose his covenant-relationship 
with God as soon as he abrogated the contract. 
If we are faithful, He will be faithful in giving 
us life eternal. 

But this Scripture specially applies to the Millennial 
Age; for at that time all are to be brought to an opportunity 
for life everlasting. People will then realize that 
"the wages of sin is death." Then it will no longer be a 
proverb that the parents have eaten a sour grape and the 
children's teeth are set on edge, but each "shall die for 
his own iniquity." (Jer. 31:29; Ezek. 18:2.) There will 
be a test for life or death, just as there is now with the 
Church. Only those who are faithful in their trial will 
be granted everlasting life, in either case. All others will 
be cut off in death. 



"HE THAT JUDGETH ME IS THE LORD" 

Question.— Suppose one addicted to the use of tobacco 
and who began to realize its filthiness should resolve to 
discontinue it and should really desist from using it for 
a time, but later should resume the occasional use of it, 
and thus did not conquer in the matter, the spirit being 
willing, but the flesh being weak— would this cause the 
loss of the crown and relegate such an one to the "great 
company"— or might it lead to the Second Death? 

Answer.— The use of tobacco is a very filthy habit; 
and there are other habits that are esteemed filthy by some 
people, but not by others. We are not to draw any line 
which the Bible does not draw. It is not, therefore, for 
any of God's people to judge another in the meat offered 
to idols, or in the chewing of tobacco, or in any such 
matters. We should encourage each other in cleanliness 
of life. To our understanding, no one would be condemned 
to death for not controlling the tobacco habit 
or the coffee habit or the morphine habit. God alone 
knows how each is struggling; He alone knows those who 
are fighting courageously day by day to the end. We are 
not competent to judge. St. Paul says, "With me it is a 
very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of 
any man's judgment; yea, I judge not mine own self. 



...He that judgeth me is the Lord." (I Cor. 4:3,4.) 
We may not even too hastily judge ourselves to be worthy 
of the Second Death. It is to be left to God as to whether 
we are overcomers or not. With this in view it is our 
duty to strive earnestly and not to be discouraged ourselves 
nor to discourage others, but rather to uphold them 
and help them to greater courage, to greater zeal in the 
service of our Lord. 



R4971 : page 54 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
BLESSINGS OF COLPORTEUR SERVICE 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I want to tell you in just a few words how very many 
blessings our dear Heavenly Father is bestowing on me in 
the little service I am privileged to render Him. I have been 
drawn so close to the Lord in my work, and am daily relying 
more on His help, looking for His leadings, and trusting His 
providences. It is so blessed to be close to the Master, to see 
and feel His guiding hand, and realize His presence. How 
sweet prayer becomes, and how precious the communion with 
Him! 

I have lately made six calls on interested ones, and hope 
to find more. It seems a mere coincidence, but I know it is 
God's hand, that when I give my canvass, often not even mentioning 
the Bible Society (for some are ever alert to prejudice), 
the first thing I know people take me in and show me the 
STUDIES, which perchance are in their bookcases. They seem 
somehow to associate us. Of course, I first draw them out, 
then I can more wisely, perhaps, make comments. I have three 
or four parties in mind that I have just found these last two 
weeks; they have become quite aroused and interested. 

We have no large class here, but are served from Dayton, 
bi-weekly, and meet for study semi-weekly. I shall urge our 
class to give public meetings, perhaps a series, shortly, for 
these people want to come. 

I can see that all Christians are more or less, even unconsciously, 
absorbing the Kingdom message, and other co-related 
matters, as given out by our dear Pastor, no doubt 
through the sermons and PEOPLES PULPrT distributed. And 
some are so truth-hungry! They confess themselves that 

R4971 : page 55 

there is a true famine in the land for the Word of God. I tell 
you we still have opportunities and find receptive hearts. 
Praise the Lord! 

One peculiar case we have found is a good, intelligent man 
who has read all six volumes; he reads the Bible continually. 
(He bought a Bible, Manna and gave a TOWER subscription.) 
We invited him to class, but he believes the churches have 



done so much harm that Christians ought to stay apart and 
not meet in congregations. We will call on him and ask 
others, especially brethren, to do so. 

One dear woman had one first volume of DAWN, and not 
knowing, even now, that I represented the same Society, confessed 
that about one or two years ago she ordered the other 
two volumes of a colporteur, but refused to take them when delivered. 
She said he was so nice about it, and it has troubled 
her ever since, so she had to confess to me. He told her he 
believed some day all would see the Truth. This was evidently 
Brother Bryant Campbell, who now, we are sure, is 
with the Lord. He canvassed here at the time, and one 
Methodist minister persecuted him, and prejudiced the people 
against him and his work. 

I thank you for your kind words of encouragement. The 
Lord bless you. Pray for me! 

Yours in the Harvest work, 

MRS. GEO. H. KELLER. --Ohio. 



"PUT ON THE WHOLE ARMOR" 

DEARLY LOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER IN THE LORD: 

With Christian greetings and a prayer of thanksgiving in 
my heart for this blessed privilege of fellowship, I wish to 
write to you for a little while. My dear husband wishes to be 
included in the spirit of this letter. 

It is seldom that he and I have the pleasure of meeting 
our beloved Pastor, so, every once in a while the desire to 
write you an expression of tender, Christian love becomes so 
great that the heart will no longer retain it, and out it comes 
at the end of this pen! 

R4972 : page 55 

If, partially, the consequence be an encroachment upon 
your time, I know you will forgive, as our dear, gracious 
Heavenly Father does when we make mistakes. 

On your return from abroad we cannot greet you as some 
others who love you, but let this letter convey to you our glad, 
loving "Welcome home!" 

And now, a few words relative to a little matter upon 
which I shall much appreciate having your opinion: 

Twice, recently, I have met friends who are studying the 
Truth and show every evidence of love for it. 

The question of Spiritism arose, and in each case the 
friend was not acquainted with the truth on this important 
Bible subject. I inquired, Would you not like the truth about 
this matter? Receiving an affirmative reply, I told the one— 
a brother— of the little book on SPIRITISM and he promised 
to read it, saying his thought had been to have absolutely 
nothing to do with the subject. 

To the other— a sister— I loaned my own book with the 
same words, that in this "evil day" it is our business to follow 
what the dear Lord indicates is necessary to our salvation, 



namely, the putting on of the "whole armor that we 
may be able to stand" in this particularly evil period. 

When next I met her she exclaimed, "O, Sister Erb, I 
could not read that awful book! I am sure that our Lord 
will never allow His children to come in contact in any way 
with anything so unholy as the demons." She quoted, "He 
will keep them, that that Wicked One touch them not." 

I have thought that possibly others are in doubt upon this 
subject so pregnant with awful possibilities— some, perhaps, 
who have recently embraced the true faith— and that a word 
of emphasis from yourself with respect to giving attention to 
the truth regarding Spiritism would be a help to them. 

With one more prayer now, added to the many I have 
offered at the Throne of Heavenly Grace on your behalf, I 
will close, hoping before very long to meet and greet you 
face to face. 

Your sister, by the grace of our dear Heavenly Father and 
through our dear Redeemer, 

MRS. JONATHAN R. ERB.-PA. 



page 55 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study VII., The Law of the New Creation. 
MARCH 3 

(25) During the interim between the fulfilling of the Law 
Covenant and the inauguration of the New Covenant, is there 
any Covenant in force? P. 360, par. 1. 

(26) What is this Covenant, and who are under it? P. 360, 
par. 2. 

(27) Explain how the Apostle Paul clearly distinguishes 
between fleshly and spiritual Israel, as shown in Galatians 4:22-31. 
P. 361, par. 1,2. 

(28) What is the Apostle's argument with respect to Gentiles 
who would attempt to come under the Mosaic Law? P. 

362, par. 1, first part. 

(29) What is his teaching in Galatians 5:1-4 with respect 
to both Gentiles and Jews? P. 362, par. 1, last part. 

(30) In this type (Gal. 4), how is the New Creation represented? 
P. 362, par. 2. 

MARCH 10 

(3 1) What did Mount Sinai and the earthly Jerusalem 
typify? P. 363, par. 1. 

(32) Under what Covenant is the New Creation? P. 363, 
par. 2, first part. 

(33) What proof have we that the Decalogue is not binding 
upon the New Creation? P. 364, top. 

(34) Explain how the New Creation is separate and distinct 
from all others in its relation toward God and His Law. 



P. 364, par. 1,2. 

(35) Are the angelic sons of God under the Sinaitic Law? 
If not, why should we expect the New Creation to be under 
it? P. 365, par. 1. 

(36) Why was it necessary that Jesus as a man should 
be under the Mosaic Law? P. 365, par. 2, first part. 

(37) What is His position as the risen Lord and Head 
over the New Creation? P. 365, par. 2, last part. 

MARCH 17 

(38) What is the heart-attitude of the New Creation 
toward the Mosaic Law? P. 366, par. 1. 

(39) Are these New Creatures absolutely without a law? 
If not, what is the law that controls them? P. 367, par. 1. 

(40) At what time did the Law of Love become the Law 

of the New Creation? and what does obedience or disobedience 
to this Law imply? P. 367, par. 2. 

(41) How does the grace of God compensate for all our 
imperfections of the flesh? and under what conditions would 
we forfeit this grace? P. 367, par. 3. 

(42) How may we distinguish between stumbling and wilful 
falling from grace? P. 368, par. 1. 

(43) What lesson do we learn from our failures, and 

what encouragement is given us in God's Word? P. 368, par. 2. 

MARCH 24 
GROWTH IN APPRECIATION OF THE PERFECT LAW 

(44) While the Law of Love was the foundation of our 
covenant with the Lord, did we at first fully appreciate that 
Law? Should we not expect to increase more and more in 
love and thus be made ready for our final examination? P. 
369, par. 1. 

(45) What illustration does the Apostle apply to our present 
experiences as embryo New Creatures? P. 369, par. 2, first 
half. 

(46) What is this "race-course," and what kind of love 
is represented by our entering the gate to it? P. 370, top. 

(47) What is our experience as represented by the first 
quarter-mark? P. 370, par. 1. 

(48) What growth in love is represented in our attaining 
the second quarter-mark? P. 370, par. 2. 

MARCH 31 

(49) What further development in love do we experience 
when we reach the third quarter-mark? P. 370, par. 3. 

(50) What is the final mark to be attained— the standard 
of perfect love? P. 371, par. 1. 

(51) Are we to love our enemies as we love the brethren? 
What example has the Heavenly Father set us in this respect? 
P. 371, par. 2. 

(52) How is God testing our professions of Love? P. 
372, par. 1. 



(53) Why was it not necessary for our Lord Jesus to 
run this race? P. 372, par. 2. 

(54) Why do some run the race and reach the mark more 
quickly than others? P. 373, par. 1. 



page 57 
