Keep Building One Another Up
1 The apostle Paul did all that he could to strengthen fellow believers. (Acts 14:19-22) Likewise, we are concerned when our brothers face difficult situations, and we want to help them. The Bible indicates that all, not just elders, should take an interest in others. (Rom. 15:1, 2) Consider two ways in which we can heed the loving admonition: “Keep comforting one another and building one another up.”​—1 Thess. 5:11.
2 Discern Others’ Needs: God’s Word reports that Dorcas “abounded in good deeds and gifts of mercy.” (Acts 9:36, 39) She took note of those who were in need and did what she could to help them. What a fine example she set for us! You may learn that an older one needs a ride to the meeting. Or there may be a pioneer who has no one to work with in service on a weekday afternoon. If you discern such a need and offer practical assistance, imagine how that one will be encouraged!
3 Spiritual Conversations: We can also build others up by our speech. (Eph. 4:29) An experienced elder observed: “If you want to be encouraging, talk about spiritual things. To start an upbuilding conversation, you might use a simple question, such as, ‘How did you learn the truth?’” Show a sincere interest in the young people in the congregation. Reach out to those who are discouraged and those who may be shy. (Prov. 12:25) Do not allow discussing the world’s entertainment to crowd out good spiritual discussions with fellow believers.​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
4 What, though, can you say to build others up? In your personal Bible reading and study, did you recently find a principle that deepened your appreciation for Jehovah? Were you moved by something you heard in a public talk or at a Watchtower Study? Or was your heart touched by a faith-strengthening experience? If you treasure up such spiritual gems, you will always have something encouraging to share with others.​—Prov. 2:1; Luke 6:45.
5 By offering practical assistance and making wise use of our tongue, may we keep building one another up.​—Prov. 12:18.

