Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting September 12
Song 29
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the September 15 Watchtower and the September 22 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. Have an elder give one of the presentations and a youth give the other. After each demonstration, highlight some good aspects of the presentation.
20 min: “Use Your Time Wisely.”a Invite audience to comment on how they arrange to set aside time each day to read the Bible. Encourage families and individuals to use the May 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert to schedule spiritual activities.
15 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies.”b Audience discussion based on parts 1 and 2 of the insert. The August 2004 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 1, may also be consulted. Why is it important to prepare thoroughly each time you conduct a Bible study? What does this involve? Invite the audience to relate how they have applied the suggestions provided. Conclude by commenting on the shaded box at the top of the first page of the insert.
Song 110 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 19
Song 168
10 min: Local announcements. Review highlights of the branch letter, which appears on the front page of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: How Did We Do Last Year? Service overseer reviews the past service year, focusing on the good things accomplished in the ministry. Give appropriate commendation. Mention one or two areas that need attention in the coming year. Comment on the activity of the pioneers, commending them for their good work. Relate the good results achieved from efforts to assist inactive ones.
15 min: “Keep Building One Another Up.”c Invite the audience to comment on how they have benefited from the loving concern of others.
Song 199 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 26
Song 122
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for September.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Making Known the Good News With Magazines. During October, we will be offering The Watchtower and Awake! In an introductory talk, discuss the following suggestions from the February 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8, paragraphs 3-6: (1) Offer the magazines as a set. (2) Schedule one day each week to share in magazine work. (3) Set a personal monthly goal of magazine placements. (4) Take advantage of every appropriate opportunity to offer magazines. (5) Make good use of older issues. Make local application of these suggestions. Then demonstrate how to present the October 1 Watchtower and the October 8 Awake! using the suggestions on page 8 of this month’s Our Kingdom Ministry (if appropriate for your territory). Other realistic presentations may also be used. In addition, draw attention to secondary articles that may appeal to people in the local territory, and demonstrate a presentation that features one of those articles. After each demonstration, highlight some good aspects of the presentation.
Song 3 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 3
Song 54
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Help Others to Become ‘Obedient From the Heart.’”d As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
20 min: Making Jehovah’s Heart Rejoice. (Prov. 27:11) Interview two or three long-time faithful servants of Jehovah. Invite each to relate one or two things that have helped them to maintain their obedience to Jehovah. Among the things that might be mentioned are diligent personal Bible study, regular meeting attendance, association with other loyal ones, whole-souled participation in the field ministry, heartfelt prayer, and avoiding unwholesome entertainment. What tests of obedience did they face, and how did they meet those tests successfully? How have they been blessed for their obedience?
Song 170 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

