R1121 :page 1 

VOL. X. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., JULY, 1889. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered letter. 

FOREIGN,-Two shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal 
Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

DAMAGED DAWNS. 

Our supply was quickly exhausted in answer to last month's 
notice— except VOL. II., cloth bound; of these we have a few left 
at 40 cents each, postage included. 



R1121 :page 1 

OLD THEOLOGY POOR FUND. 

It is suggested that, as the OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS are 
evidently destined to become quite a feature of the "harvest 
work," some arrangement should be made for supplying them 
free to the Lord's children who have the time and heart to give to 
this sort of preaching, but who could not afford to pay for the 
one-thousandth part of what they could wisely circulate. 

Nor would it be right to absorb the general fund, called "Tract 
Fund," in this work, for already it finds more to do than it can 
do, in the other branches of the work. (The Tract Fund will do 
this, however, toward putting a little ammunition in the hands of 
those who would be sure to use it and that wisely: It will pay the 
subscription for one year on five tracts quarterly to any WATCH 
TOWER subscriber too poor to purchase them, who will send in 
the request.) Besides, some deeply interested in the OLD 
THEOLOGY "hail" desire such a special fund so that they may 
specially help and forward that part of the work. 

A start has already been made in this direction. One sister 
contributes $68 for 3000 tracts, quarterly, this year (12,000 
tracts in all), to be sent to Baptist ministers throughout the 
United States. We have thought best to fill this order by sending 
Tract No. I to all as a sample, so far as it will go, and 
accordingly the 12,000 are already send out. As there are about 
22,000 Baptist ministers, this sister's wise stewardship of the 
Lord's funds entrusted to her care sends some "meat in due 
season" to more than one half of the Baptist preachers-some of 
them we trust will produce an abundant yield. 

A brother of this city, himself so situated that he cannot engage 
in circulating them, as he would like to do, contributed $1 10 for 
20,000 tracts, of any or all the numbers of the present year, for 
circulation in the cities of Pittsburgh and Allegheny: remarking 
that he knew of no other way of doing so much good with the 
same amount of money; that he could think of no better topic for 
the general reader than Tract No. I, and that even if he could 
prepare as good, only about one half as many, for the amount of 
money, could be procured in the ordinary way from printers; 
adding that, if permitted, he hoped from time to time to provide 
for others of our large cities, thus to aid representatively in 



preaching the truth to thousands who as yet know only very 
imperfectly— 

"The message of salvation 

From God's own holy Word. " 

The work was taken hold of here with a will by some who 
appreciate the privilege of the service, (some doing more and 
some less) three brethren and five sisters having already 
distributed about 6,000-to church-goers, to street car 
passengers, etc. A plan found to be good, is to have along also 
some of the Arp Tracts, which are less expensive (and supplied 
free), to give to such as appear less likely to become interested. 

If all TOWER readers, not otherwise in the service, would take 
hold of this work earnestly, a million or two of these "hail" 
stones would quickly be poured forth to sweep away the refuge 
oflies.-Isa. 28:17. 



R1121 :page 1 

MISTAKEN EXPEDIENCY. 

Among Romanists there is a recognized principle, which might 
be termed the law of expediency; which, briefly expressed, is— 
"The end justifies the means." The all important end is the glory 
of the Church, let the means be what they may; and every reader 
of history knows how vile the means have been. And while 
Protestants do not admit this principle openly, and are scarcely 
aware that they admit it to any extent, the question of 
expediency is often raised, and sometimes with considerable 
bitterness, against the truth-the old theology of the Lord and the 
apostles and prophets. 

Very many of God's children who long since got their eyes open 
to the fallacy of the doctrine of everlasting torment, and who 
realize it to be a horrible blasphemy against God's character, 
permit Satan to seal their lips, and to destroy their influence as 
children of the light, by getting them to cover their light with the 
bushel of expediency. He raises before their minds dreadful 
pictures of what would result if this truth, which so much 
relieved their minds and refreshed their hearts, and which lifted 
them into a new atmosphere of joy and peace and love, should 
become generally known. He points out that they first 
approached the Lord through fear and under the influence of this 
error, -without pointing out that they might have received the 
Lord much sooner under the presentation of the truth, and under 
the constraining power of love. He points out that they 
themselves had finally found peace while holding this error, but 
does not mention how unsatisfactory a peace it was, which 
continually had unrest for fear of a final slip into eternal 



torment, either of themselves or their loved ones. Nor does the 
adversary point out that the proportion in which any obtained 
peace was to the degree that they forgot or disbelieved the 
horrible error. 

The adversary, furthermore, urges the inexpediency of 
proclaiming this and other truths on still other grounds; he 
reminds his victim that though neither reason nor the Bible 
endorses the doctrine, yet upon it all the creeds and sects of 
Christendom are built; and that to attack that error is to attack 
the entire nominal church and to gain the opposition in every 
way of the most powerful human institution; and that he has no 
chance for success; and that if he should succeed in 
overthrowing the error, it would shake and break sectarianism 
entirely, create a great commotion, and paralyze sectarian efforts 
at home and in foreign lands. 

He does not suggest, however, that the breaking of false creeds, 
confessions, and of the sects which hold them, would be a great 
blessing to all the true "wheat," the true church, and would result 
in bringing them into true unity upon the basis of God's Word 
and under the bonds of love; and that the only evil would be to 
the "tare" class, who have no knowledge of God's true church 
whose names are written in heaven, and who recognize only 
sectarian systems and memberships whose names are written on 
earth; and who worship and serve the institutions of their own 
organizing. 

Alas ! How many are bound by mistaken expediency, almost as 
firmly as they 

R1122:pagel 

were formerly by errors, from which these truths, which they are 
ashamed or afraid to acknowledge, set them free. 

To stimulate this mistaken idea of expediency, the adversary 
emboldens some of the shallowest minds and hearts to 
unreasoningly cry aloud, "Awful heresy!" "Infidelity!" etc. 

This he does to draw attention away from the fact that it is the 
error that is "awful," "blasphemous," "heresy," and veritable 
infidelity to God's Word. 

This cry comes with greatest emphasis from those whose earthly 
interests of bread and butter, and ease, and comfort, and 
reputation, and honor, and pride are bound up with this long 
admitted and established doctrine of fear. And every zealous 
supporter of so-called Orthodoxy re-echoes the cry of alarm; and 
as the message of truth, "the good tidings of great joy to all 
people," goes forth, it is everywhere confronted by the zealous 
heralds of the bad tidings-of eternal misery to all people, except 
a holy few who expect to become so God-like that they will 
praise God the louder when they witness the wretched despair 
and hopeless eternal torment of their fellow-creatures, who were 



so unfortunate as never to have received as good a chance as 
themselves to escape the awful ruin. 

These notes of alarm from Babylon, probably hinder many of 
the Lord's sheep from apprehending his truth. Having trusted too 
implicitly to the teachings of a self-exalted clergy, and failed to 
search the Scriptures for themselves, like the "noble Bereans," 
that their faith might stand in the wisdom of God and not in the 
wisdom which this world teacheth, they are afraid to disregard 
their commands now,— afraid to believe their own senses in the 
study of God's Word. 

Let us remind such of the words of the Prophet Isaiah- "Their 
fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men; " and again, of 
the Apostle Paul- "For God hath not given to us the spirit of 
fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. " (Isa. 
29:13; 2 Tim. 1:7.) That the spirit of love and of a sound mind is 
a power, "Orthodoxy" fails to see. The scourge of torment, the 
mean incentive of fear, is held to be a necessity, to restrain men 
from vice and to inspire them to morality and virtue and secure 
their admission to heaven when they die. 

Before considering the wisdom of God's course, let us first 
inquire, Has the doctrine of fear accomplished the end which it 
claims to have in view? No, we answer. The result of this error 
have only been bad, and that continually; and any good which 
has been accomplished is due, not to the error, but to the all- 
powerful truth, -withstanding the friction of error which 
everywhere opposed its progress. As the result of this error, 
what do we see, after centuries of effort ostensibly to convert the 
world, to turn men to God and righteousness? We see just what 
we should expect to be the miserable fruitage of such doctrine— 
that it has not only failed to accomplish the world's conversion, 
which Orthodoxy claims to be its mission, but that it has 
accomplished the demoralization of the church (nominal) and of 
all influenced to any extent by it. 

Under its influence and misrepresentation of the character of 
God, every device of tyranny and persecution and torture, in the 
name of God and religion, has flourished, and largely 
accomplished its diabolical mission of stamping out truth and 
righteousness. And as a consequence, we see to-day great 
antichristian systems of error, built up by centuries 

R1122:page2 

of false teaching and so subtle in their influence as to deceive, if 
it were possible, the very elect. Their form of godliness draws 
one class which desires to live godly; but their lack of the power 
of godliness, truth, soon deadens every real spiritual aspiration. 
They also draw and encourage a mean hypocritical class of 
those who assume the garb of Christianity for mercenary and 
base purposes. And amid an overwhelming host of deceived and 
hypocritical pretenders, those possessing the genuine article of 



living faith in the true Word of God, and vital godliness, are to- 
day at an immense discount among the loudest professors of 
Christianity. And thinking men of the world-and the thinkers 
are fast multiplying-are beginning to see, in the light of a better 
civilization, that this monstrous blasphemy of eternal torment 
has no foundation in common sense and that it can in no sense 
be compatible with their natural ideas of morality and virtue and 
godliness: and, say such, if the Bible teaches this doctrine, as all 
branches of the church claim, the Bible must be a bad book, and 
the God of the Bible, if there be such a God, is unworthy of love 
or worship, or even respect. And some to whom nature and 
reason whisper, There must be a God, conclude that nature and 
reason are the only channels through which he may be known or 
traced. And thus the thinking and nobler minded of the world 
are driven to Infidelity and Atheism; and the ignorant and the 
credulous, while they still fear that eternal torment may be a 
reality, are generally willing to incur the unlikely risk of 
realizing it, that they may enjoy the pleasures of sin while the 
opportunity lasts. And the heathen nations never have been and 
never will be influenced by it. 

Such, in brief, have been the results of the doctrine of fear. It has 
repelled the world from God, and reduced (nominal) Christianity 
to sham and hypocrisy, and stimulated vice and immorality to 
the crimes of treason against God and persecution of truth and 
virtue. 

But let us now consider, on the other hand, what power there is 
in the spirit of love and of a sound mind. A sound mind is a 
reasonable mind, a mind governed, neither by fickle impulse, 
nor by superstition, fear, prejudice, nor any other than the 
noblest faculty which God has given it, namely reason. And 
reason, if not perverted by pride, or prejudiced by false teaching, 
leads directly to the fountain of truth in God's inspired 
Revelation (See, M. DAWN, Vol. I., Chap, iii.); and to one so 
led, faith in the inspired revelation of the omnipotent God is a 
most reasonable thing. This reasonable faith, rooted and 
grounded in the divine testimonies and promises, calls into 
exercise all the noblest faculties of our moral nature and centers 
the affections upon the great Author of all truth, whom to know 
is to love and worship and adore. And this faith, working by 
love, purifies the heart and transforms the character into the 
glorious likeness of the blessed God. 

Such is the power of love and of a sound mind. It serves God 
from purest filial love and gratitude, and the only fear it knows 
is that filial fear of failure to fully manifest love and 
thankfulness, which is the fear mentioned by the Psalmist 
(111:10) as the beginning of wisdom. Perfect love casts out all 
servile fear, and brings the studious and devoted servants of God 
into active co-operation with all his benevolent plans for the 
blessing of all his creatures. This is the kind of service God 



accepts: Those who worship him acceptably must worship him 
in spirit and in truth-in love and verity, and not hypocritically 
through fear. 

Such results never have been and never can be produced by the 
"orthodox" doctrine of fear. Why, then, should it be deemed 
expedient to suppress the true plan of God and still advocate the 
blasphemous error of eternal torment? 

The earnest, sound-minded Christian sees no sufficient reason; 
though the supporters of Orthodoxy see very grave and weighty 
ones. They see at once that to renounce this doctrine would be to 
destroy their systems of theology and completely disintegrate 
their various organizations, to give the lie to their false 
teachings, to expose a vast amount of hypocrisy and deceit in 
high places, to discontinue the gains of oppression, and to 
humble their pride and assumed dignities and honors in the dust. 
And truly, before this spirit of fear could be supplanted by the 
spirit of love and of a sound mind among the great masses of 
men, these, released from the bondage of fear and not yet 
restrained and constrained by the power of love and of a sound 
mind, would suddenly become a dangerous element in the 
world. 

And just this, which "Orthodoxy" fears, the Scriptures declare 
shall actually come to pass— a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation— a fearful recompense to great Babylon 
for her blasphemous misrepresentation of the character and plan 
of God. Fearful plagues are to be visited upon Babylon, and no 
wonder she raises the cry of alarm when she sees them coming. 
To preach the truth is not expedient, she declares,- "The end 
(the preservation of the old order of things) justifies the 
means;"- the perversion and suppression of truth. 

Had the truth been preached by the church from the days of the 
apostles to the present time, the centuries past would have so 
fully accomplished the development of true Christian character 
that the present time, we might safely say, would witness a truly 
"Christian world." But as it is, when the old errors are 
overthrown, it would be unreasonable to expect to see a sudden 
conversion of the world to truth and righteousness. Time is an 
important element in the arrangements for the world's 
conversion. It will require a thousand years to accomplish it 
under the reign of Christ, and since the church (nominal) has 
frittered away nearly two thousand years and accomplished 
worse than nothing in this direction, she must reap the reward of 
her doings— the punishment due her misarranged systems. 

God's time to speak has come; and let the prayer of every loyal 
son of God be, O send forth thy light and thy truth! God will 
send it forth and is sending it forth: he will vindicate his 
character and 

R1123 : page 2 



his cause before an astonished world, and the glorious end will 
be the peaceable fruits of righteousness in all the earth, when the 
truth is fully known and its blessed influences have had 
sufficient time to accomplish the great work of transformation. 

If we would be in harmony, and co-workers together with God, 
therefore, our chief business in life must be the vindication of 
his character by the preaching of his truth. And so far as our 
testimony can reach, let the message of his gracious designs be 
coupled with the wholesome restraints which his justice insures. 
There shall be a just recompense of reward to every man. The 
eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and the 
good, and every work shall be brought into judgment, with 
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Not 
the benevolent gift of a cup of cold water shall lose its reward; 
nor shall any wilful sin against light and opportunity escape its 
deserved punishment. 

It is our business to declare these truths, to preach the gospel 
without any mixture with the traditions of men, to declare the 
whole counsel of God, as the church should have done since the 
days of the apostles, and the results God will take care of, and 
out of the confusion of the great time of trouble he will bring 
order and harmony and a grateful recognition of and submission 
to his righteous authority, based upon the principles of truth and 
justice. Our effort should always be, however, to accomplish a 
conversion so complete that it will not only turn men away in 
disgust from the old errors, but also turn them fully to 
righteousness. And such conversions there are, when the truth is 
wisely presented by those who are imbued with its blessed spirit. 
It is only by the presentation of a measure of truth sufficient to 
turn men away from doctrinal errors, and yet leave them in their 
sins, that violence and confusion shall be brought about. 

We may not teach men that God is so loving that justice can 
never exert its power, but, on the other hand, that his justice is 
so unswerving that his love can in no degree conflict with it, or 
act contrary to it, and that so important was it that his justice 
should stand inviolate, that only through the sacrifice of his only 
begotten Son did his love accomplish his purpose for man's 
redemption and restitution: "For God so loved the world that he 
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him 
might not perish, but have everlasting life. " 

Through Christ alone, therefore, is the great salvation attainable- 
-"through faith in his blood." Without faith in his blood, we can 
only be judged by God by the rule of strict justice, and it is a 
fearful thing to fall thus into the hands of the living God; for 
outside of God's plan for our redemption through Christ, his 
justice can only condemn us as unworthy of life. Nor do we 
teach that having once come to a clear knowledge of the truth, 
we may reject it and sin against it with impunity, or postpone 
our personal submission and conformity to it, without receiving 



the penalty for so doing;— the penalty for rejection of full light 
and opportunity being the second death, from which there is no 
recovery. By one offering he hath perfected forever them that 
are sanctified by the truth; but that offering intelligently 
rejected, there remaineth no more a sacrifice for sin, but a 
certain looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which 
shall devour the adversary. But having come to the knowledge 
of the truth-to which God purposes to bring all men-and to 
obedience, and to faith in God's appointed way of salvation, not 
attempting to climb up like a thief or a robber by some other 
way, the end of such faith and obedience will be everlasting life. 

It is expedient, therefore, from God's standpoint of view, that the 
truth should be fully and clearly proclaimed without regard to 
the cry of alarm from Babylon, and equally without regard to the 
disastrous consequences to that system, against which the fiat of 
destruction has gone forth from Jehovah. "This is the will of 
God, who will have all men to be saved and to come to a 
knowledge of the truth. " 

So far as our knowledge and observation have gone, a 
knowledge, even of the general outlines of God's plan, does not 
produce carelessness or indifference or a desire to procrastinate 
coming into conformity with it. On the other hand, we do know 
of hundreds of sound conversions from sin and infidelity and 
from every evil course. At the present time there are on our list 
of subscribers to the TOWER five names of criminals in various 
prisons who have received the truth, and who have been 
converted by it. And another whose term expired a few months 
ago, having been imprisoned for highway robbery, was soundly 
converted through the reading of The Plan of The Ages and the 
TOWER while in prison, and has now become an active 
minister of the gospel, and in the past two months has sold 800 
copies of DAWN, Vol. I. Raised in the Methodist church under 
the influence and fear of the doctrine of eternal torment, he 
became a highway robber, while under the influence of the truth 
he became a minister of the gospel. Yes, praise the Lord! it is 
expedient to preach the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but 
the truth; and we rejoice to know that God will continue to send 
forth his light and his truth until the earth is filled with his glory, 
and blessed is every man who is privileged to bear the message. 



R1123:page2 



CHEERFULNESS. 



Cheerfulness is one of the loveliest graces of the Christian 
character. It belongs to those noble natures whose very presence 
carries sunshine with them wherever they go. 



Sometimes we look into a face which is so cold and repulsive, 
dark and gloomy, that it makes us feel almost blue to look at it, 
and which betokens no joy in the heart, no nobility in the soul, 
no generosity in the nature; the whole character as cold as an 
iceberg. And again we meet a face so bright, smiling, cheerful, 
happy, that one glimpse of it does our very souls good, and is 
like an inspiration to us. And we feel more cheerful ourselves. If 
we possess a hopeful spirit it will enable us to discern the silver 
lining of the darkest cloud, behind which ever shines the light of 
divine promise and help. 

True religion is not gloomy, "her ways are ways of pleasantness, 
and all her paths are peace. "-Selected. 



"Blessed is he who learns to profit by his wants and infirmities, 
and who, in all the privation he endures, is still submissive to the 
Word of God." 



Much remains 



To conquer still; Peace hath her victories, 
No less renowned than War; new foes arise 
Threatening to bind our souls with secular chains. 
Help us to save free conscience from the paw, 
Of hireling wolves, whose gospel is their maw. 



-Milton. 



R1127:page3 



COURAGE! PRESS ON. 

Tired! well, what of that? 
Didst fancy life was spent on beds of ease, 
Fluttering the rose leaves scattered by the breeze? 
Come, rouse thee! work while it is called to-day: 
Courage! arise! go forth upon thy way. 

Lonely! and what of that? 
Some must be lonely; 'tis not given to all 
To feel a heart responsive rise and fall, 
To blend another life within its own: 
Work can be done in loneliness. Work on. 

Dark! well, what of that? 
Didst fondly dream the sun would never set? 
Dost fear to lose thy way? Take courage yet! 
Learn thou to walk by faith, and not by sight; 
Thy steps will guided be, and guided right. 



Hard! well, what of that? 

Didst fancy life one summer holiday, 

With lessons none to learn, and naught but play? 

Go— get thee to thy task! Conquer or die! 

It must be learned; learn it then, patiently. 



-Sel. 



R1123:page3 

CALAMITIES-WHY PERMITTED. 

"EXCEPT YE REPENT, 
YE SHALL ALL LIKEWISE PERISH." 

"There were present at that season some who told him of the 
Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. 
And Jesus answering said unto them, Suppose ye that these 
Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they 
suffered such things? I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye 
shall all likewise perish. 

"Or, those eighteen, upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, and 
slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that 
dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye 
shall all likewise perish. "-Luke 13:1-5. 

Noble and good in the sight of both God and man are the 
generous impulses, of charity and sympathy, awakened by great 
calamities in recent years. And when this is said, it leaves little 
more of good to be said favorable to calamities or their 
influence. 

While these charities should not be misconstrued to signify that 
God's consecrated saints are rapidly multiplying-for many of 
the charitable are not the consecrated, and some are even 
infidels,— yet they are an evidence that at least some of the 
original God-likeness of our race remains; that it has not been 
wholly obliterated by the degradation of the fall, nor wholly 
poisoned by the bad theology of the dark ages. While we live in 
perhaps as selfish and money-loving a period as any known to 
history, yet millions of dollars are generously poured forth to aid 
suffering humanity. And yet many who in times of calamitous 
distress show that they have a tender spot, somewhere, in their 
hearts, would and do at other times lend time and brain and skill 
to the arts of war, and in designing the most horrible implements 
of warfare; and on occasions when bitter passions are aroused 
would relentlessly and pitilessly slaughter a thousand times as 
many as the accidents of nature. Yet, for all this showing of the 
two elements in the same men, we rejoice 

R1124:page3 



that the God- like element of sympathy exists as a partial offset 
to the devilish qualities of selfishness and heartlessness, which, 
under the degrading influence of man's fallen state, have grown 
strong during the past six thousand years. 

Preparatory to looking carefully, reasonably and Scripturally at 
the question of why does God permit calamities, let us note 
some of the absurd views of some Christian people, who should 
know God's Word and character much better than they seem to. 
Some whose hearts overflow with sympathy and God-like love 
in the presence of great calamities (which proves their hearts 
better and more sound than their theology), declare that God is 
the director and cause of all disasters and troubles. Hence 
whatever men may do to alleviate such distresses would, 
according to this false view, be so much done in opposition to 
God; and whatever love and sympathy they feel, is as much 
sentiment opposed to God's sentiments, —which are thus made 
to appear malicious. 

But the hideousness of such a character, as is thus ascribed to 
the God of love, is intensified, when the same good, tender- 
hearted, but wrong-headed, Papacy-deluded people (whose 
theology was formed in the "dark ages" when the Bible 
doctrines concerning God's character and plan had become over- 
grown with papal superstition and human tradition), tell us their 
faith in God and their view of his character, is that, He not only 
looks without pity or sympathy upon man's present calamities 
and distresses, and fore-ordained them, but that he has 
furthermore fore-ordained and made fullest preparation for 
engulfing the vast majority of his creatures in a calamity in 
comparison with which all the horrors of all earth's calamities 
united in one would be nothing;— but mere preludes to that most 
awful, indescribable torment, which would be wholly 
unendurable, but that God with fiendish cruelty will perpetuate 
life under such awful conditions, forever and forever, in order to 
have them suffer, and will never relieve them. And why? Simply 
because, when told that such was God's character and plan, they 
would not love him, nor praise as good and just such a plan; or 
because millions of others had died in ignorance of the Lord 
Jesus, through faith in whom, alone, any can be acceptable 
before God. 

It is surprising that any who possess the spirit of God, to any 
extent, can thus blaspheme his holy name? It is surprising that 
they do not know more of the character of the Creator than this, 
even without the Bible testimony to his character of love and 
justice, to advise them of his plan in Christ for blessing all the 
families of the earth; the declaring of which plan constitutes the 
"good tidings of great joy [not of eternal torment] which shall be 
unto all people. " Verily, God is more villified by many of his 
children than by the infidel world. And yet, how strange ! the 
very Bible which declares God's true character of love and 



justice, they have been led to consider as the authority for these 
devilish doctrines and false interpretation of our Lord's parables 
and of the symbols of the book of Revelation, originated by 
those who during the "dark ages" used to burn and torment Bible 
believers. 

GOD'S LO VE-HO W SHO WN. 

When we declare that whatever there is of love and sympathy 
in man, is only the remnant of the original divine likeness, in 
which Adam was created, not wholly effaced by six thousand 
years of degradation in sin, it at once raises the question: In what 
way does God manifest his sympathy and love in such 
emergencies, when even the hearts of fallen human beings are 
touched, with sympathy and love, to acts of kindness and 
succor? 

A correct answer is, that God is represented in every act of 
kindness done, whether by his children or by the world; because 
their actions under such circumstances are the results, in some 
measure, of his character and disposition. And yet this answer is 
not full enough to be satisfactory. But, thank God, a fuller 
investigation, in the light of his Word, reveals a boundless 
sympathy on God's part,- providing also an abundant succor, 
which is shortly to be revealed. 

But why does not God immediately succor his creatures from 
calamities? Or, to go still farther back, why does he who has all 
wisdom to know and all power to prevent, permit calamities,— 
cyclones, earthquakes, tidal-waves, destructive floods, 
pestilences, etc.? And while we are about it, we may as well 
include all the evils which God could, if he would, prevent -all 
the forms of sickness and pain and death; every form of 
destruction— wars, murders, etc.; every thing which causes pain 
or trouble to those willing to do and be in harmony with God? 
The answer to one of these questions will be the answer to every 
question on the subject; for all human evils are related and have 
a common source or cause. 

To fully comprehend this cause, we must go far back, to the 
very beginning of sickness, pain, death and sorrow,-to the 
Garden of Eden, where neither famine, pestilence, cyclones, 
earthquakes, nor death in any form was permitted; where man 
and his surroundings and conditions were pronounced "very 
good," even by God himself, and certainly greatly appreciated 
by man, who had to be driven out and prevented from returning 
by the fiery sword which kept the way of access to the life- 
sustaining fruits of the trees of the garden. 

How came it that the Creator, who so graciously provided for 
the life and comfort of his creatures, and who communed with 
them and gave them his blessing and the promise of everlasting 
life upon the sole condition of continued obedience, should so 



change in his attitude toward his creatures, as to drive them from 
the enjoyments of those Eden comforts and blessings, out into 
the unprepared earth- to toil and weariness and insufficient 
sustenance, and thus to death? 

We must remember that only the Garden of Eden was 
"prepared," and fit for man's comfortable enjoyment of the favor 
of life. The preparation of the whole earth for man, requiring in 
a natural way seven thousand years more to entirely fit it for the 
habitation of perfect, obedient, human children of God, the 
Creator specially or miraculously prepared the Garden of Eden 
in advance merely as a fit place for Adam's trial. God foresaw 
the fall of his creature, and provided that the penalty for sin, 
"dying thou shalt die, " instead of being suddenly inflicted as by 
a lightning stroke, or other speedy method, should be served out 
gradually by conflict with the unfavorable conditions (of 
climate, sterility of soil, storms, miasms, thorns, weeds, etc.,) of 
the as yet unprepared earth. 

Adam and Eve, therefore, went forth from Eden convicts, under 
sentence of death; self-convicted under the most just of all 
judges, their Creator and friend. The convicts esteemed it a 
mercy to be let die gradually rather than suddenly; while to the 
Creator and judge this was expedient because of a plan he had 
for their future, in which such experience with imperfect 
conditions would be of great value;— a plan for the increase of 
the race, and for its discipline and final redemption and 
restoration. 

The death penalty, inflicted in this manner, God foresaw would 
furnish man, through experience, such a lesson on the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin and its baneful results as would never need to 
be repeated; -a lesson, therefore, which will profit all who learn 
it to all eternity; especially when Christ's Millennial reign of 
righteousness shall manifest in contrast the fruits of 
righteousness: God also designing that the exercise of man's 
mental faculties in coping with the disturbances and 
imperfections of his surroundings and in inventing reliefs, and 
the exercise of his moral faculties in combating his own 
weaknesses, and the calls upon his sympathy should prove 
beneficial. 

Had the sentence of God (in addition to a loss of Eden's 
comforts and experience with sin and death,) condemned his 
creatures to an eternity of torment and anguish, as so many now 
believe and teach, who could defend such a sentence, or call the 
Judge just, or loving, or in any sense good? Surely no one of a 
sound mind! 

But when it is seen that the Scriptures teach that death 
(extinction), and not life in torment, was the penalty pronounced 
and inflicted, all is reasonable. God has a right to demand 
perfect obedience from his perfect creature when placed under 



perfect conditions, as in Adam's case. And the decree that none 
shall live everlastingly except the perfect, is both a wise and a 
just provision for the everlasting welfare of all God's creatures. 

There is a depth of meaning in the Creator's words, as he sent 
forth his fairly tried and justly condemned creatures, among the 
thorns and briars, to labor and pain, and sorrow, and disease, and 
to be subject to the casualties and calamities of nature's 
unfinished work. He said:- "Cursed is the ground FOR THY 
SAKE:" i.e., the earth in general is in its present imperfect 
condition for your profit and experience; even though you may 
not esteem it so. Adam would have sought to retain continual 
access to the garden fruits, to avoid severe labor and to enable 
him to fully sustain his vital powers and live forever; but in 
loving consideration for man's ultimate good, no less than in 
justice, and in respect of his own sentence of death, God 
prevented this and guarded the way back to the garden, in order 
that the death sentence should not fail of execution, in order that 
sinners should not live forever and thus perpetuate sin. 

The children of the condemned pair inherited their fall, 
imperfections and weaknesses, and also the penalties of these; 
for "who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?" The whole 
race, therefore, 

R1125 : page 3 

as convict laborers, have not only been learning what sin and 
evil are, and their undesirable results, but by their labor and skill 
they are serving to prepare the earth and bring it as a whole to 
the full perfection designed for it, and illustrated in the condition 
of Eden-ready for a further purpose of God of which none but 
his children (and not all of them) are made aware through the 
Scriptures. 

We can see, then, that labor and toil were prescribed for man's 
good. They have kept him so employed that he could not plan 
and consummate evil to the same extent that he otherwise would 
have done. And as the earth becomes more fertile, approaching 
perfection, man's vitality becomes less; so that now, with greater 
leisure to plot and scheme and grow wise in evil, the period of 
life in which to do so is shorter. What a mercy in disguise 
present shortness of life is, under present circumstances. Were 
some of our "shrewd business men" who accumulate millions of 
money, and grasp great power, in a few short years, to live 930 
years, as Adam did, what might we expect but that one man, or 
at most a syndicate or trust, would own every foot of land, 
control every drop of water and every breath of air, and have the 
rest of the race for their dupes and slaves? 

God's action, then, in exposing his creatures to death, pain and 
various calamities, it must first of all be seen, was one which 
related only to his present life on earth, and to no other; for of 



any continuance of life, in any other locality, God did not give 
him the slightest intimation. On the contrary, the words of the 

R1125 : page 4 

penalty were, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return, "-- 
"dying thou shalt die. "-Gen. 3:19; 2:17, margin. 

True, God gave promise that, somehow and at some time, a son 
of the woman should accomplish a deliverance. But it was vague 
and indefinite then, merely a glimmer of hope, to show them 
that though God dealt severely with them, and on lines of law 
and justice, he yet sympathized with them, and would, 
ultimately, without violating justice or ignoring his own 
righteous sentence of death, bring them succor. 

Paul tells us that God adopted a method for the recovery of man, 
from that original sentence of death which came upon all as the 
result of Adam's fall, which would show the justice of his 
sentence and the unchangeableness of his decrees, and yet 
permit such as are sick of sin to use their experience wisely, and 
to return to harmony and obedience to their Creator and his just 
and reasonable laws and regulations. 

This divine plan, by which God could remain just and 
unchangeable in his attitude toward sin and sinners, and yet 
release the well-disposed from the penalty of sin (death and 
disfavor), is stated by the Apostle in Rom. 3:24-26. 

In brief, this plan provided that another man who, by obedience 
to the law of God, should prove his worthiness of eternal life, 
might, by the willing sacrifice of the life to which he was thus 
proved worthy, redeem the forfeited life of Adam and of his 
posterity who lost life through him; for it is written, "In Adam 
all die," and "By the offence of one sentence of condemnation 
came on all men."-l Cor. 15:22; Rom. 5:12,18. 

Since the condemnation to death was thus upon all men, and 
since another man newly created and inexperienced as Adam 
was, though just as favorably situated, would have been 
similarly liable to fall, God devised the marvelous plan of 
transferring his only begotten Son from the spiritual to the 
human nature, and thus provided a man fit for sacrifice- "the 
man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all;" "who, 
though he was rich [though he was possessed of glory and honor 
and riches of wisdom and power above both angels and men], 
nevertheless for our sakes became poor [humbling himself to a 
lower nature, even as a man, becoming obedient even unto 
death] that we through his poverty might be made rich."-l Tim. 
2:5; 2 Cor. 8:9. 

Thus the one first created, "the firstborn of all creation" (Col. 
1:15), "the beginning of the creation of God" (Rev. 3:14), the 
one who had known God's character longer, more fully and 
more intimately than any other being, the one in fact who had 



been Jehovah's chief and honored, intelligent and active agent in 
the creation of angels as well as of men, the one by whom all 
things were made, and aside from whom not anything was made 
(John 1:3; Col. 1:16,17) -this great being, Jehovah's Prime 
Minister, and next to himself in dignity, the Almighty entrusted 
with the great work of redeeming and restoring mankind. 

To redeem them would cost the sacrifice of his own life as their 
ransom-price, with all that that implied of suffering and self- 
denial. To restore them (such of them as shall prove worthy— 
whosoever wills,) will require the exercise of divine power to 
open the prison-house of death, and to break the fetters of sin 
and prejudice and superstition, and give to all the redeemed the 
fullest opportunity to decide whether they love good or evil, 
righteousness or sin, truth or error, and to destroy all who love 
and work iniquity, and to develop and perfect again all who love 
and choose life upon its only condition-righteousness. 

To know the Father's plan and his privilege of co-operation in its 
execution, was to appreciate it and joyfully engage therein. 
Willingly our Lord Jesus laid aside the glory of the higher nature 
which he had had with the Father from before the creation of 
man. (John 17:5; 2 Cor. 8:9.) He was "made flesh" (John 1:14; 
Heb. 2:14), became a man at thirty years of age, and then began 
the great work of sacrifice, the sacrifice of himself, a perfect 
man, for the cancellation of the sin of the first man, to recover 
Adam and his race by dying on their behalf, as their Redeemer. 
By giving to Justice the price of their liberty from divine 
condemnation, he secured the legal right to cancel the sentence 
of condemnation to death against them, and hence the right to 
resurrect or restore to life and to all the lost estate and blessings, 
"whomsoever he wills." (Rev. 22:17.) And he wills to restore all 
who shall prove worthy. And to prove who are worthy will be 
the object of the Millennial reign.-l Tim. 2:4; 2 Pet. 3:9. 

This fact that our Lord's mission to earth at the first advent was 
to undo for the race, legally, the results of Adam's transgression, 
and to secure the right to resurrect them and restore them, is 
clearly stated by the Apostle.-See, Rom. 5:5-12, 16-19,21; 1 
Cor. 15:21-24. 

Though tempted in all points like as we (his "brethren") are, he 
ignored his own will (Luke 22:42; John 4:34; 5:30) and all 
suggestions from others contrary to God's plan (Matt. 16:23; 
Luke 4:4,8,12), and obeyed God implicitly. And therein lay the 
secret of his success. Temptations did not overcome him, as they 
did even the perfect man Adam, because of the fulness of his 
consecration to the divine will and plan; and this fulness of 
consecration and trust was the result of his intimate knowledge 
of the Father and his unbounded confidence in his wisdom, love 
and power. He had recollection of his previous existence as a 
spirit being with the Father. (John 17:5; 3:12,13.) Our Lord's 
success, then, was the result of being rightly exercised by his 



knowledge of God; as it is written: "By his knowledge shall my 
righteous servant justify many, while bearing their iniquities." - 
Isa. 53:11. 

The suggestive thoughts here are two: First, that even a perfect 
man failed in trial because of the lack of full appreciation of 
God's greatness, goodness and resources. Secondly, the 
knowledge (as in Satan's case) would be valueless, if 
unaccompanied by sincere love and consecration to God's will. 
A lesson further, to Christ's "brethren," is, that knowledge and 
consecration are both essential to their following in the Master's 
footsteps. 

Among men he and his mission were not really known; even his 
most ardent followers and admirers at first supposed that his 
mission was merely to heal some of the sick Jews, and to 
advance their nation to the rulership of a dying world, and to be 
a teacher of morals; they saw not at first that his mission was to 
lay the foundation of a world-wide empire, which should not 
only include the living, but also the dead, of Adam's race, and 
which should insure peace and joy everlastingly to all the 
worthy, by eradicating, forever, sin and all who love it after 
fully comprehending its character in contrast with righteousness. 
Even his friends and disciples were slow to realize these grand 
dimensions of his work, though he continually repeated them, 
and bore witness, saying: "The Son of man came to give his life 
a ransom for many;" "Verily, verily, the hour is coming* when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that 
hear [obey] shall live. " "The Lord hath sent me to preach 
deliverance to the captives [of death] and recovering of sight to 
the [mentally, morally and physically] blind; to set at liberty 
them that are bruised" -injured by the Adamic fall. -Matt. 20:28; 
John 5:25; Luke 4:18. 

The sacrifice of the Redeemer's all, as man's ransom price, was 
offered at the time he was thirty years old-at his baptism. And 
there the offering was accepted by Jehovah, as marked by his 
anointing with the spirit. Thenceforth, the three and a half years 
of his ministry he spent in using up the consecrated life already 
offered; and this he completed at Calvary. There the price of our 
liberty was paid in full. "It is finished!" It holds good; it is 
acceptable by the grace of God, as the offset and covering for 
every weakness and sin of the first man, and his posterity, 
resulting either directly, or indirectly, from the first 
disobedience and fall. All that is necessary since, for a full 
return to divine favor and communion, and to an inheritance in 
the Paradise of God, which 

R1126:page4 

the great Redeemer in due time has promised to establish in the 
entire earth, as at first in the Garden of Eden, is, a recognition of 
sin, full repentance, and a turning from sin to righteousness. 



Christ will establish righteousness in the earth by the Kingdom 
of God, which he has promised shall be established, and for 
which he has bidden us wait and hope, and for which he taught 
us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth even 
as it is done in heaven." 

Under that blessed and wise rule of Christ as King of nations,* 
all the evil, depraved tendencies inherited from the fall and from 
the six thousand years of degradation, will be restrained, held in 
check, by super-human wisdom, love and power; and all being 
brought to a clear knowledge of the truth in its every phase, all 
will be fairly and fully tested. The lovers of righteousness will 
be perfected and given control of the perfected earth, while 
those loving unrighteousness under that clear light of knowledge 
and experience will, as followers of Satan's example, be utterly 
destroyed in the Second Death. The first death is the destruction 
to which all were subjected by Adam's sin, but from which all 
were redeemed by the Lord Jesus' sacrifice; and the second 
death is that destruction which will overtake those who, though 
redeemed by Christ from the first death, shall, by their own 
wilful conduct, merit and receive death again. This second death 
means utter destruction, without hope of another redemption or 
resurrection; for Christ dieth no more. Nor could any good 
reason for their further trial be assigned; for the trial granted 
during the Millennial age under Christ, as Judge, will be a 
thorough and fair and individual and final trial— 1 Cor. 15:25. 



*Sinaitic MS. omits the words and now is. 



*Not visibly in flesh, however, for he is no longer flesh, having 
been highly exalted again, after he had finished the flesh-life by 
giving it as our ransom price.— See, "The Time at Hand," Chap. 

v. 



R1126:page4 

"YE SHALL ALL LIKEWISE PERISH" 
UNLESS YE REPENT. 

Death, in whatever form it may come, is perishing, ceasing to 
exist. All mankind, through Adam's transgression, came under 
condemnation to loss of life, to "perish, " "to be as though they 
had not been. " And only one way of escape from that 
condemnation has been provided. (Acts 4:12.) Because of 
Christ's redemptive work all may escape perishing by accepting 
the conditions of life. During Christ's Millennial reign those 
whom Pilate slew, and those upon whom the tower of Siloam 
fell, and all others of the race, sharers in the death penalty now 



upon all, will be released from the tomb, brought to a knowledge 
of Christ, his ransom work, and their privilege of repentance and 
full restitution to divine favor,-life, etc. Thus seen, the Adamic 
death penalty was-to perish; but it has been canceled by Christ's 
Ransom, so far as it relates to those who, when brought to know 
the Redeemer, shall forsake sin. No longer should it be regarded 
as a perished condition, but as a "sleep" (John 11:11-14; Matt. 
9:24; 1 Thes. 4:14; 5:10), from which the Redeemer will awaken 
all, to give each who did not have it before being overtaken by 
Adam's death, a full, individual opportunity to escape perishing 
and live forever. Yet, finally, all who shall fail to repent and lay 
hold upon the gracious Life-giver shall perish; they will fail to 
obtain the full restitution provided; they shall never see [perfect] 
life [full restitution] for the wrath or condemnation of God will 
abide on them, condemning them to death as unworthy of life. 
As this will be their second condemnation, and an individual 
one, so the penalty will be the second death, which will not be 
general to the race, but only upon such individuals as refuse 
God's favor of reconciliation and life. 

As our Lord Jesus used the calamities of his time, as illustrating 
the just penalty against all who do not flee sin and lay hold upon 
the Redeemer and Life-giver, so we use them. We declare that 
destruction, perishing, is the just penalty of sin taught in the 
Scriptures. We denounce the eternal torment theory, so 
generally believed by God's children, as unscriptural; as one of 
Satan's blasphemous slanders against God's character. And we 
proclaim that only by faith in the Redeemer, repentance and 
reformation, can the gift of God, eternal life through Jesus 
Christ our Lord, be obtained. Whoever hears the offer of life is 
responsible to the extent that he understands it; and according to 
God's promise and plan all mankind shall, at some time, either 
during the Gospel age, or during the coming Millennial age, be 
brought to a full, clear appreciation of these conditions and 
opportunities, with fullest opportunities for repentance and life. 

Calamities, then, are to be regarded, generally, as accidents, 
attributable to human imperfection and lack of experience, or to 
disturbances incidental to the preparation of the earth for its 
more quiet and perfect condition during the Sabbath or Seventh 
Thousand years (the Millennium), and for its state of absolute 
perfection forever after the Millennium, which, under Christ's 
direction, shall give it its finishing touches and make it fully 
ready for the redeemed race, which his reign shall prepare also 
to rightly use and enjoy and rule the perfected earth. And man is 
exposed to these calamities and accidents, and not defended 
from them by his Almighty Creator, because, first, man is a 
sinner condemned to death anyway, and is not to be spared from 
it, but must be allowed to pass through it; and secondly, by the 
present experiences with trouble and sorrow and pain, all of 
which are but elements of death, mankind is learning a lesson 
and laying up in store an experience with sin and its awful 



concomitants, sorrow, pain and death, which will be valuable in 
the Millennial age, when each shall be required to choose 
between good and evil. The evil they 

R1126:page5 

learn first, now; the good and its blessed results and rewards, but 
dimly seen now, will be fully displayed then,— during the 
Millennium. 

But some one inquires, If this be God's plan, for redeeming the 
world by the death of his Son and justifying and restoring all 
who believe in and accept of him, and obey and love 
righteousness, why did not the Millennial reign of Christ with its 
favorable conditions and powerful restraints begin at once, as 
soon as Christ had given the ransom price at Calvary; instead of 
compelling those who would follow righteousness, to sail 
through bloody seas and suffer for righteousness sake? Or else, 
why not have postponed the giving of the ransom until the close 
of the six thousand years of evil and the inauguration of the 
Millennial reign? Or, at least, if the present order of events is 
best in the divine wisdom, why does not God specially protect 
from calamities, accidents, sorrow, pain, death, etc., those who 
have fully accepted of Christ and who have sacrificed and are 
using their all in the service of righteousness? 

Ah yes! The subject would be incomplete were this point left 
untouched. The consecrated saints, the church of the Gospel age, 
are a "peculiar people," different from the rest of the redeemed 
race; and God's dealings with them are peculiar and different 
also. Inasmuch as it was God's purpose to highly honor and exalt 
our Lord Jesus far above all others, because of his faithful 
obedience even to self-sacrifice, so it was his purpose to select a 
"little flock" for his companionship in glory, who, after being 
justified by Christ's sacrifice and reconciled to God by the death 
of his Son, should develop so much of a likeness to his Son, by 
intently following his words and example, that they, like him 
(though far less fully than he because of weaknesses of the 
flesh), should likewise so love righteousness and truth, and so 
delight to do God's will, that they would do it at any cost or 
sacrifice of earthly pleasures, or comforts, or esteem among 
men— even unto death. 

The space of time between the giving of the ransom for all, and 
the establishment of the kingdom which is to bestow upon 
mankind the blessings purchased, is for the very purpose of 
selecting a "little flock" of under kings and priests, Christ's 
companions in the honors and work of the Kingdom, otherwise 
called, as a class, "the Bride, the Lamb's wife. " The selection of 
this class must take place during a time when evil, trouble and 
sin have sway in the world; for it is by the special opposition of 
evil and sin, to God's plan and to all in harmony with it, that 
these are to be specially tried and tested; that only "overcomers" 



shall be selected and given this very honorable and responsible 
position. 

Not only is this class required to follow after righteousness and 
truth, and to support them and oppose sin, to their present 
discomfort and loss, but they are required to do all this on the 
strength of faith, outward evidences being often contrary to 
faith. A part of their test is, that they must walk by faith and not 
by sight. They are to believe God's promises though every 
outward circumstance seems to contradict it. This is part of their 
lesson as well as part of their trial. 

They are to believe God's testimony, that death and trouble 
entered the world as a result of Adam's sin, and that a fall from 
perfection took place in Eden, no matter what speculations 
among scientists may suggest to the contrary,— as that Adam was 
evolved from an ape, and that the Bible story of the fall, the 
condemnation and the redemption are alike unscientific; that 
Christ, like Confucius, was a great teacher, but nothing more; 
that he accomplished no redemption and that none could have 
been needful or required. The saints are to shun all such 
babblings of science and philosophy, falsely so-called, and to 
walk by faith in God's revelation.- Rom. 5:12-20. 

Though they see errors flourish and Scriptural truths spurned 
and disregarded, they are to disregard numbers and human 
traditions and, by faith, hold to God's Word. Though told by 
God that they are redeemed and no longer under his 

R1127:page5 

condemnation and disfavor with the rest of the world, they are to 
believe and walk by faith, nothing doubting, even though they 
are not the recipients of special earthly favors, and even though 
they, like others, have a share of sickness, pain and death. 

Their advantages are often less than those of other men, and 
their course often much more up-hill and rough. They walk by 
faith and not by sight, however; they endure as seeing him who 
is invisible, and the crown which is invisible, and the kingdom 
which is invisible, and as though they already had everlasting 
life, though they die like other men. In all these things, yea, in 
everything, they are required to walk by faith and not by sight, if 
they would be crowned overcomers and made heirs in the 
coming kingdom. 

Their advantages are all invisible to the world, and are seen only 
by the eye of faith. Their peace and joy are dependent upon their 
knowledge and trust of God and his plan; and their knowledge 
and trust depend upon their faith in his Word of promise. By 
faith they "know [even when outward evidences seem contrary] 
that all things are working together" for their ultimate good, and 
that the glories and blessings of the future shall far over-balance 
all the trials and troubles and wounds of the present; and so 



believing from such a standpoint, it is well said that these have a 
joy and peace, even amid tribulation, which the world can 
neither give nor take away. 

What advantage, then, hath a true, consecrated Christian in the 
present time? Much every way; both in the life that now is, and 
also in that which is to come. All things are yours; for ye are 
Christ's, and Christ is God's, and ye are accepted of God in and 
through the merit of Christ. 



Soul, then know thy full salvation, 
Rise o'er sin and fear and care; 
Joy to find in every station, 
Something still to do or bear. 

No matter how dark the clouds, no matter how unfavorable the 
circumstance on its surface, thou hast the heavenly assurance, 
that- 

" All must work for good to thee. " 

Even those things which may seem to be, and to the world are, 
accidents, cannot be so regarded in connection with these so 
peculiarly precious in God's sight. Nothing transpires without 
your Father's knowledge —not even a sparrow falls, nor a hair of 
your heads. And since infinite wisdom, infinite love, and infinite 
power are pledged to our aid, and guarantee us against all that 
would not be for our ultimate good, with how much confidence 
and trust all such may free themselves from harassing care and 
anxiety, and with how much courage they may press on, 
committing their way unto the Lord, and engaging heart and 
hand and brain in his service; for we also "know that our labor is 
not in vain in the Lord. " Like their Master, such shall yet see 
results for all their travail of soul which will fully recompense or 
satisfy them. Such may rejoice even in tribulation, knowing the 
results. Even the families of the saints, and all that concerns 
them, are precious to the Lord for their sakes. 

Courage, then, dear family of God! Be strong! quit you like 
men! Endure hardness as good soldiers; endure as seeing the 
Lord and the prize, though they are invisible except to your eye 
of faith. Expect not to reign, nor to be exempted from trial and 
sufferings, until the battle is ended-until Evil (sin, as well as 
disaster, trouble and death, its accompaniments) shall be 
removed by our Redeemer, who soon is to take his great power 
and reign to deliver the groaning creation from all its present 
distresses. 

"Behold, we bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people." (Luke 2:10.) Let every thing that hath breath 
praise the Lord; for though for a little moment he hid his face 
and permitted calamities to scourge and destroy his creatures 
because of their transgression, yet in great mercy he hath 



provided our ransom price; yea, he hath highly exalted him to be 
both Priest and King to cleanse from sin, and to rule to perfect 
all who will then submit their hearts to him and obey him. From 
such he shall wipe away all tears; and sorrow and dying, and 
every evil, shall be no more. "Behold, I make all things new." 

Tell the whole world the blessed tidings; 
Speak of the time of rest that nears; 
Tell the oppressed of every nation 
Jubilee lasts a thousand years. 



R1127:page5 

PAUL'S CHARGE TO TIMOTHY. 

"This charge [message] I commit to thee, son Timothy, in 
harmony with the teachings previously given thee [to guide 
thee], that by these thou mayest carry on the good contest, 
holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put 
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck. " 

"I give thee charge in the sight of God who quickeneth all 
things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate 
witnessed the good confession, that thou keep this 
commandment [Greek, entole— "this thing given in charge"-this 
doctrine given by divine inspiration] without spot, unrebukable, 
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: which [good 
confession or sound faith] will be manifested in due time by that 
blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords- 
-the only one possessing immortality, inhabiting light 
inaccessible, whom no one of men has seen, nor is able to see, to 
whom be honor and power everlasting."- 1 Tim. 1:18,19; 6:13- 
16. 

We have frequently noticed and called attention to the earnest 
exhortations and careful instructions given to Timothy by the 
faithful Apostle Paul. But while these instructions were 
applicable and profitable to Timothy in his day, they apply with 
still greater force to the Gospel Church as a whole, of which 
Timothy was a member, and of which we have reason to believe 
he was a figure, or representative. 

Of this we have evidence in the general character of the epistles 
addressed to Timothy, which implies either that Timothy, or the 
class which he represented and of which he formed a part, 
would be living down into the end of the age. We believe, then, 
that in the person of Timothy as a representative, the entire 
Gospel Church is here addressed by Paul, and we notice that the 
name Timothy signifies- "honor of God." The church honors 
God and is to have honor conferred upon her by God. In the 
present age the honor consists in the fact that so important a 
"charge" is committed to her trust. And those thus honored in 



this age, and who prove faithful to the trust, will in the next age 
be yet more highly exalted and honored. 

Three times Paul most solemnly and earnestly repeats this 
charge. He thanked the Lord that though he had been a 
blasphemer and persecutor of the church, yet he had obtained 
mercy, because he did it ignorantly, and verily thought that in so 
doing he was doing God service, and had been put into the 
ministry, the glorious gospel of the blessed God being 
committed to his trust. (1 Tim. 1:11-13.) And now knowing that 
age was creeping on, and that perils surrounded him on every 
hand, and before writing the second letter, saying that he was 
about to be offered, he commits this charge to the faithful ones 
who must carry on the work after his departure. 

The charge was to keep the blessed gospel untarnished and 
"without spot," to keep it in its glorious simplicity and purity, 
unmixed with human theories and 

R1128:page5 

false doctrines, which even then the enemies of the cross of 
Christ were laboring to introduce. The rising errors must be 
guarded against, first, by maintaining a clear conscience; and 
secondly, by faithful study of the word of God. To study the 
Word of God with a clear conscience is to study it with the 
single and only purpose of knowing and doing God's will. This, 
Paul says, some in his day did not do; they had theories and 
plans of their own, and endeavored to wrest the Scriptures to 
give their theories seeming support; and thus they made 
shipwreck of their own faith and turned others out of the way. 
As the end of the age should approach such false teachers he 
said were to multiply and gain great influence, and overthrow 
the faith of all who should not meekly and devoutly walk with 
God, trusting alone in his faithful word. 

Next to guarding ourselves thus— and those who thus do so have 
the power of God pledged to keep them from falling- is the 
charge to help others to stand: to help them by earnestly 
contending for the faith; by pointing out the snares of the 
adversaries of the truth, and by calling attention boldly and 
fearlessly to every pitfall and placing the light of truth over it. 

To preach this "glorious gospel of the blessed God," to present it 
in its purity and grandeur, to contend against the errors which 
friends and enemies seek to engraft upon it, is the charge given 
to and the duty devolving upon the church in the present time- 
the charge which we must keep and labor to sustain until the 
appearing (manifestation, or bright-shining) of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Before the brightness and glory of his presence the 
darkness of ignorance and error shall flee away, and no hiding 
place shall be found for them; for the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the earth as the waters cover the sea, when his presence 
is fully revealed to all. 



Till thus relieved of this duty of guarding the truth, the church 
must wait for her victory, must watch against the dangers of 
abounding and wide-spreading error, and the seducing 
temptations of the world, the flesh and the devil, must pray for 
and use divine strength in enduring hardness as good soldiers 
unto the end, and must boldly and nobly contend for the faith 
delivered in charge to the saints. "Blessed is that servant whom 
his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing. " Those not so 
doing will not be counted worthy to be gathered among Christ's 
jewels. 

It should be borne in mind also that in the days of his presence, 
before his manifestation to the world, there is even greater 
necessity for watching and contending for the faith than at any 
previous time,— since his presence is discerned by the church 
only by faith in the foretold indications, and since the perils 
occasioned by numerous false doctrines and many antichrists are 
greatly increased; so much 

R1128:page6 

so, that only those who have on the whole armor of God are able 
to stand and to contend for the faith in the face of such subtle 
and crafty opposition. The charge is to stand well armed, and to 
contend for the faith until his manifestation to the world, in the 
close of the perilous times of this harvest. 

How solemn the obligation: -"I give thee charge in the sight of 
God who quickeneth all things "-the great Life- giver or Father 
of all, Jehovah. We are his representatives in the earth; the honor 
of his name is to be vindicated in the presence of his enemies 
and before many of his deceived children; his glorious plan is to 
be published broadcast in opposition to all the worldly-wise 
schemes which men are and have been trying to invent. And his 
eye is upon us, marking how faithfully or unfaithfully we as his 
ambassadors represent him. 

Not only do we receive this charge in the sight of God, but also 
"before the anointed Jesus," our great example and forerunner, 
who also bore witness to the truth, sacrificing all things for the 
privilege of witnessing to it— even unto death. 

All told, the church is but a little flock: they are generally also 
the humble poor of this world, who have little influence among 
men. Nevertheless their charge is an important one. They must 
"hold the fort" until the Lord himself shall in power and great 
glory establish the truth and exalt his church. He will complete 
what we in our present condition accomplish only in part: He 
will scatter all the mists and let in the broad sunlight of his truth, 
until none need say to his neighbor, "Know the Lord— for all 
shall know him from the least unto the greatest," as represented 
in his plan, work and office. Already the light of his presence 
begins to dawn. Already he begins to lift the veil of error and to 



restore, with increasing beauty and clearness, the truths he first 
inculcated and afterward left to his church in charge. 

The substance of this sound faith left in charge at first was, 
"This is life eternal that they might know thee," Jehovah;- know 
his goodness, know his love, know his power and his justice; 
that knowing of God's character as revealed by Christ they 
might delight to accept his proffered aid through Christ, and 
returning to God be abundantly pardoned; and, continuing to 
grow in knowledge and love and devotedness to God, be 
accepted as co-workers and co-heirs with Christ Jesus, their 
Redeemer and Lord. 

Our Lord's work at his second advent will be similar, the 
Apostle assures us: He will take up the same truth, which he first 
taught, the same that was given into the church's charge during 
his absence, and will show to all the world of mankind, the real 
character and plan of God the Father;-i.e., he will cause all to 
know and appreciate the character and plan of Jehovah, the 
blessed and only potentate; King of all kings, and Lord of all 
lords; who alone possessed, originally and innately, immortality; 
who dwells in light unapproachable. 

Courage, the, brethren! Our great Commander is even now upon 
the battle field. "Stand fast; quit you like men; be strong!" the 
fiercest part of the conflict is just before the shout of victory is 
heard; the darkest hour is just before the dawn of day. As 
triumphant conquerors, O faithful few, you shall soon wear the 
laurels of immortality and eternal glory. 

The witnessing of the church through the long dark centuries of 
the Gospel age has not been in vain. The object of her mission 
was not to convert the world before the Lord's return, but to 
develop her own character and prove her worthiness of the high 
exaltation which she is called to share with her Lord, while 
bearing witness to the world of the facts of the glorious gospel, 
which shall be good tidings of great joy to all people, when in 
due time it is testified to all. 

Then continue to preach the word. Be instant in season and out 
of season;— when it suits your convenience and when it does 
not. Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all patience and doctrine, and 
study to show yourselves workmen approved unto God, rightly 
dividing the word of truth. Thus, speaking the truth in love and 
growing up into Christ our living head, may we each be found in 
acceptable readiness to be gathered among the Lord's jewels. 
And to this end let us each see to it, that what faith we hold is 
held with a good conscience,— honestly held and honestly acted 
upon. 



R1128:page6 



THE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY, NO. I. 

That at this time of day there should be anything new to be said 
on the subject of Christian Ministry, and that any one should, by 
appealing to the New Testament alone, lay open such a 
statement on this theme as must, if true, tend to disturb the 
composure of every sect, would appear to many too strange for 
credence; yet the very fact, that numerous religious divisions in 
Christendom have established many varieties of ministry, and 
that all of them appeal to the Scriptures for the validity of their 
ministerial arrangements, is a prima facie argument for a new 
examination of the question, as it is quite obvious that only one 
of the sects can, by possibility, have discovered the truth. 

At the same time, it is far more probable that all should have 
erred than that only one should be right. Every one who has not 
taken for granted the perfect and unimpeachable conditions of 
the "denomination" in which he happens to be enrolled, must 
acknowledge the force of this argument. And when the history 
of Protestant divisions is duly weighed; when their origin and 
the circumstances that led to their formation are calmly 
considered; when it is remembered that not one of them can put 
in a claim to a divine birth (for we know the pedigrees of them 
all, and can most accurately describe their earthly lineage), then 
must the argument be much strengthened, so that we need 
scarcely fear stating, that it is in the highest degree improbable 
that any known sect should have come to indubitable 
conclusions on the article of Christian Ministry. 

In the great Reformation this momentous question was never 
fairly examined, or rather we may say it was slurred over as too 
delicate and dangerous to handle. Luther indeed saw very 
clearly the master-truths of the spiritual priesthood of all 
believers-liberty of ministry for all the saints, the total 
abrogation of all official priesthood in Christianity, and the 
vanity and absurdity of "ordination." He had nothing more to 
learn on these points; but then, as in many other instances, he 
did not think it necessary or politic to press his views, or to 
insist on them as a part of the Reformation. It is well known that 
he tolerated many absurdities in worship and ceremonies, 
probably because he despaired of weaning the people from 
them; and thus he tolerated ordination 

R1129:page6 

though he made a joke of it in his letters, and unmercifully 
quizzed his brother reformers who had some grand doings at 
their* "ordinations." 

The Protestant party, headed by Melanchthon, were so little 
solicitous to place "ministry" on Scriptural foundation, that they 
rather showed a disposition to yield to all the papal decrees 
concerning the Priesthood. In the confession of Augsburg, the 
Protestants thus warily expressed themselves in the 14th article:- 



-"Concerning the ecclesiastical order, they [the Protestants] 
teach that no one ought to teach publicly in the church, or to 
administer the sacraments, unless he be duly called." To this the 
papal party replied: - 

"When in their fourteenth article they confess that no one ought 
to administer the word and the sacraments in the church unless 
he be duly called, it ought to be clearly understood that he only 
is duly called who is called according to the form of the canon 
law, and the ecclesiastical sanctions and decrees, which, up to 
this time, have everywhere been observed in the Christian 
world; not called according to the vocation of Jeroboam (1 
Kings 12:20), or a tumultuous election of the people, or any 
other irregular intrusion: for no one taketh this honor unto 
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. " 

The Protestants, in their "Apology of the Confession," thus 
notice this stricture:- "Our fourteenth article, in which we say 
that the administration of the sacraments and of the word should 
be allowed to no one unless he be duly called, they accept, if 
only we make use of canonical ordination. On this subject we 
have frequently testified in the diet of Augsburg, that we, with 
the greatest willingness, desire to preserve the ecclesiastical 
polity, even the degrees of priesthood that have been made in 
the church by human authority; for we know that ecclesiastical 
discipline, as set forth by the ancient canons, was established by 
the fathers for a good and useful purpose; but the [papal] 
bishops compel our priests either to renounce and condemn the 
doctrine which we have confessed, or else kill them, innocent as 
they are, with new and unheard-of cruelties. For this cause our 
priests are prevented from acknowledging the bishops." 

Here, then, we see the perilous position of "ministry" during the 
Reformation; and we can therefore well understand how, in such 
circumstances, there was little likelihood that the question 
should be investigated, as it deserves to be, with a professed and 
unhesitating submission to the Word of God. 

But this is not all, for "ministry" must needs be produced in 
some form by the Protestants, and that form must of necessity be 
accommodated to the worldly position which the Protestant 
religion assumed at first, and has retained ever since. For it is to 
be remembered that the Reformers never acknowledged the 
heavenly calling of the saints; never confessed that the church 
had her polity only in heavenly places; never hesitated to draw 
the sword in "defence of their civil and religious liberties:" 
never declined from power and authority in the world, but 
rather, under the auspices of princes and magistrates, sought to 
establish the Gospel as a handmaid of Government, and, as if a 
second Joshua were their leader, to drive the enemy out of the 
land, that they might take possession of the fertile Canaan, long 
defiled with papal abominations. 



The world, then, being the portion of the Protestant religion, its 
ministry required a substantial and consolidated formation, 
suited for its earthly calling and its contentious life; and that it 
soon obtained on the Continent, and in England and Scotland, 
according to the arrangements of the different predominant 
sections of the reformed faith. Hence we everywhere find that 
Protestant ministry is based on the old maxims and principles of 
the antecedent creed. These maxims and principles may indeed 
be modified, and reduced in intensity, but as the papal system 
had brought to perfection the mystery of amalgamating the 
church and the world, the new possessors of power, whose 
object it was to be proficients in the same mystery, could not do 
otherwise than study the successful methods of their 
predecessor. 

But in this forbidden science, the Protestants seem to forget that 
the old masters can always obtain an easy victory over all co- 
rivals; for in the matter of ministry, wherever it is of human 
institution, Popery has the means of surpassing all antagonists, 
and of confounding all opponents. It is owing to the superior 
claims of the papal priesthood to the obedience of man, on 
earthly principles, that Popery is now once more disturbing the 
repose of Protestants, and threatening some great crisis in 
ecclesiastical history. 

In "ministry," as a human institution, Popery possesses 
incomparable advantages; for who does not see that even the 
ordinations of the dissenters come from Rome through the 
Church of England, and that the idea of requiring a clerical body 
to convey the power of "administering the sacraments" (an idea 
fully recognized by Protestants), is easily to be traced to the 
decrees of the canonists? 

The Church of England smiles with disdain on the imitation of 
clerisy by the dissenters, and haughtily denies the validity of 
their ordinations; but the Church of Rome, enthroned in the 
magnificent deceptions of many ages, and unrivaled in the 
perfection of every earthly principle, classes the Anglican 
prelate with the dissenting minister, sees no difference between 
the preacher of the conventicle and the archbishop of 
Canterbury, and in the comprehensive category of "heretic," 
erases all Protestant ministers of every grade out of the clerical 
order. And, indeed, if it be a question between the comparative 
merits of any particular clerisy, if the genus "clergyman" be 
once admitted in Christianity, who would not naturally prefer 
the type of the whole family to any of the imperfect and mongrel 
varieties which could be put in competition with it? 

When once, therefore, an inquirer is directed to rest on human 
ministry, and when he comes to discover that the priestly 
college, the priestly education, holy orders, the distinction of 
clergy from laity, the clerical character, title, and costume, the 
clerical right to preach and administer the sacraments, and the 



clerical prerogative of conveying that right, are to be had at the 
fountain-head at Rome— that from Rome all these things were 
derived, and that at Rome they all flourish in native splendor, 
inimitable in any other communion-he must naturally incline to 
go direct to the fountain-head for that which he had been falsely 
taught is a part of Christianity. Neither can we doubt that Popery 
is triumphing now through this obvious process of thought; for I 
profess not to understand how, admitting the clerical character 
and prerogatives obtainable by clerical ordination, it is possible 
to rest content with the imperfect and borrowed orders of the 
Church of England. "If there is a link out of 

R1129:page7 

the chain, it seems to matter very little whether it is wanting at 
one end or the other," the Anglican priest remarks, in 
commenting on the "orders" of the dissenters, forgetting that he 
is himself a dissenter from the mother church, and that it 
belongs to that church alone to use such a reproof, which is 
applicable to every Protestant that tampers with "the apostolical 
succession. " 

As, then, preaching justification by faith without works, that is, 
asserting that he who does not work, but instead of working 
believes in that God who justifies ungodly persons, is the only 
method of meeting Rome in her doctrinal power, so the assertion 
of liberty of ministry for all believers is the only method of 
meeting Rome's pretensions to clerical pre-eminence, a 
pretension before which all must succumb who in any way 
acknowledge the clerical order. There is no medium, no resting- 
place for a candid inquirer between the two extremes— the 
ministry of the Spirit as revealed in the Word of God, or human 
ministry as exhibited by the ancient Church of Rome. Either 
take liberty of ministry for all the saints, from the supernal and 
free Jerusalem, "the mother of us all;" or, rejecting this, then 
accept the clerical order from Rome, the mother of all clerisy, 
and the mistress of all ecclesiastical bondsmen. 

Let not these remarks, however, be interpreted as belonging to 
the controversy between the Roman Catholics and the 
Protestants. That controversy enters not, I trust, into any part of 
this inquiry, which, as it professes to be an examination of the 
Scriptures, for the purpose of vindicating certain Scriptural 
truths of deep value to the Church of God, can only incidentally 
touch on the divisions of professing Christendom. In vain will 
we seek for either Papist or Protestant in the New Testament, or 
for their churches under any name, or any representation. 

In God's Word we find only two antagonistic sects: that of the 
world and that of grace; known also by the names of the 
children of the devil and the children of God; of the sons of 
darkness and the sons of light; the body of Christ and the 
children of wrath. But wherever we find the principles of this 



world admitted into any system of professing Christianity, there 
we find a portion of that which is technically called "Popery;" 
and which is nothing but the fulness of this world's principles, 
and the entire satisfaction of all the desires of the carnal mind in 
its notions about religion. Now, with the Church of England and 
the dissenters, there is much of the elements of this world: much 
that proves that their citizenship is not, and that they do not wish 
it to be, in heavenly places. They are 

R1130:page7 

marshaled under opposing banners for an earthly portion; they 
both teach that politics should be "cultivated religiously;" and 
they both give the whole weight of their influence to the 
political parties of the day; nay, to such an extent is this rivalry 
carried on, that their very places of worship are rearing as if they 
were fortresses and castles for a civil war. "It seems to be the 
present policy of the Church of England to build us down and 
build us out," says one of the antagonists; "but we must catch 
the building spirit of the age; we must build, build, build. This 
should be our cry, MORE PLACES OF WORSHIP. It may be 
well enough to form protective societies for the defense of our 
civil rights; but our best defense, under God, is in our numbers; 
numbers carry weight and influence. We cannot multiply our 
persons, unless we multiply our places. We must not wait for 
congregations to be gathered before we build; we must build to 
gather." 

In the meanwhile, on these very principles, the common enemy 
of all the Protestant sects is advancing with a rapidity that 
alarms them all; and he who, ages ago, had the whole earthly 
portion, for parts of which others are now contending, is 
reviving his claim and taking active measures to recover it. 

"I claim to retain the favor of the state," says the church; "I 
claim an equality in all rights of earthly citizenship," says the 
dissenter; but the imperial priest of the seven hills cries out, "I 
claim dominion over all the works of God's hands; all things are 
put under my feet; all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the 
field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, and 
whatsoever passeth through the paths of the sea; for of me it is 
written, 'Behold, I have set thee over nations, and over 
kingdoms, to root out and to pull down, to destroy and to throw 
down, to build and to plant."* 

It is not then for Protestants that we write but for the "holy 
brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling," who desire to be 
acquainted with the will of God, whatever may be the 
consequences. One consequence, indeed, is certain, that if these 
things be true, then does Christianity stand before the world 
acquitted of the charges brought against it by its restless 
enemies, who, viewing it only in its clerical form, condemn it, 
both for what it has done, and for what it has failed to do. 



When Gibbon lays it down as an axiom, "that the Christian 
Church entrusted the service of the altar to a perpetual 
succession of consecrated ministers; and that bishops alone 
possessed the power of spiritual generation" (Decline and Fall, 
chap, xx.) he asserts that which all his Christian antagonists 
have allowed to pass unnoticed and uncontradicted; but grant 
him only this hypothesis, and who then shall be able to gainsay 
his history, which indeed has hitherto been more railed at than 
confuted? Gibbon has incidentally written a history of clerical 
Christianity in tracing the decline and fall of the Roman Empire, 
and that form of Christianity it has never been proved that he 
has misrepresented; but if we deny that clerisy is an authentic 
part of Christianity, and if we establish this position by a close 
inquiry into the Scriptures, then we ascertain that neither he nor 
any other infidel has ever yet been able even to find the true 
Church, which has fled into the wilderness far out of their reach, 
where, being reputed dead, and having her "life hid with Christ 
in God," she has found for herself "a fountain of gardens, a well 
of living waters, and streams from Lebanon." They that know 
this life will not evade any truth of the Word of God, whatever 
may be its tendency; for they know full well that most of the 
truths of Christ are attended with His cross, and to the world 
must ever appear unconvincing and unamiable; but, as their 
citizenship is in heaven, so will they not, as others do, be 
looking to this earth as a place of power, influence and honor for 
the Church, but rather remembering the great question, "When 
the Son of man cometh, will he find faith upon the earth?" they 
will anticipate suffering times, and days of painful testimony, 
"until the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall 
see it together;" and so, suffering with him, that with him they 
may also reign, their present position will be unhesitating 
obedience, though the daily desire of their hearts will be, "Make 
haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe, or to a young hart 
upon the mountains of spices." 

It should be understood that the word "denomination," which 
will occasionally appear in following our Inquiry Concerning 
Christian Ministry, [in subsequent issues of the TOWER,] is 
used for the sake of peace, and to avoid the appearance of 
criminatory language; for if, in detecting error, crimination is 
inevitable, it is better that it should be by facts than by pointed 
expressions, and by proofs than by contentious phrases. 
Nevertheless "denomination" is only a veil for that harsher word 
"sect," though even that is a softened translation of the 
original.+ 

"Denomination" is a specious word invented by Shame to 
conceal the nakedness of the fall of Christendom: that which 
erring and bewildered Christians call denomination is in the 
Scriptures SCHISM, for so it is in the word, "I beseech you, 
brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak 
the same thing, that there be no schisms [see the Greek] among 



you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind 
and in the same judgment" (1 Cor. 1:10 and 12:25); for in the 
Scriptures believers are represented not only as being one body 
and one spirit, but as having a perfect unity of mind and 
judgment; so that whatever we may now hear concerning 
"denominations" (that is, sects and schisms), and however these 
divisions may now be applauded and admired, and how much it 
may have become a fashionable virtue to speak well of them all; 
yet this is certain, that if there be any truth in the Word of God, 
every sect is a sin, and every division a proof of disobedience. 

"THERE IS ONE BODY," is a truth in the Word of God. (Eph. 
4:4.) The faith once delivered to the saints was mainly to 
establish this fact, the whole of the New Testament tends to 
confirm it, and visible Christianity utterly fails to represent the 
true Christian faith where this fact is not both in practice and in 
theory fully acknowledged. I can, at present, only allude to this 
subject in passing, for it is of itself a theme for a wide and 
serious inquiry, but so much is here said on it, lest any believer, 
rightly instructed in the word of truth, should be offended with 
the usage of a word, which was originally intended to hide sin. 
To speak of "various denominations" is, after all, but saying that 
there are various schisms, for Christ and his Church have but 
one name (1 Cor. 12:12), one body (Eph. 5:29,30), and one 
spirit (1 Cor. 6:17); and therefore to give Christ the name of 
Roman Catholic, Churchman, Presbyterian, Independent, 
Baptist, Wesleyan, or any other sectarian name, and to admire 
this many-headed portent as "his body," the Church, is as 
intolerable as to call our Lord by the names of Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Siva, or to look for the body of his disciples among the sects 
of Athenian philosophy. It is one thing to love all God's children 
though entangled in sects, and another to avoid the meshes of 
their captivity. The oneness of thought, mind and action, 
required of the Church of God, may be seen in the following 
texts: -John 13:34,35; 17:23; Acts 4:32; 20:29,30; Rom. 12:16; 
15:5,6; 16:17; 1 Cor. 1:10; 12:25; 2 Cor. 13:11; Gal. 1:9; Eph. 
4:14; Phil. 2:2,3; 3:16,17; 1 Thes. 5:13; 2Thes. 3:6; 1 Tim. 1:3- 
6; 6:3,20; 2 Tim. 4:3,4; 2 John 9. 

R. M. BEVERLEY. 



*The imposition of hands in ordination was a perplexing 
question to the Protestants; thus, for some time, the whole senate 
of Geneva, consisting of many laymen, used, by imposition of 
hands, to ordain the ministers. Calvin and Farel objected to this 
practice. The Kirk of Scotland, a branch of Calvin's church, in 
the year 1560, renounced ordination by imposition of hands, as a 
"superstition:" eighteen years later, they restored it! 



*So applied by the canonists, and so quoted by Pope Boniface 
VIII., Extrav. C. "imam sanctum." 

+That word is heresy (airesis). "As concerning this sect [i.e. 
heresy] we know that it is everywhere spoken against. " (Acts 
28:22.) So Acts 5:17; 15:5; 26:5. In all these instances heresy is 
translated sect. But in 1 Cor. 11:19 we read, "There must be also 
heresies amongst you," or if we choose, sects, or denominations, 
"for one saith, I am of Paul, and another of Apollos." (1 Cor. 
3:4.) Then again, Gal. 5:20. "The works of the flesh are 
manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, 
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, 
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies"-or sects or denominations. 



R1131 : page 8 

THE ANATOMY OF CONCEIT. 

Every man sees with his own eyes. He discovers in the world 
only what his capacity and range of vision fit him to see. So 
every man thinks and judges and estimates other men and 
himself according to standards and limitations peculiar to his 
own mind. The eye of the soul has its limit of vision. Many a 
man has no right estimate of his fellow men, because he 
measures them by the false standards of his own thinking. Still 
more men have no right estimate of themselves. Wrong 
estimates of others and of ourselves are sure to be found 
together sooner or later; they spring from the same root, namely, 
a bad standard or a false application of good standards. In this 
way a man may either underestimate or overestimate himself. 
Thus arises conceit. This quality is simply erroneous self- 
measurement. 

Conceit implies a narrow and superficial knowledge of the 
world. As in perception we determine the size of things by 
comparison of them with other things, so we estimate men and 
ourselves by comparison. The earth seems very great to us when 
we cross its oceans and traverse its continents. But when we 
pursue the astronomer's reasoning, and learn that there are 
worlds in comparison with which our planet is little more than a 
floating particle of dust, our estimate of its relative size and 
importance is wholly changed. A better knowledge of the 
universe humbles our judgment concerning our world as a part 
of the creation of God. In like manner, all self-estimates are 
relative. In self-conceit, man dwarfs the universe in order to 
magnify himself. With a true conception of the majesty of the 
universe, and of the wisdom and power revealed in it, conceit is 
impossible. The mind is overwhelmed with the impression of its 
weakness in the presence of that gigantic system of things in 
which it finds itself. 



It follows that conceit springs from ignorance and 
thoughtlessness. It is consistent only with narrow views of the 
world and of life. It makes precisely the mistake of the old 
astronomy, which supposed our world to be the central and 
largest one of the system, simply because it knew so little of 
other worlds. The conceited man magnifies his own importance 
only because he does not know what real greatness is. He is 
great in his own eyes only because his eyes can see nothing truly 
great. 

Conceit arises from a low estimate of other men. Estimates of 
ourselves, as well as of other men, are relative. All self- 
measurements involve measurement of others. It results from 
this, that there is no way by which the conceit can be taken out 
of a man so effectually as by bringing him into a clear 
comparison and sharp competition with other men. This is the 
reason why it has become proverbial that school-life— especially 
college-life— will be likely to cure boys and young men of their 
conceit. In the class-room they are brought into close 
competition, in which even the best scholar is sure to be 
sometimes outdone by other men. Thus every man is frequently 
compelled to a tacit acknowledgement of others' superiority, and 
that in their very presence. This kind of life forbids to men the 
easy and flattering method of "comparing themselves with 
themselves," which is the great promoter of conceit. 

This is the reason why the process of education tends to cure 
conceit. The men who recover from it least, are the men who 
have too little perception to discover clearly, or too little 
sensitiveness to feel keenly, the superiority of others. The same 
principle holds in the great school of life. No man can remain 
persistently conceited, who has any adequate appreciation of the 
merits and attainments of his fellow-men. A man may be 
conscious that he has done his best, and may feel a keen 
satisfaction in this fact; but any large knowledge of men will 
show him how often his work has been equaled and surpassed. 
The real scholar is compelled to think modestly of his 
productions; for he well knows how thorough and successful 
have been the labors of others in the same or similar fields. He 
who is most likely to suppose that he has done a great service to 
science, is the tyro who does not know what others have 
accomplished. 

We estimate ourselves by comparison. The more widely and 
truly we know men, the more we shall see we are frequently 
equaled and surpassed. Candid estimates of ourselves by 
comparison with others will make us think soberly, and judge 
ourselves modestly. Conceit has no more fruitful root than a 
narrow knowledge and prejudiced estimate of the labors and 
worth of others. 

Conceit involves a faulty self-knowledge. It is noticeable that a 
man who thinks most highly of himself is one of whom others 



think least highly. The conceited man has only one ardent 
admirer -that is himself. The world knows most men better than 
men know themselves, and at this point "this wise world is 
mainly right. " A true self-knowledge reveals our faults to us, 
and gives us a true view of ourselves. It lets the light in upon our 
narrow prejudices, and makes us ashamed of them. It discloses 
the insufficient grounds of many of our judgments, and unearths 
the subtle processes of our self-deception. It lays bare the 
operation of motives, and shows how often conscience itself is 
made a convenience. Self-knowledge humbles a man. Those 
who think themselves complete beyond other men commonly 
stand alone in that opinion. They think themselves complete 
only because, while they keenly perceive others' faults, they are 
blind to their own. 

In this view lies almost the only excuse which can be given for 
the man of inordinate self-conceit. It implies intellectual 
weakness, an incapacity for keen discernment, an inability to 
study successfully one's self and others. It may be a mental quite 
as much as a moral fault, though it is usually both. In both views 
it is a quality whose development is to be dreaded and checked 
with the utmost promptness and sternness. No trait of character 
conveys a more unfavorable impression; none so quickly excites 
disgust; none provokes such constant and universal ridicule. The 
ancient proverb expresses the world's verdict on this point: 
"Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope 
of a fool than of him. " 

Conceit is a mark of smallness of soul. It is a phase of 
selfishness. Conceit is essential littleness. It means small 
thoughts of the world and of other men; low ideals of character 
and attainment; weak and narrow conceptions of duty. It is the 
mark of a self-centered life; and the life which makes self the 
center is as much smaller than the true life as the idea which 
made our earth the center of the universe was beneath the true 
conception of the solar system. "Conceit, in weakest bodies 
strongest works," said Shakespeare. The men who have been 
servants of humanity- the great reformers and philanthropists- 
have been freest from conceit. They were great in humility; for 
humility, rightly understood, is essential greatness. Humility is 
the quality which leads men to serve others; conceit, the quality 
which leads them to serve themselves. 

Traced to its deepest root, therefore, conceit is a fruit of 
fundamentally defective character. It implies a lack of 
appreciation of God's greatness, before which every thoughtful 
mind should stand with reverence and humility, and the proofs 
of which in the world, in man, and in history, might well 
impress every person with his own feebleness and 
insignificance. It implies a want of generous sympathy and 
kindly appreciation of others. It gives rise to cynicism and 
misanthropy. The conceited man helps nobody, unless he does it 



in order that he may thereby indirectly help himself. He is as 
intolerant of other men's faults as he is tolerant of his own. 

Like all other qualities, conceit grows by indulgence. It is as 
subtle as counterfeit virtue, with which it has close affinity. It is 
as mischievous as self-deception, of whose essence it partakes. 
The analysis of this trait lays bare its inherent meanness, and 
shows it to belong to a type of life which is unworthy of any 
noble, generous, aspiring soul.— Sunday School Times. 


