Questions From Readers
● Why could the apostle Paul say: “As for me, through law I died toward law”?​—Gal. 2:19.
The apostle’s words form part of an argument showing that a man cannot make himself righteous before God through “works of law.” Paul wrote: “We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners from the nations [that did not have the Mosaic law and that conducted themselves in a lawless way from the standpoint of the Jews], knowing as we do that a man is declared righteous, not due to works of law, but only through faith toward Christ Jesus, even we have put our faith in Christ Jesus, that we may be declared righteous due to faith toward Christ, and not due to works of law, because due to works of law no flesh will be declared righteous.”​—Gal. 2:15, 16.
The Law made Paul aware of the fact that he simply could not keep it perfectly. It condemned him as a sinner who was deserving of death. No matter how scrupulously he might try to observe the requirements of the Law, he would find himself falling short. (Rom. 7:7-11) Thus, “through law I died toward law.” Or, as Today’s English Version words it: “So far as the Law is concerned, however, I am dead​—killed by the Law itself—​in order that I might live for God.” By accepting, in faith, Jehovah’s arrangement for salvation through Christ, Paul was justified by God to live again. Thus he came to life spiritually. As a result of his faith, the apostle came under the influence of the holy spirit, with its fruitage being displayed in his life. That is why Paul added, “that I might become alive toward God.”​—Gal. 2:19.
● Why did Solomon state: “Jehovah himself said he was to reside in the thick gloom”?​—1 Ki. 8:12.
King Solomon made this statement after the priests deposited the sacred Ark in the Most Holy of the temple and when, subsequently thereto, the cloud filled the sanctuary. (1 Ki. 8:6-11) It was this cloud that reminded Solomon of the manner in which Jehovah God had earlier revealed his presence. For example, Moses was told: “Look! I am coming to you in a dark cloud.” (Ex. 19:9) When referring to this on another occasion, Moses stated: “There was darkness, cloud and thick gloom.” (Deut. 4:11) In view of the fact that the Most High associated his presence with a cloud, Solomon could rightly speak of ‘Jehovah’s residing in the thick gloom.’

