From Our Readers
Children and War  With a deep sense of sadness, I read the series “What War Does to Children.” (October 22, 1997) I too was a child of war. During World War II, I spent four and a half years in the Japanese concentration camps Ngawi and Bandung. At the age of ten, I was separated from my family and labored seven days a week in the tropical sun—undernourished and suffering from beriberi and dysentery. Still, my experiences seem like a picnic compared with the indescribable cruelty millions of children experience today. May we never feel discouraged that Jehovah has allowed time for people worldwide, including children of war, to come to a knowledge of his comforting promises!
R. B., United States
Pot of Fat  I was feeling very sad and sorry for myself. A year ago my husband decided he didn’t want a Christian for a wife, and he put my son and me out of the beautiful house he said he had bought for me. I went into poverty. My life seemed hopeless, and I asked Jehovah for help. Well, I received a lesson from the article “A Lesson From a Pot of Fat.” (October 22, 1997) It reminded me to be content with sustenance and covering and to keep Kingdom interests first.
K. P., United States
Sibling Problems  The article “Young People Ask . . . Why Does My Brother Get All the Attention?” (October 22, 1997) came exactly when we needed it. It helped us realize that unequal treatment is not necessarily injustice. We now see that our parents have good reasons for giving our siblings extra attention. We really agree with the article.
B. K., H. K., and G. U. O., Nigeria
Noise Pollution  I have worked in a large factory for several years, and some of my colleagues and I have suffered the effects of the loud noise there. I took the November 8, 1997, issue to work (“Noise—Our Worst Pollutant?”), and the management has decided to take necessary precautions to safeguard the health of all the workers.
R. P., Italy
I have been upset for several years because of the noise my neighbor makes. He runs a business until late at night. I have sometimes become very angry. But I was strengthened to know that there are Christian brothers and sisters who are also victimized by noise but who are coping by exercising self-control.
T. O., Japan
I have a neighbor who disturbs me by making phone calls in the early hours of the morning. These articles have given me wonderful tips on how I can deal with this matter in an amicable, Christian manner.
J. R., England
Magellan  I really appreciated and enjoyed the article about Ferdinand Magellan entitled “The Man Who Unlocked the World.” (November 8, 1997) When the article came out, we were learning about him in my fifth-grade class. I learned more about him from the article than I did from my social studies book. I gave my teacher my personal copy of the magazine, and she loved it! A couple of days later, I got the magazine back, and it had a note on it thanking me again.
B. V., United States
It was wonderful to be able to imagine how Ferdinand Magellan, such a determined man, overcame hostility and various difficulties to realize one of the greatest achievements in history. Thank you for writing on a fascinating subject.
M. E., Italy

