From Our Readers
Burn Victim
Thank you for the article you published in the March 22, 1980, Awake! entitled “I Was a Burn Victim.” Two years ago when I first read the article, I had two young children who were often caught playing with matches. So I read them the article, and that was more effective than any of the punishments I’d tried to get them to stop. I was recently reminded of this article and I decided to write and let you know how much my family benefited from it.
M. J., California
Violence In Sports
Whilst reading through your May 22, 1982, Awake!, I noticed the article “Why the Violence in Sports?” and it stated “People in downtown Barcelona, Spain, shudder when they think of the Scottish Celtic fans that sowed panic in their streets a few years ago.” I feel quite sure that the incident you are referring to was the European Cup Winners cup final held in 1972. The Glasgow Rangers being the only Scottish participant in the final, there were four occasions before and during the match when a section of Rangers supporters invaded the field of play, and on the fifth and final invasion (at the end of the match) came the infamous battle between a number of Rangers supporters and the baton-wielding Spanish police. The Glasgow Celtics have done much to weed out the hooligan element among their support and have been complimented on their friendliness.
A. A., Scotland
Awake! erred. It was the Glasgow Rangers fans. Our apologies to the Scottish Celtic fans. The error was corrected in all our foreign language editions.​—ED.
I’m a ten-year-old boy. I am very athletic and I enjoyed the issue on sports. There really is a lot of aggression in the world. Keep on publishing good articles.
K. W., Kentucky
I really did appreciate your article on the violence of sports and the effects it can have both on participants and on spectators. Regretfully, some of our brothers today seem to have lost sight of the dangers, physical and especially spiritual, in becoming involved in sporting events, especially those with violence. I hope that this new article will reawaken some to the dangers.
W. G., Maryland
“Dallas” on TV
Thank you for the item in “Watching the World” (April 22, 1982) on the TV show “Dallas.” A few months ago I was shocked to hear that a number of brothers and sisters from my own congregation watch this show. Perhaps reading the item “Dallas Turns Lounge Into Brothel,” from the South African newspaper will jar them to their senses.
C. M., Canada
For over a year I have declined to watch the television series “Dallas,” leaving the room whilst the transmission is received at my lodgings. Your comment greatly encouraged my stand.
D. L., England

