“According to Your Faith”
1 Samuel 14:1-23
The nation of Israel was under Philistine domination. King Saul raised an army to free Israel, but the Philistines prevailed and the Israelites took cover. At this point Jonathan, Saul’s son, said to his armor-bearer, ‘Let us cross over to the outpost of the Philistines. Perhaps Jehovah will work for us.’
‘We will show ourselves. If they say, “Come up against us!” we will, for that will be a sign that Jehovah is with us.’
They came out into the open, and the Philistines cried out, ‘The Hebrews are coming out of their holes!’ They shouted down to Jonathan and his armor-bearer, “Come on up to us, and we will let you know a thing!” It was the sign from Jehovah! “Come up after me,” Jonathan said to his armor-bearer, “because Jehovah will certainly give them into the hand of Israel.”
The two began to climb up to the Philistine outpost.
Heavily outnumbered, Jonathan and his armor-bearer stood back to back and fought the Philistines, until twenty of them lay scattered about, dead. At the crucial moment, Jehovah did ‘work for them.’
Earthquake! Confusion! In the turmoil Philistine fought Philistine.
Israel poured out of their hiding places to join in the battle, and their enemies were routed.
LESSON FOR US: Ponder the words, “Perhaps Jehovah will work for us.” Faith that he would moved Jonathan to act. Jehovah did work. Israel came out of hiding, the Philistines were routed, and “Jehovah proceeded on that day to save Israel.” (1 Samuel 14:23) All because of Jonathan’s faith. Today Christians do not engage in carnal warfare as Jehovah’s servants did in ancient times. We do, however, need his backing in our present Christian activities, and when we move forward in faith we give God cause to work for us. Jesus says, “According to your faith let it happen to you.” (Matthew 9:29) Jehovah invites, “Test me out, please.” (Malachi 3:10) So let’s be like Jonathan and act according to our strong faith. “Perhaps Jehovah will work for us” also.

