
They Offered Themselves Willingly—In Brazil




SOME years ago, Rúbia, a sister who is now 30 years old, made a trip to visit Sandra, a pioneer who served in a small congregation in the south of Brazil. During the visit, something happened that impressed Rúbia so much that it changed her life. What was it? Let us find out.



SHE NEVER THOUGHT IT WAS POSSIBLE

Sandra took Rúbia on a Bible study she had with a woman. During the study, the woman told Sandra that three girls at her workplace wanted to study the Bible. But the woman had told them that Sandra did not have time to study with anybody else for the rest of the year and that they would have to wait. Rúbia never thought it was possible that people would have to wait for their turn to have a Bible study! She says: “In my home congregation, I had a hard time finding even one study. At that very moment, in the home of that Bible student, I felt a deep desire to help the people in her small town. Soon thereafter I left the big city where I lived and moved to the town where Sandra was pioneering.”
“Within two months after moving there, I was conducting 15 Bible studies.” And soon, like Sandra, Rúbia had a list of people waiting for a Bible study!

What were the results for Rúbia? She explains: “Within two months after moving there, I was conducting 15 Bible studies.” And soon, like Sandra, Rúbia had a list of people waiting for a Bible study!



IT MADE HIM THINK ABOUT HIS MINISTRY

Diego, a brother who is now in his early 20’s, visited a couple of pioneers serving in Prudentópolis, a small town in the south of Brazil. This visit made him think about his own ministry. In his congregation, he was spending just a few hours each month in the preaching work. But when he visited those pioneers and listened to their experiences, it was clear that they had a lot more joy in their ministry than he had in his. Diego says: “When I saw how happy and excited they were, I wished that my life could be as meaningful as theirs.” After that visit, he began pioneering.
Are you a young Witness? Like Diego, do you go out in service and attend meetings but at the same time feel that your ministry is not very exciting? If so, can you make changes in your life so that you can have the joy of serving where the need is greater? It is natural for you to be afraid of giving up a comfortable life. But many young ones have chosen to do exactly that. They have had the courage to change their goals and desires so that they can do more in Jehovah’s service. Consider the example of Bruno.



MAESTRO OR MINISTER?

Some years ago, Bruno, who is now 28 years old, studied at a famous music school. He wanted to become a maestro, or an orchestra conductor. In fact, he did so well in his studies that he was invited many times to conduct a symphony orchestra. It seemed that he would be a very successful maestro. But Bruno says: “I felt that something was missing in my life. I had dedicated myself to Jehovah, but I knew that I wasn’t giving my all to him, and that bothered me. I told Jehovah in prayer about my feelings, and I also spoke to experienced brothers in the congregation.” After seriously thinking about his situation, Bruno decided to put his ministry first, left the music school, and moved to a place where there was a great need for preachers. What were the results of his decision?
Bruno moved to the town of Guapiara. This town is about 260 kilometers (160 miles) from the city of São Paulo and has about 7,000 people. It was a big change for him. He tells us: “I moved into a small house without a fridge, TV, or Internet connection. Still, the house came with some things I’d never had before—a vegetable garden and an orchard!” Bruno served there in a small congregation. Once a week he packed his bag with food, water, and publications and went to preach in the countryside on his motorcycle. Many people in that area had never heard the good news before. Bruno says: “I conducted as many as 18 Bible studies. Seeing how these students made changes in their life gave me so much joy!” He adds: “At this point, I realized that I had found what had been missing in my life—the feeling of deep satisfaction that comes from putting Kingdom interests first.” He knows that he would never have felt this joy if he had continued with his career in music. And what about work? How did Bruno support himself in Guapiara? He says with a smile: “By giving guitar lessons.” In a way, he was still a maestro.



“I SIMPLY HAD TO STAY”

Mariana, who is now in her late 20’s, was in a situation similar to Bruno’s. Even though she earned a lot of money as a lawyer, she did not feel truly satisfied. She says: “I felt as if I was ‘striving after wind.’” (Ecclesiastes 1:17) Many brothers and sisters encouraged her to think about pioneering. After thinking seriously about her situation, Mariana, together with her friends Bianca, Caroline, and Juliana, decided to help a congregation in Barra do Bugres. This is an isolated town near Bolivia, thousands of miles away from their home. What happened next?
Mariana explains: “My intention was to stay there for three months. But at the end of that period, I was conducting 15 Bible studies! Of course, those students needed much more help to progress in the truth.” Mariana did not have the courage to tell her Bible students that she was leaving. She says: “I simply had to stay.” And that is exactly what all four sisters did. Mariana now feels that her life has much more meaning. She says: “That Jehovah uses me to help people change their lives for the better gives me a good feeling. It’s a blessing for me to know that I’m now using my time and energy doing something that’s really worthwhile.” Caroline describes how all four sisters feel about giving their best in Jehovah’s service. She says: “When I lie down at night, I have a feeling of deep satisfaction.” She continues: “My life centers on how to help my Bible students. It’s marvelous to see them making progress. I am experiencing the truthfulness of the words: ‘Taste and see that Jehovah is good.’”—Psalm 34:8.
“My life centers on how to help my Bible students. It’s marvelous to see them making progress. I am experiencing the truthfulness of the words: ‘Taste and see that Jehovah is good’”

Jehovah must be very happy to see more and more young brothers and sisters moving to isolated areas to preach the good news of his Kingdom! They “offer themselves willingly.” (Psalm 110:3; Proverbs 27:11) Jehovah greatly blesses willing workers like these.—Proverbs 10:22.



We Have Everything We Need
When João Paulo and his wife, Noemi, told others that they wanted to serve where there was a greater need, a few in the congregation said discouraging things to them. Some said that in a small town it would not be easy for João Paulo and Noemi to get enough money to care for their needs. Others said they should not move because there was still a lot to do in their own congregation. João Paulo says that it was hard not to feel discouraged, even though these friends in the congregation were trying to be helpful. But today, after serving for years in an area where there is a greater need for publishers, João Paulo and Noemi are happy they did not give up on their decision to do more in the ministry. João Paulo explains that ever since they moved, they have had everything they need, and they now have more blessings than they ever had before. Noemi adds: “It was worth the effort.”
In small towns, it can be hard for people to get enough money to care for their needs. How do those who have moved to small towns do this? By thinking about different ways they can use their abilities for work. Some teach English or another language, help children with their school studies, do some sewing or house painting or whatever other work that allows them to do more in the ministry. And how do those who serve where the need is greater feel about their way of life? They all feel that the blessings are worth the effort!


It Can Be Difficult to Be Far From Home
The congregation Tiago moved to had very few publishers. Also, there was not much to do for fun in the town. He started to feel discouraged and to think a lot about home. He knew that he needed to do something to stop feeling that way. So he decided to get to know the brothers and sisters in the congregation better. This helped him. Tiago says: “I made new friends, and before long I felt very happy and much at home.”


