The Olympics, Sports and Religion​—Is There a Conflict?
“THE last of the ancient Olympic Games was held in A.D. 393. In the following year the edict of the emperor Theodosius prohibited the holding of the Games.” (History of the Olympic Games, by Xenophon L. Messinesi) Why did the “Christian” emperor ban the Games? He wanted to purge all pagan activities from the empire. But why were the Olympic Games considered pagan?
Writer Messinesi adds: “We are told that, during the sacrifices to [the Greek god] Zeus . . . a priest stood at the end of the stadium holding a torch. The athletes among the worshippers . . . raced to the end of the stadium toward the priest . . . [the victor] had the privilege of lighting the fire at the altar for the sacrifices. The flame at the altar burned symbolically during the whole period of the Games . . . It is this part of the ceremony which has been resurrected for the contemporary Games.”
The pagan origin of the Games is perpetuated to this day in several ways. The Olympic torch is lit by the sun’s concentrated rays in a ceremony at the Sacred Grove in Olympia, Greece. A head priestess and priestesses participate in the act. The sacred flame is then carried from Olympia to the current Olympic Games city. Millions follow by TV and radio the journey of the torch. The climax is at the final stage when it is brought into the Olympic stadium to light the flame that will burn throughout the Games.
Historian Messinesi explains: “Nothing of all the ceremonies seems to create such an impression as the Flame which comes from Olympia . . . It links the Games about to be held with the religious expression sanctified over the centuries.” (Italics ours.) This opinion is confirmed by the words of the modern founder of the Olympic movement, Baron Pierre de Coubertin, who in the year before he died stated: “I therefore think that I was right in trying from the outset of the Olympic revival to rekindle a religious awareness.”​—Italics ours.
Even as observed in the Los Angeles Olympic Games, there is a quasi-religious atmosphere to the ceremonies​—the host country’s national anthem is played, the Olympic flag is raised and the Olympic hymn is intoned. In view of all of this, how should a Christian view the Olympic Games? Moreover, what ideals should be his guide? Is ‘winning the only thing’? Or can simple participation be its own reward?
Sports in the Bible
Anyone reading the writings of the Christian apostles Peter and Paul has to recognize their exposure to the sports of their day. For example, Paul counseled the Corinthians, who were well aware of the athletic contests held at the Isthmian Games: “Do you not know that the runners in a race all run, but only one receives the prize? Run in such a way that you may attain it. . . . Now they, of course, do it that they may get a corruptible crown [fading crown of leaves, Phillips], but we an incorruptible one [an eternal crown that will never fade].”​—1 Corinthians 9:24, 25.
Was Paul in effect saying that ‘winning is the only thing’ in sports? Not at all. He was making the point that there is only one first prize in a secular race​—but in the Christian race everyone can attain a first prize. So run with your mind fixed on winning the prize!
The victor’s crown is also alluded to by Peter. Both apostles knew that the different games awarded crowns​—of wild olive leaves in the Olympian Games, laurel leaves in the Pythian Games and a crown made of the pine for the Isthmian Games. These all faded and perished with time. Thus Peter recommended “the unfadable crown of glory” to Christian elders.​—1 Peter 5:4.
Therefore the point is well made​—glory achieved in sports is ephemeral, transient. That is why Paul could say: “For bodily training is beneficial for a little; but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.” (1 Timothy 4:8) He clearly indicates that some physical training and exercise is beneficial or has a limited value. But it should not displace or replace a Christian’s dedication to God through Christ. God’s Kingdom, not sports, should occupy the first place in every Christian’s life. (Matthew 6:33) Of what good would it be to have an athletic body if the mind became degenerate or debased? Or what if he became an apostate by participating in pagan religious sports events? (2 Corinthians 6:14-17) And therein lies the danger today. Many things in modern sports philosophy compromise Christian principles and ideals, as do those who practice such philosophy. How so?
Winning Is Not the Only Thing
Powerful pressures are generated in sports today. For example, vast sums of money are being paid openly or covertly to all kinds of athletes. Recently a U.S. football player signed a contract guaranteeing him $40 million. For that kind of money, and even lesser amounts, the athlete has to deliver​—victories. He has to pull in the cash-paying public and the TV advertisers.
These top athletes are the patterns, the role models, for millions of children and young people. Their aggressive, competitive attitudes percolate down to the lower levels of sports participation. Thus the saying “Nice guys finish last” reflects the negative psychological effects of much of modern sports.
The implication is that to be a winner you usually have to be merciless and violent. It is no exaggeration to say that these attitudes are prevalent even at school levels. John McMurtry, a former football player in the Canadian League, wrote: “Progressively and inexorably, as I moved through high school, college and pro leagues, my body was dismantled. Piece by piece. . . . It is arguable that body shattering is the very point of football, as killing and maiming are of war. . . . Competitive, organized injuring is integral to our way of life, and football is one of the more intelligible mirrors of the whole process: a sort of colorful morality play showing us how exciting and rewarding it is to Smash Thy Neighbor.”
The role model for Christians, Jesus Christ, exhorted his followers: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.” “All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must likewise do to them.” (Matthew 19:19; 7:12) The win-at-all-costs driving force that motivates so many sports today is obviously incompatible with the teachings of Christ. A balanced person does not have to win every time in order to enjoy healthy participation in a sport. That may be difficult for some to understand, but surely it is a matter of focus. Sports should be a health-promoting, relaxing pastime. Certainly for the average amateur, participation should bring its own satisfaction. Otherwise, why would thousands participate in athletics if there can only be a handful of satisfied winners? The vast majority know they cannot win. For many, their pleasure is in having participated and having finished the race.
The competitive spirit leads to divisions, pride and bragging. Then the dignity of the loser is not respected. Because of this worldly spirit, Christians would not want to be involved in competitive leagues, not even among themselves. Neither would they want to play one Christian congregation against another in any sport. Remember, regardless of current philosophy, winning is not everything. As James Michener wrote: “Losing a game is not equivalent to death. Failing to be numero uno does not make me a lesser human being.”
Far more important than any accomplishments in the field of sports are the qualities we develop as imitators of Christ. Defeating others in a sport does not make us better people. We might even become worse. As the apostle Paul counseled: “Let us not become egotistical, stirring up competition with one another, envying one another.” “But let each one prove what his own work is, and then he will have cause for exultation in regard to himself alone, and not in comparison with the other person.”​—Galatians 5:26; 6:4.
[Picture on page 11]
The pagan Olympian ceremony is repeated in modern times

