An Excellent Provision
1 The above words fittingly describe not only our new Live Forever book but also the timely arrangement to begin considering this material at the Congregation Book Study this month. No doubt all have read the book through. Hundreds of thousands of copies have been placed in the field during the past few months. It is being used effectively in conducting many home Bible studies. How appropriate it is now for this publication to be used in the Congregation Book Study. Everyone is encouraged to attend regularly each week and enthusiastically share in the joyful feast of spiritual good things.—Matt. 5:3, 6.
2 A reasonable amount of material is being allotted for study each week. This will give everyone, including children, an opportunity to participate freely. Time should be allowed to read and discuss thoroughly some of the key texts. All of us, especially the conductors, should diligently prepare, acquainting ourselves with not merely the answer to each question but also “the reason of things.” (Eccl. 7:25) If we do, each week our group study will result in increased knowledge, understanding and faith.—Prov. 14:6; 2 Pet. 1:5.
3 In addition to strengthening our faith, our weekly study will equip us with talking points for use in the field ministry. You may have already developed effective illustrations or enjoyed interesting experiences. At times there may be opportunity to work in helpful field points briefly that will contribute to making the study lively and progressive. The Congregation Book Study should help us to become even more effective teachers.—Compare Proverbs 27:17.
4 The book study is also an excellent provision for acquainting our Bible students with Jehovah’s organization. Invite them to attend regularly and experience an interchange of encouragement while also growing in knowledge. (Rom. 1:11, 12; Heb. 10:24, 25) Regular attendance each week will help them to draw closer to the congregation and build faith in God’s Word.
5 Consider some of the thought-provoking subjects for discussion: Chapter 1 contrasts life in this dying old system with the beauty of living in Paradise. We are impressed with its reality! Chapter 4 describes in detail the grandeur of Jehovah, the reasonableness of his existence and the magnificence of his personality. Later chapters build on this foundation so that we can develop a personal relationship with Jehovah that will benefit us both now and in the future. This excellent provision will heighten your conviction as to the truths found in the book, You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth.

