Announcements
● Literature offer for June and July: The book “Let Your Kingdom Come” may be offered for 75c. Otherwise, any 192-page book may be placed. When publishers meet persons with limited education, those who speak a foreign language or parents who have young children, the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! may be offered for 25c. The brochure has also proved to be effective in witnessing to persons who are deaf.
● Literature offer for August and September: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for $2.50. If this is not available, use My Book of Bible Stories or any other book currently in stock.
● Presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation accounts on June 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● One of the dramas to be presented at the “Kingdom Unity” District Convention is based on Nehemiah, chapters 1-6. It is suggested that everyone read that material in preparation for the drama.
● New Publications Available:
My Book of Bible Stories—Irish, Kosraean, Ponapean
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry—English, Spanish
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1982—English
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Korean
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
Aid to Bible Understanding (A-Z)—English
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Genesis (set of four; congregation and public: $6; pioneers: $5)—English
The First to the Corinthians (single cassette)—German
Beware of Losing Faith by Drawing Away From Jehovah—Drama (single cassette)—Spanish
My Book of Bible Stories (four cassettes in album; congregation and public: $8; pioneers: $6)—French, Spanish
● Pressure-sensitive labels for identifying Kingdom Recordings cassette albums as either “Greek Scriptures” or “Hebrew Scriptures 1” are now available upon written request. Please enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope, and the two self-adhesive labels will be mailed to you free of charge.
● The Society now has available the following three booklets in grade-two English Braille: In Search of a Father, From Kurukshetra to Armageddon—And Your Survival, and The Time for True Submission to God. These one-volume booklets may be obtained on a loan basis and returned, or they may be purchased and kept permanently. If purchased, a remittance of $1.00 each should accompany all orders. Send orders for Braille items to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK; they are not included on regular congregation literature orders. Braille publications should not be stocked by the congregation.

