Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
Note: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Each congregation may make adjustments to allow for attending the district convention and then for a review of the program highlights on the Service Meeting the following week.
WEEK STARTING MAY 29
Song 28
12 min: Question Box and Announcements. Encourage all families to share in field activity the first Sunday of the month.
 8 min: “Drinking—Do You Share the Bible’s View?” Talk by qualified elder based on April 15, 1983, Watchtower, pages 25-27.
10 min: “An Excellent Provision.” Enthusiastic discussion between book study conductor and assistant. Encourage all to prepare diligently for each study and attend regularly. Encourage congregation to invite newly interested ones. Briefly incorporate suggestions from School Guidebook, page 36, paragraph 11.
15 min: “‘How Will They Hear . . .?’” Questions and answers. Allow time to read and discuss key scriptures and selected paragraphs.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 5
Song 38
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
10 min: Since many will be attending the district convention or otherwise traveling, it is a good time to look for opportunities to do informal witnessing. Mention various situations and suggest what type of approach might get good results. (See 1983 Yearbook, pages 169, 170.) Relate one or two local experiences. Take literature with you so you will have it available. Be sure to note time spent and placements so it can be reported at the end of the month.
15 min: “United Supporters of God’s Kingdom.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraphs 4 and 5, encourage the congregation to relate personal experiences resulting from sharing in formal and informal witnessing while attending conventions.
12 min: “Put It in Writing!” Discussion between two elders based on February 8, 1983, Awake! article. Highlight need for all to follow this direction. Encourage all to participate in magazine activity on Saturday, as this will be second Saturday of month. Announce other field service arrangements.
Song 57 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 12
Song 60
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: Consider material in book Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, from subheading on page 8 to end of chapter on page 12. Questions and answers.
12 min: Assist Those Who Have Disfellowshipped Relatives. Talk by qualified elder based on “Questions From Readers,” January 1, 1983, Watchtower, pages 30 and 31. Highlight need to lovingly encourage faithful family members of disfellowshipped persons. They have special need.
 8 min: Consider experiences local publishers and pioneers have had in placing “Kingdom Come” book and new brochure. Encourage youths who are now on summer vacation from school to arrange to have a full share in the field service. Some may be able to auxiliary pioneer. Review local arrangements for weekend field service.
Song 77 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 19
Song 96
12 min: Local announcements. “Were You There?” Talk based on May 15, 1983, Watchtower related to district conventions in the southern hemisphere and elsewhere.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Goal of Starting Studies.” Question-and-answer discussion. On paragraph 7, arrange for a brief demonstration to show how a study might be started using the Live Forever book. If time permits, include an experience showing how a former opposer finally demonstrated interest.
10 min: Prepare locally according to needs or consider “Young People Ask . . . Does It Really Matter What I Wear?” from December 22, 1982, Awake! pages 13-15. Show how Bible principles discussed can be applied by both young and old.
 8 min: Encourage support for magazine work on the fourth Saturday. Briefly mention some articles that might be featured in either the June 15 Watchtower or June 22 Awake!
Song 110 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 26
Song 97
 8 min: Local announcements. Remind congregation to prepare for family witnessing on first Sunday of the month.
15 min: Making Good Use of Our Magazines. Talk and audience discussion. Compare congregation’s average monthly magazine placements with number of magazines ordered. Are magazines piling up in the congregation or at home? Discuss variety of contributing factors: need to review quantity ordered, failure of publishers to pick up magazines. Emphasize the importance of each one getting out in the field service regularly and enthusiastically offering the magazines at every door.
10 min: “What’s Happening With Video Games?” Family discussion of November 8, 1982, Awake!
12 min: Be Ready to Give an Answer. Discuss and demonstrate common objections met in the field. We should not be easily dissuaded from our purpose in sharing life-giving message of truth. After entertaining audience comments, have well-prepared demonstration of practical suggestions. Include brief experiences of good results in overcoming objections.
Song 68 and concluding prayer.

