Presenting the Good News—With the Goal of Starting Studies
1 Jesus commanded his disciples to be preachers. (Matt. 10:7) A preacher is defined as one who speaks in public, usually offering religious advice. Later, Jesus made it clear that they were to be more than just preachers. They were to become teachers, ones who show how, train, give lessons. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Preaching would make others aware of the Kingdom message, but in order to make disciples it is necessary to teach, and that means starting and conducting home Bible studies.
2 Paul told his brothers that they “ought to be teachers in view of the time.” (Heb. 5:12) The present times are critical. We are being trained to be teachers. Have you made progress in this area? Our primary means to teach others is through Bible studies. Are you sharing in this activity? If not, is there more you could do to start a study so that you can share in teaching others?
3 Our attitude largely determines our success. Some say their territory is unresponsive and there is little hope of finding sincere ones who will study. Without realizing it, they may have judged those in their territory as unworthy of help. Yet, we can all recall examples of bitter opposers who have later on accepted the truth.—Gal. 1:13, 23.
4 All of us would like to find joy in what we do, especially in the disciple-making work. What brings the greatest joy? Not simply an impressive report. Genuine joy comes from helping others. Paul described those whom he had assisted as his “joy.” (1 Thess. 2:19, 20) We find joy in diligently searching for ones who want to know Jehovah. Once we locate them, we will use our abilities to the full to present the message in the most understandable, appealing manner possible. Where there is response, our goal is to convey some Scriptural truth that will touch the person’s heart. Keeping a record and making definite plans to return will confirm our sincere concern. This positive mental attitude assures that we, too, will reap “great joy” in our ministry.—Acts 15:3.
5 A positive approach may determine how much we accomplish. If we really want to help someone, we can usually find a way. Genuine love does not give up easily. (1 Cor. 13:7) A positive attitude shows we are sincere and convinced that what we have is good. If we offer to study with others and mean it, that in itself may produce a favorable response.
6 Jesus had a positive mental attitude. He was moved by genuine love for others. (Matt. 9:36) He felt very strongly about doing his work well. (John 4:34) He was convinced that the truth could change people’s lives. (John 8:32) He was willing to sacrifice his own comfort to help them. (Mark 6:31-34) Everything he did in his Father’s service reflected the happiness that he promised would come from giving. (Acts 20:35) How appropriate that we earnestly ask Jehovah to help us be like Jesus!—1 John 5:14.
7 Jehovah continues to make fine provisions to help us in the ministry. The book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth is especially designed to help both teacher and student. Its eye-catching appearance makes it easy to place. The material answers many questions that are on the minds of people everywhere. Its concise and simple message is appealing to the heart. Colorful illustrations bring Bible events to life, making a vivid impression on the mind. In what better way could Jehovah answer our request for his aid in becoming teachers? Of course, it is Jehovah who brings the increase and he is due the praise for what is accomplished. However, if we maintain a positive attitude, take advantage of the help he provides and do the best we can with our abilities, then we will receive our own reward as God’s fellow workers.—1 Cor. 3:5-9.

