United Supporters of God’s Kingdom
1 Our brothers worldwide are united in their support of God’s Kingdom. They are not adversely affected by factors that divide worldly groups and organizations, including Christendom. That is why the psalmist stated: “Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” (Ps. 133:1) Jehovah’s people today are experiencing this condition, and during June we will have many opportunities to reflect joy in demonstrating our Christian unity.
2 The “Kingdom Unity” District Conventions scheduled for the United States will be held within a six-week period during the months of June and July. By now all of us should have made plans to attend one of these conventions, and we are no doubt anticipating a rich spiritual feast. (Mal. 3:10) Such gatherings will serve to demonstrate that Jehovah’s Witnesses are a united people. They also provide occasions for us to strengthen the unity of our Christian brotherhood. While listening to the convention program, make note of suggestions given that will strengthen our brothers worldwide.—Eph. 4:3; 1 Cor. 1:10.
3 Not only do we want to attend the “Kingdom Unity” District Conventions but we want our Bible students and other interested persons to attend as well. Would it not be a cause for joy if all of those who were present at the Memorial celebration this year were also in attendance at the conventions this summer? They could observe firsthand the unity of Jehovah’s people. They would receive information enabling them to take a definite stand for the truth. This is necessary if they are to become united with God’s people in proclaiming the Kingdom message to others.
HAVE FULL SHARE IN FIELD MINISTRY
4 This summer, arrangements will be made for field service on Thursday afternoon, following the conclusion of the session. This will give all the opportunity to share in the field ministry during the early evening. Make plans in advance and invite others to work with you. Family groups especially will want to participate together. Many fine experiences have been enjoyed by those who have shared in it in the past.
5 In addition, look for opportunities to witness while traveling to the convention each day. Talk to others while at hotels or motels, restaurants, or on other occasions. Carry an extra supply of books, magazines and tracts with you for use when interested persons are contacted. If you will be attending a convention near the end of the month, be sure to report your field service activity promptly to your home congregation.
6 During the months of June and July we will be offering the book “Let Your Kingdom Come.” As you will recall, this publication was considered at the Congregation Book Studies during the first six months of 1982. It contains information that will acquaint honest-hearted persons with God’s Kingdom and the blessings that it will bring to mankind in the near future. If we meet persons with limited education, individuals who speak foreign languages or parents with young children, the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever may also be offered. Plan to have a full share in the door-to-door work during the month, directing interested persons to the Kingdom hope.
7 June will prove to be a full month of activity. May we make good use of the time, whether we are assembled together with those of like faith or participating in the field ministry. We will want to demonstrate the spirit of true Christian unity and brotherhood as we work shoulder to shoulder in loyally supporting Jehovah’s Kingdom. The results will be truly rewarding!

