‘How Will They Hear . . .?’
1 The greatest worldwide Kingdom proclamation ever undertaken will soon draw to a close. (Matt. 24:3, 14; Mark 13:10) Our times are exciting and marked by a sense of urgency as we accomplish our God-given commission. Our ministry should be both progressive and expansive as we consider not only the quality but also the quantity of our service. Why so? Because there are still scores of individuals and families scattered throughout our territories who have not had an opportunity to hear the message of faith. Since “faith follows the thing heard,” how appropriate the question: “How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?”—Rom. 10:14, 17.
2 A number of congregations have assigned territory that is not frequently worked. It may be in either distant rural areas or nearby city territory. To work such territory may require not only a little more effort and time but also additional expenditure of money. If your congregation has territory that is worked less frequently than desired, what can be done to correct this? How can other congregations and traveling overseers help?
3 With pleasant summer weather ahead, congregations should concentrate on covering all unworked territory. A strong desire to work hard and make careful advance preparation is needed. (Neh. 4:6; 1 Tim. 4:10) Good results are being enjoyed by witnessing with magazines during the late afternoon or early evening hours. Our objective should be to herald the Kingdom message throughout the territory as quickly as possible. Notations can be made only of the interest shown for appropriate follow-through by return visits or letters. Why not organize car groups and plan full days of service, perhaps one weekend out of the month? Get an early start. Driving time can be used to discuss the text and have a practice session along the way. Prepare a lunch to take with you and make the best possible use of the time. Perhaps some could pool their resources, thus sharing the expense so that no one person will be unduly burdened. How fine it is to ‘slave for the furtherance of the good news’!—Phil. 2:22.
4 There is also much that you can do to aid congregations in your circuit or neighboring ones. The circuit overseer is responsible for coordinating activity to ensure complete coverage of all territory. If you desire to assist, inform the elders and they can contact the circuit overseer to ascertain where a need exists.
5 All of us can share in this vital work. Families may decide to take a vacation or weekend excursion to an area where the territory needs to be covered. Some car groups might be willing to cover distant areas. Older publishers can be invited even though they may be limited in the number of homes they can work. Those unable to travel a great distance might be able to assist in nearby territory that for some reason has not been worked recently. Think of a way that you, too, can help others to hear the good news!
6 Experienced publishers and new ones alike can enjoy the challenges that accompany Kingdom preaching in such unique circumstances. In some rural areas it may be practical to obtain a detailed county map showing all roadways and the locations of homes. Plan to cover the territory systematically to accomplish the most good in the time available. Cooperation among congregations, zeal for the ministry and good organization of efforts will help toward getting all congregation territory worked at least once a year.
7 We all share a responsibility for the lives of people in our territory. (Ezek. 33:6-9) Your call may be one of the last opportunities for ‘those who are rightly disposed for everlasting life’ to become believers. (Acts 13:48) We have been sent forth to preach to all who will hear. So, let us do so “as out of sincerity, yes, as sent from God, under God’s view, in company with Christ.”—2 Cor. 2:17.

