





YOUNG PEOPLE ASK
How Important Is Online Popularity?




A teenager named Elaine says: “When I saw that my schoolmates had hundreds of online followers, I thought, ‘Wow—they’re popular!’ Honestly, I was a little jealous.”
Have you ever felt that way? If so, this article can help you avoid getting caught up in the quest for online popularity.
What are the dangers?

“An illusion of popularity”

How important are followers and likes?

Beware of the “humble brag”





What are the dangers?

At Proverbs 22:1, the Bible says that “a good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth.” So it’s OK to want a good reputation—even to want others to like you.
But sometimes a desire for acceptance turns into a craving for popularity. Could there be a danger? Onya, 16, would say yes:
“I’ve seen people do crazy things—like jump off a second-story ledge at my school—just to become popular.”

To get the attention of their peers, some people even film their foolish stunts and post them online. For example, a number of teenagers uploaded videos of themselves eating laundry detergent pods—small capsules that contain toxic substances—something that no one should ever do!
The Bible says: “Don’t do anything from . . . a cheap desire to boast.”—Philippians 2:3, Good News Translation.
To think about:
  How important is online popularity to you?

  Would you risk your health or your life to gain the attention and approval of your peers?
What your peers say





“Popularity becomes dangerous when people have a do-​whatever​-it​-takes attitude, thinking that if they talk, dress, or act a certain way​—even online​—they will become popular. Popularity isn’t worth the cost of compromising your beliefs and principles.”​—Leianna.








“An illusion of popularity”

Efforts to become popular do not always involve going to risky extremes. Erica, 22, notes how some people use another strategy:
“People will post highlight after highlight of their life, making it appear as if they had an endless list of close friends that they constantly spend time with. It creates an illusion of popularity.”

Cara, 15, says some people use deceit to create that illusion:
“I’ve seen people stage photos that make it look as though they were at a party when they were really at home.”

Matthew, 22, admits to having done something like that:
“I posted a picture and tagged the location as Mount Everest, even though I’ve never been to Asia!”

The Bible says: “We wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.”—Hebrews 13:18.
To think about:
  If you use social media, do you resort to deception to boost your popularity?

  Do the pictures and comments you post really reflect who you are and what you stand for?
What your peers say





“Some people will do whatever it takes to get more likes. But what do you want to be known for—talking and dressing inappropriately or showing off the things that you own? Or would you rather be known for your good qualities or your genuine interest in others? Being liked gives you a good feeling, but make sure it’s for reasons you can be proud of.”​—Hannah.








How important are followers and likes?

Many people believe that the key to online popularity is to have an extraordinary number of followers and likes. Matthew, quoted earlier, admits that he used to feel that way:
“I would ask people, ‘How many followers do you have?’ or ‘What’s the highest numbers of likes you’ve ever received?’ To raise my follower count, I would follow random people, hoping that they would follow me in return. I developed a greed for popularity, and social media fanned the flames of that greed.”





Online popularity is like junk food—it feels good for a short time but does not leave you satisfied



Maria, 25, observes that some people judge their entire self-worth by the number of followers and likes they receive:
“If a girl’s selfie doesn’t get enough likes, she concludes that she’s ugly. That’s a wrong assumption, of course, but many people in that situation would react the same way. In a sense, they are cyberbullying themselves.”

The Bible says: “Let us not become egotistical, stirring up competition with one another, envying one another.”—Galatians 5:26.
To think about:
  If you use social media, do you find that it causes you to compare yourself with others?

  Do you place more importance on a follower count than on developing genuine friendships with people who care about you?
What your peers say





“To be popular online you have to become someone that other people admire, and that usually means becoming like them. That can make you focus too much on how you’re viewed by others and how you can appeal to them. Wanting to be liked is normal, but focusing on popularity can turn that desire into an obsession.”​—Joshua.








Beware of the “humble brag”
Have you ever noticed how some people boast of their accomplishments but disguise it as a complaint?
  “Since I got my brand new car, people just won’t stop asking me for a ride!”

  “I can’t stand the way everyone keeps complimenting me for my weight loss!”


The speaker adds an element of complaint to appear humble—even in the midst of a brag.
Warning: That method of bragging, or boasting, usually backfires, because people can see right through it. And because the humble brag is insincere, people often dislike it more than they do the outright brag.
The next time you post a comment or a photo on social media, beware of the humble brag. Follow the Bible’s wise advice: “Let someone else praise you, and not your own mouth.”—Proverbs 27:2.


Review: How can you avoid the trap of online popularity?
  Make sure that what you post online accurately reflects who you are and what you stand for.

  Be honest in how you present yourself online.

  Maintain a balanced view of followers and likes.




