





YOUNG PEOPLE ASK
What If I’m Bored?




To some people, there’s nothing worse than being stuck at home on a rainy afternoon with nothing to do and nowhere to go. “At times like that,” says a young man named Robert, “I just sit there, not knowing what to do with myself.”
Have you ever felt that way? If so, this article can help you!
What you should know

What you can do

What your peers say





What you should know

  Using technology might not help.
Surfing the Internet can be a way to pass the time, but it can also stifle your imagination and thus contribute to boredom. “You find yourself mindlessly staring at a screen and not really engaging your mind,” says Jeremy, aged 21.
A young woman named Elena would agree. “There’s only so much you can do with technology,” she says. “It distracts you from the real world, so that when you put your device down, you’re bored with life even more!”

  Attitude makes a difference.
Will simply having a lot to do stave off boredom? Much depends on your level of interest in what you are doing. For example, a young woman named Karen recalls: “School was very boring to me, even though I had things to do all day. You have to be engaged in what you’re doing in order not to be bored.”


Did you know? “Nothing to do” is not an obstacle but an opportunity​—fertile soil in which creativity can grow.




Time on your hands is fertile soil in which your creativity can grow






What you can do

Broaden your horizons. Meet new friends. Start a new hobby. Research new subjects. People with a variety of interests are less likely to find it boring to be alone​—and less likely to be boring when with others!
Bible principle: “Whatever your hand finds to do, do with all your might.”​—Ecclesiastes 9:​10.
“I recently began learning Mandarin Chinese, and practicing daily has made me realize that I really missed that kind of learning. I love having a project to work on. It keeps my mind engaged and helps me to use my time productively.”​—Melinda.

Focus on your objective. If you see a purpose in what you are doing, your interest in it will increase. Even schoolwork can be less boring when you see your objective.
Bible principle: “There is nothing better for a man than to . . . find enjoyment in his hard work.”​—Ecclesiastes 2:​24.
“Toward the end of my schooling, I was studying eight hours each day because I needed to catch up. Boring? Not when I set my mind to it. I kept focused on the end result​—graduation​—and that spurred me on.”​—Hannah.

Accept what you cannot change. Even the most exciting pursuits will have at least some monotonous aspects. And even the best of friends will sometimes cancel plans, leaving you with nothing to do. Rather than becoming a victim to your circumstances and surrendering to negative feelings, try to adopt a positive attitude.
Bible principle: “The one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast.”​—Proverbs 15:15.
“A friend told me to learn to enjoy my alone time. She said learning to balance being with others with being by yourself is a valuable life skill that everyone should master.”​—Ivy.




What your peers say





“I used to envy people who seemed to have such exciting lives. Then I realized that they were just ordinary people who did things. So I started doing things. I took up hobbies and researched interesting topics. As you expand your knowledge of the world, you become more fascinated by it and boredom goes away.”​—Hannah.






“In my early teens, I tried to cure boredom by playing video games. As I got older, though, I found that video games can actually be counterproductive. They keep you occupied, but when you’re finished you have nothing to show for it. I found better ways to fill my time.”​—Caleb.






“I used to feel that my days were long and boring, but I eventually learned that if I want people to reach out to me, I need to reach out to them. I started doing that, and it helped a lot. Now, I actually appreciate those moments of ‘boredom,’ because they’ve become so rare!”​—Micaela.



