Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
For all of Jehovah’s people recent months have been exceptionally busy. At the Brooklyn headquarters, in all the branches and throughout the worldwide field, brothers have been working hard and exerting themselves. (1 Tim. 4:10) As a result much has been accomplished, due mainly to Jehovah’s blessing upon our united efforts. It is evident that he has been making things grow.—1 Cor. 3:6, 7.
Last March a dedication program was held at Brooklyn Bethel in connection with the new office annex. Members of the Bethel family in Brooklyn and at Watchtower Farms had the opportunity to tour the factory and new office facilities. They saw some of the new equipment and changes now in operation. Also, at the present time, construction of a new addition to the existing factory at Watchtower Farms is under way. This will accommodate more presses to care for our printing needs.
In recent months new branch facilities have been dedicated in Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan and Korea. Four members of the Governing Body were privileged to share in these programs. The brothers in these lands are thrilled to see the work moving ahead and are prepared to give an even greater witness concerning the Kingdom.
All of us rejoice in the new peaks reached during April in various features of the ministry, including the total number of publishers.
New publisher peaks were reached during April in Austria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France, Greece, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Spain, Sweden, Venezuela, West Germany and 15 other lands. In quite a number of countries April was the best month thus far in reporting total hours, return visits, home Bible studies and auxiliary pioneers.
With overseers taking the lead, publishers and pioneers everywhere are demonstrating a zealous spirit in developing new interest and directing Bible students to the organization. Also, there is no question that the house-to-house ministry is reaching more of the ‘deserving ones.’ (Matt. 10:11) What a grand privilege we have to be engaged in this holy work of the good news!—Rom. 15:15, 16.
Your Brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

