Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 1
Song 57
12 min: Local announcements, including encouragement to share in weekend field service. “A New Color Calendar for 1983.” Encourage all to order promptly.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—Using My Book of Bible Stories.” Question-and-answer discussion highlighting unique advantages of this book. In considering paragraph 6, arrange for a brief demonstration showing how to initiate a conversation and point out features of the book. As time permits, invite audience to relate experiences which illustrate how effectively it can be used in helping others.
15 min: Use time for local needs, or have an elder give a talk on the article “An Educated Tongue—‘To Encourage the Weary’” found in the June 1, 1982, Watchtower, pages 9-14. Explain how all of us can apply this admonition in our efforts to help those who have become depressed.
Song 95 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 8
Song 91
 5 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Youths—Serve Jehovah With Loyalty.” Upbuilding discussion conducted by an elder. Invite parents and young ones to express themselves as to how the admonition can be applied. Emphasize the responsibility of young people to fulfill their role in the family and congregational arrangement by being obedient and willing participants in the field ministry.
10 min: “Young People Ask...” Capable brother discusses with audience how this feature of Awake! might be used in your territory. Demonstrate how magazines could be offered using talking points from article in the latest issue. Encourage younger publishers to share in magazine work on second Saturday.
15 min: Loyalty to Jehovah While in School. Elder interviews some young people about situations in school where they are confronted with pressures designed to undermine their faith and morals. Young people are invited to explain what Bible principles they would consider when questions arise about (1) dating, (2) engaging in sports, (3) attending social functions, (4) patriotic ceremonies or (5) other situations common locally. Refer to Youth book, chapters 8, 16-19.
Song 65 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 15
Song 45
15 min: Local announcements. “Let’s Get Acquainted.” Interview two or three individuals about how they became acquainted with the truth. Highlight blessings of getting to know one another by personal association as opportunity affords.
15 min: “Directing Interest to the Organization—Part I.” Talk and audience discussion. Capable teacher, preferably Watchtower conductor, explains why there is a need to include such instruction in our Bible studies. When considering paragraph 5, invite some who conduct studies to relate what they have done in this regard with good results.
15 min: Pioneering—A Worthwhile Goal. Invite regular or auxiliary pioneers to explain how they feel they have been rewarded by putting forth the effort to pioneer. Highlight joy and peace of mind that come from knowing we are doing what pleases Jehovah. Now that children are about to return to school, encourage sisters to consider enrollment. Review some of the practical suggestions offered in the March 1, 1982, Watchtower, pages 27, 28.
Song 32 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 22
Song 38
10 min: Local announcements, and other local needs.
20 min: Appreciating the value of personal study. Panel discussion preferably under direction of school overseer. Review many far-reaching benefits that come from good study habits. Consider helpful suggestions offered in the School Guidebook, chapter 7. Group can discuss the following questions: (1) What practical suggestions will help us regularly prepare for congregation meetings? (2) How can we keep up with reading the new magazines and other publications? (3) How can we do research on Bible questions? Recommend good study habits that use the minimum amount of time to achieve maximum results.
15 min: Talk by elder on “Questions from Readers” appearing in the March 15, 1982, Watchtower, page 31. Encourage participation in magazine work on fourth Saturday.
Song 31 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 29
Song 59
10 min: Local announcements and main points of article “Preview of Fall Circuit Assembly.”
15 min: Presenting the Truth book during September. Talk and demonstration. This book has been published by the Society in more languages than any other. Review talking points that can be used in offering it. Show how Topic for Conversation can be developed using material in the book. For example, arrange for publisher to demonstrate using material in chapter 1, paragraphs 8-10. A special effort should be made to follow up placements so as to start Bible studies; offer suggestions on how to do that.
20 min: Fulfilling and Glorifying Our Ministry. Discussion by two or three elders with service overseer as chairman. Consider Branch Letter and “A Fine Memorial Report.” Review outstanding features of congregation’s preaching activity during the past service year. Give commendation and offer suggestions on what can be done to improve in the coming year. Discuss any local problems which tend to limit participation and suggest ways to cope with them. Encourage all to share in service on the first Sunday.
Song 107 and prayer.

