Part I—Directing Interest to the Organization
1 The spiritual development of newly associated ones involves their demonstrating a love of Bible truth accompanied by deep appreciation for Jehovah’s organization and its provisions. (Ps. 33:12; 119:97) Our progressive, regular study with new ones should therefore accord honor to Jehovah and his orderly arrangement for worship. If we faithfully call attention to the organization’s role in our lives, we will prove to be effective Kingdom teachers on Bible studies and stimulate the student’s further growth.
2 If our teaching is to be effective in producing true disciples of Christ, then we must faithfully help interested persons to recognize and appreciate Jehovah’s organization. Many Kingdom proclaimers have enjoyed encouraging results from systematically directing attention to the organization. What methods can you employ to stimulate interest in congregation meetings? How can our Bible students progressively become better acquainted with the organization? What helpful ideas can be used to remove any apprehension new ones may experience before going to the Kingdom Hall for the first time?
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS
3 From the initial study develop the habit of speaking about the organization every week. The student should come to see your total involvement with the truth, affection for your brothers and respect for Jehovah’s arrangement. Speak of the brothers by name and take other enthusiastic ones with you to the study. This can contribute to a lively and progressive weekly discussion. In time, the student may well reflect your own appreciation and enthusiasm for the Christian congregation.—Luke 6:40.
4 What can be done to remove any fears new ones may have about attending meetings for the first time? Some experienced publishers have found it helpful to explain the purpose and function of the Kingdom Hall. After one interested family had refused many invitations to congregation meetings, the brother conducting the study found it convenient to take this family to the Kingdom Hall at a time when meetings were not being conducted. They got a tour of the facilities and from that time forward began attending meetings. His discernment and initiative helped him to overcome an obstacle in getting these new ones to the meetings.
5 This aspect of our home Bible study activity is not difficult to do, but it does require a measure of forethought and planning. However, this need not be very time-consuming. Consider the personality of the student as well as his response to Bible truths thus far. With this information in mind you may wish to develop a five to ten minute Scriptural discussion regarding the organization. If you are acquainted with experienced publishers who have enjoyed success in helping Bible students to attend congregation meetings, why not take the initiative to ask them for workable ideas and suggestions? In time you will have a wealth of material to effectively employ in conducting your studies.
WHY BENEFICIAL
6 If we fail to channel the student’s attention to the organization, we inhibit his progress toward genuine discipleship. He must appreciate that the doctrinal truths being learned find their source, not in us, but in the Scriptural worldwide arrangement of worship Jehovah is using and blessing. Help your students develop the conviction of heart that will impel them to associate with us. (Zech. 8:20-23; 1 Cor. 14:24, 25) Imitate Jesus and enthusiastically direct honest-hearted ones to Jehovah’s visible organization. Future issues of Our Kingdom Ministry will outline additional suggestions, including use of the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century in directing interest to the organization.

