Presenting the Good News—Using My Book of Bible Stories
1 My Book of Bible Stories has filled a need. Parents interested in teaching their children needed a book designed for that purpose. The Society saw that need and filled it. The book is simple but not childish. Its large print is appreciated by both young and old. Its many pictures are appealing to young minds. The short stories, related in a colorful manner, hold attention of youngsters. Children need something that extracts the lessons and principles from a Bible story and explains them in a way that young minds can grasp.
2 After finding it difficult to conduct a family study, one parent that started using the book happily told us: “My children and I now find it a great pleasure.” Obviously pleased, a mother wrote: “My five-year-old never fails to bring the book to me at bedtime.” After a few studies with her children, another parent happily observed: “It is amazing how much their little minds can grasp!”
3 We have also heard from youngsters who like the book. One told us that “it makes the Bible come alive!” A teenager related: “When I started reading it, it was very hard to put it down.” An eight-year-old exclaims: “It is my favorite book ever since I have been living!” A ten-year-old expressed appreciation for the book saying: “I would like to have faith in Jesus like his disciples.”
4 These expressions should encourage us to make good use of this book. Can you think of opportunities to offer it informally to others? Some youngsters have taken it to school and placed copies with their classmates. A number of teachers have taken copies and some of them have later read stories to their classes. Numerous placements have resulted from simply showing the book to visiting friends or neighbors. Offering it as a gift to relatives or workmates has accounted for many placements. One brother was able to start many conversations about the Bible simply by displaying and reading the book during his daily ride on public transportation.
5 When offering the Bible Stories book from door to door, many feel that if they can get it into the hands of the householder, it will virtually place itself. Its modest cost is appealing. Many adults find its simple, direct approach to the Bible to be refreshing; do not hesitate to offer it to them. If older persons you meet have other interests, offer any one of the 192-page books.
6 How could you start a conversation using the book? You might ask: “Do you think the earth will ever be a happy and peaceful place to live?” Turn to story 71 and relate highlights from Isaiah 11:6-9 or Revelation 21:3, 4. Or, you might pose this question: “Do you find it difficult to explain the Bible to your children? If so, this book can help you. Let me show you how it can help you to explain the meaning of the Lord’s prayer.” Review the highlights of story 91.
7 Also, remember that the entire text of this book is now available on cassette tapes. Parents have found them ideal for teaching the Bible to children who have not yet learned to read. What an excellent way to help them develop their reading ability, and at the same time, learn the fundamentals of God’s Word. The use of these tapes may divert their attention away from the unwholesome television programming which causes parents so much concern. When making return visits on families who have shown interest, inform them of the cassette tapes and describe their practical value.
8 So, My Book of Bible Stories has filled a need. It can help us fulfill our God-given responsibility to rear our children “in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” We will find cause for real joy in being able to impart “the comfort from the Scriptures” that can bring our children a sure hope for the future.—Eph. 6:4; Rom. 15:4.

