From Our Readers
Saved From Suicide
I called on a young lady who previously had accepted an issue of Awake! She said: “I’m going to take these magazines again because one of them saved me from suicide. I read an article on suicide and it kept me from taking my own life.” (August 8, 1981) She explained that she left home, got pregnant and felt that the only way out was suicide. Now that her life has been spared she has decided to have her child and keep it rather than give it up for adoption.
J. R., Brazil
About a Budget
Just this past October my husband handed me the family money to care for, and I was frightened at the responsibility at first. I managed to get along all right once I got organized. But what a help I found in your article in the April 8, 1984, Awake! “Do You Spend More Than You Earn?” This article has shown me how to be more thrifty and has relieved a lot of stress by showing me how to plan my budget.
M. B., Washington
The Pope on the Move
Your issue of December 8, 1983, was one of the most appealing, absorbing and sensitive in recent memory. Your critical analysis of the Pope’s spiritual, political, moral and social activities was authoritative, balanced, sane and backed by an array of insurmountable Biblical facts. It exposes with conviction the fallacies and dangers of modern Catholicism. Awake! has once again enhanced its stand as the true light of the entire family irrespective of the latter’s “spiritual ideology.”
C. N., Ghana
Along with you, I, too, deplore the state of affairs in our Catholic Church. Along with many other Catholic Christians, however, I draw a completely different conclusion. We try to take measures against this state of affairs, rather than trying to find weaknesses among Jehovah’s Witnesses. Your presumptuous criticism of Christ’s earthly representative will accomplish just the opposite of what you want it to.
H. J. S., Germany
You all loved it, didn’t you? You couldn’t resist taking a shot at the Catholic Church, could you? I will never forgive the way you mercilessly tore down the Pope. If Jehovah’s Witnesses must refer to cheap shots in attempting to bring down other religions, they’re in more trouble than the Catholics.
M. C., Florida
We surely were not trying to take cheap shots at the pope or the Catholic Church, nor were we criticizing Catholics. The Catholic Church occupies a very significant position in the world and claims to be the way of salvation for hundreds of millions of people. Any organization that assumes that position should be willing to submit to scrutiny and criticism. All who criticize have the obligation to be truthful in presenting the facts and fair and objective in assessing such. In both respects we try to live up to that obligation.​—ED.

