Announcements
“TELL THE GOOD NEWS FROM DAY TO DAY”—Ps. 96:2.
To tell good news one must have good news to tell. Jehovah’s witnesses have the very best of good news to tell, for they are the bearers of the message of salvation through God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus. Delighting to share the good news of salvation with others, Jehovah’s witnesses are happy to be able to “tell the good news of salvation by him” from day to day. (Ps. 96:2) Throughout the month of December all of Jehovah’s witnesses will joyfully participate in house-to-house ministerial service at every opportunity, in order to have the greatest possible share in telling to all who will listen the good news of salvation. In addition to an enlightening and helpful three- to eight-minute Bible sermon, a Bible-study aid book and booklet will be offered on a contribution of only 50c. Be sure to join in telling the good news of salvation to others at every opportunity.
DAY-BY-DAY REFRESHMENT
When the old passes away, everyone looks forward to the new. That is true of the year now closing and of the one just ahead. Many amazing things have taken place during 1957, but especially is this true of the work of Jehovah’s witnesses and their activity world-wide. Every day of the year and in all parts of the earth, east, west, north and south, in the heat or cold, they keep on proclaiming the good news of God’s kingdom. Never has a year produced such wide-spread results. You will enjoy the 1958 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses as you consider the heart-warming experiences they had this past year. Each day of the new year you will find inspiring and instructive reading, not only in this fascinating report but in the daily consideration of the scriptures and comments taken from issues of The Watchtower of the past year. A companion to the Yearbook is the 1958 calendar, which displays the year’s Bible text and additional Scriptural periods and themes. Send 50c for the Yearbook and 25c for the calendar.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
January 12: Deliverance for Integrity Toward God, ¶1-15. Page 748.
January 19: Deliverance for Integrity Toward God, ¶16-30, and Examples of Keepers of Integrity, ¶1-3. Page 752.
January 26: Examples of Keepers of Integrity, ¶4-24. Page 758.

