From Our Readers
HELP FOR HOMOSEXUALS
My husband and I contacted a 50-year-old man. When his subscription to “Awake!” delivered the issue dealing with homosexuality, it moved him to confide his life-style to us. His sincerity moved us to start a study with him. We have spent considerable time going over the articles in “Awake!” that have dealt with this subject during the past 14 years. We have shared these articles with him a number of times. Since he says he has never known any to change completely, the experiences in two issues have been of real benefit to him to see it is possible. These experiences have also enabled us to understand what a struggle it must be for him. We thank you for these articles and experiences. Such articles dealing with homosexuality, incest and other subjects are really giving many the added encouragement they need to change and to know that others have coped. It is our prayer that you will continue to discuss such subjects in future issues. It must bring you great joy to know how many lives are being affected by such articles.
R. & B. C., Alabama
COPING WITH DEATH
I really appreciated your article “A Death in the Family​—How Can You Cope?” A short time ago my little nephew passed away. We were hurt, but the comfort Jehovah gave us by means of the friends gave us the strength to endure. Also, we really experienced the truthfulness of what was written under the subheading ‘Another Powerful Help.’ The family is now getting back in shape. We appreciate all the information and encouraging articles in the magazines.
R. Y., Florida
READING THE BIBLE
I especially want to thank you for your suggestion about reading the Bible through in a single year. I started in January by reading three chapters a day, and, beginning with October, four a day. By the end of the year I just finished the last three chapters. I am so pleased that I plan to continue the same procedure next year and in future years as well. The regular reading of the Bible has helped me to fulfill my duties better, and has given me the opportunity to encourage others to read the Bible regularly too.
R. P., Germany
SUICIDE
I take this opportunity to suggest that you focus on a subject which, in my opinion, you have neglected. It is “Child Suicide.” I consider this problem, which has been on the increase these last few years, to be very urgent, and hope for your understanding. In all fairness, let me add that the ‘neglected subjects’ in your magazine are definitely in minority!
G. E., Denmark
We agree that this problem is serious. Please see “Awake!” of August 8, 1981, for a consideration of suicide, including some reference to the problem of youth suicides.​—ED.
SOLVING WORLD PROBLEMS
I was especially happy about your article entitled “A Sick World​—Can It Be Cured?” The articles are written in such a clear, timely and convincing way that anyone who reflects on the matter just a little should be able to recognize that God’s kingdom alone can solve the worldwide problems facing us and bring mankind everlasting peace.
F. V., Germany

