A Fine Program of Spiritual Instruction
1 The Theocratic Ministry School program that has been arranged for the 1975 calendar year will furnish us with an abundance of spiritual food. All of us will want to benefit from it fully.
2 The schedule has been so arranged that, for any given meeting, much of the material will be drawn from Aid to Bible Understanding and one pocket-size book. You will doubtless want to bring these publications, along with your Bible, to the school, with the exception of written review nights.
3 As you look at the schedule, you can see what a wealth of fine material we will cover in the months to come. Even though we have been using the Aid book for four years, a vast storehouse of rich spiritual food still remains to be tapped in that publication. So we will continue to make good use of it. Toward the latter part of the year our Bible reading assignments will take us back into the Christian Greek Scriptures, to consider the faithful example of our Lord Jesus Christ! The talks based on Is This Life All There Is? can aid us greatly in exposing religious error and in building up others’ faith in the dependability of God’s promise of everlasting life. Additionally, we will practice discussing God’s view on matters of current interest in the world, such as ESP, pornography and mercy killing. Faith strengthening will be the discussions based on experiences of Jehovah’s servants in this century who maintained integrity and were strengthened by his spirit to endure under very trying circumstances. Our reviewing the Organization book in the school will do much to enhance appreciation for the loving way in which Jehovah is dealing with his servants today. And the material from the Word of God book can equip us to reach people who doubt the authenticity of the Bible. All of that is included in our school program for 1975!
4 When you are scheduled to give talks, you may not be able to use all the material. But be sure to develop the main points. To this end, read the material carefully and then determine what the main points are. A good selection of main points (perhaps three or four) and choice supporting arguments from the material will result in talks that are the most beneficial for everyone present.

