Daily Exulting in Jehovah
1 Doesn’t it warm your heart when you think of the marvelous year of blessings we have experienced as Jehovah’s dedicated Christian witnesses? Our heavenly Father has been good to us in so many ways and, as our 1974 yeartext has pointed out, we have been able to exult in Jehovah despite earthly hardships.​—Hab. 3:17, 18.
2 Reflecting on what has happened during the calendar year, we realize that there have been many hardships world wide, and our brothers, too, have been affected by them, including such things as food shortages, economic instability, runaway inflation and disasters from storms and earthquakes. Nonetheless, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness we as a people have been extremely joyful. Indeed, our faith has been sustained day by day by remaining close to Jehovah through a study of his Word, meditating on it, sharing it with others and persisting in prayer.
3 Appropriate to the fact that we exult in Jehovah is our literature offer for December. We will be featuring the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the book Is This Life All There Is? Keep in mind, too, that, for persons who may want them, you can obtain the large-print edition of the New World Translation, The Kingdom Interlinear Translation and The Bible in Living English.
4 Also, during December, we will be having four public talks on the new book Is This Life All There Is?, and in the first two service meetings outlined in this Kingdom Ministry many of its excellent field points will be featured. Be sure to bring your copy of the book to these two service meetings. Surely this will prepare us to present this book and the Bible to the people. What benefits they will receive as they read the Scriptures and rejoice in what Jehovah’s Word has for all of us in these critical and yet thrilling times!
5 Using the Bible and the This Life book in combination, you may want to turn to the illustration on page 24, and, after showing the householder this illustration and explaining it briefly, you can read Psalm 90:10. Thereafter, you may want to say: “As you can see, the Bible recognizes the way things are relative to our life-span today. But is this the way it will always be? Please note what is said in this regard at John 17:3, pointing to the hope of everlasting life in a righteous new order.” Then read John 17:3. As a suggestion, why not use a new copy of the regular edition of the New World Translation and Is This Life All There Is? and, after doing what is suggested above, hand them to the householder, saying that these copies can be his for just $1.25. If the householder wants only the new book, then, of course, we will accommodate him.
6 As we approach the new year full of anticipation, we will continue to exert ourselves and exult in Jehovah day by day, realizing that he is directing all things to his glory.​—Ps. 145:2.
[Blurb on page 1]
Exult in Jehovah Despite Earthly Hardships.

