Presenting the Good News​—During the Watchtower Campaign
1 Just ahead of us is the thirty-seventh annual Watchtower campaign. Jehovah’s servants everywhere greatly appreciate the Watchtower magazine with its timely counsel, its explanation of “the deep things of God.” (1 Cor. 2:10) Whether we are newly associated or have been serving Jehovah for many years, it is not difficult to recall many new and good things we have learned from its pages. Truly it is one of the foremost instruments that Jehovah is using today in progressively revealing the marvelous truths in His Word.​—Prov. 4:18.
2 Appreciating the spiritual blessings we have received from The Watchtower ourselves, we want to see that it regularly reaches as many households as possible. To do this effectively will require good organization and preparation, both individually and congregationally. This year the Society is assisting all of us to use a fresh, attention getting Scriptural presentation with each issue of The Watchtower during the campaign. Yes, we can take the title of the first Watchtower article and the scripture featured in bold type with the opening article of each issue during the campaign and use these as the basis for a brief presentation. Thus we can have a presentation tailor-made to the magazine we are offering, showing the householder the spiritual benefits of The Watchtower.
3 For example, the January 1, 1975, issue on page 3 has the article “Why is it So Hard to Make a Living?” We could begin our presentation by asking the householder that very question. Let him comment. Then turn to page 4 and, pointing to the scripture that is made prominent there, say that things have gotten so bad in some places in the world that they are fulfilling what the Bible, in Revelation, foretold, namely, “A whole day’s wage for a loaf of bread.” (Rev. 6:6, Weymouth) Use such appropriate boldface headings as “What is Behind It?” and “What Can You Do About It?” to show what the article discusses. Also, direct attention to the last page of the article, with the subheading “What the Future Holds,” showing what is ahead as outlined in the Bible. Briefly comment, not only on the impending “great tribulation,” but also on the grand prospects of God’s new order.
4 Conclude by showing the need to learn the permanent solution, since these very conditions show that this system is soon to end, and the importance of being on God’s side. Knowledge is necessary, and The Watchtower is the foremost magazine presenting good news of God’s established kingdom. Its refreshing and encouraging message can come twice monthly for a year at a cost of only $1.50.
5 You may find when reading the article that there are other points that you would like to use. Fine. Use what works for you. Read from the Bible where you can, but in many cases you may prefer to read scriptures right from the article. This same method can be used with the issues to follow.
6 At the meetings for field service during the campaign a brief review of the opening articles in the current Watchtower will prove most stimulating to all. Also you will find it beneficial to practice presentations at home. Then we will be able to enjoy one of the finest campaigns yet. Think, too, of the excellent spiritual blessings that will flow to those who are enabled to receive the faith-building information in The Watchtower and Awake!, to their benefit and to Jehovah’s glory.

