Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 8
10 min: Song 64. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Daily Exulting in Jehovah.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate points in paragraph five.
20 min: Getting Acquainted with the This Life Book (Part I). Purpose of this part, and one for following week, is to highlight a number of outstanding field points contained in publication. There are basically two groups of people we meet these days: (1) Those who are indifferent, apathetic, materialistic, scientifically oriented. (2) Those who still have respect for the Bible or at least have some belief in its message. (Analyze material in light of type of people found in your territory and spend more time on what would be of greatest benefit locally. When certain pages of book are part of upcoming public talk assignment for that week, give these only brief coverage, encouraging audience to take note of details when the talk is given.)
Chairman asks group of prepared publishers the following questions: How might we try to reach the hearts of indifferent, materialistic people? (Pp. 5, 6, 12-16) What points could be used when talking to those who are curious about the occult, communication with the dead, etc.? (Pp. 74-78, 85-88) What might we show to people who are distressed by present world conditions? (Pp. 137-143, 160-166) Publishers use points from book to answer. In doing so, might refer to specific pages in This Life book, doing so at a pace that will allow audience to take note of points for future use. Include any good experiences had when using particular material from book.
Urge brothers ahead of time to bring “This Life” book to first two service meetings scheduled in this “Kingdom Ministry,” to gain most benefit.
15 min: Concluding comments. (Include accounts report but not necessary for brother caring for accounts to handle this.) Include appropriate observations from Branch Letter. Urge brothers to bring This Life book to service meeting next week and tell them how they can prepare for next week’s presentation. Song 72.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 15
15 min: Song 75. Introduction, text and comments. Work in local experiences enjoyed thus far in using Bible-book offer, also some items from Theocratic News.
10 min: Holiday Witnessing. Chairman relates special problems in witnessing at world’s holiday time, slanting recommendations to local circumstances. We need brief presentation when circumstances require it so as not to irritate householders. Be discerning and adapt to circumstances met at each door with view to leaving householder in good frame of mind insofar as it depends on you. When they are busy you might say: “Since you are busy, I would just  like to mention that we are offering this translation of the Bible written in the language we speak today, together with a Bible study help that really answers the question ‘Is This Life All There Is?’ on a contribution of $1.25.” When persons wish you “Merry Christmas” or the like, there is no need to get into a discussion of the origin of Christmas. Rather, simply acknowledge their well-meant greeting with a friendly smile and a “thank you” as you go on to the next door. Our goal is to win hearts and we can best do that in the house-to-house work by talking about the blessings of God’s kingdom wherever possible.
20 min: Getting Acquainted with the This Life Book (Part II). Book has excellent arguments and logic designed to help us overcome objections that come up often in the field service. For example, what can we say to people who feel that everlasting life on earth would be boring and impractical? First, ask householder why he feels that way. Allow householder to reply. (May express such thoughts as, ‘We would run out of things to do,’ or, ‘Without sickness and death or some problems we would lose appreciation for the good things in life.’) Publisher can reply: ‘Do we really need sickness so as not to become bored with good health? People do not lose joy in living because they feel well, do they?’ Also, can point out that likely there are many things we would like to do in our lives such as developing some talent in music, painting, sculpture or learning something about woodwork, mechanics, designing or architecture. But life is so short. We need time to do these things and only God’s arrangement for everlasting life on earth would provide that time.​—Pp. 144-150.
Present this material so the brothers can learn how to overcome objections in a kind reasoning and logical manner, utilizing points from the book and Bible. As time permits, invite audience to comment on following questions. If some are especially needed in your territory you may also want to demonstrate them. (1) How can we answer the objection that humans had an existence prior to their present life and will continue to live after they die? (Pp. 53-60) (2) What might we say to people who think that if humans lived forever, tremendous overpopulation and food shortage would result? (Pp. 134-137) (3) Is there a solid hope for the dead? For those who accept the existence of God why should there be no problem in having a firm belief in the resurrection? (Pp. 166-175) Main thing is to acquaint brothers with this excellent material, featuring that which will be most helpful locally to get through to the minds and hearts of house holders so they can profit from our conversation with them. (Give only brief coverage to points that will be handled in public talk for that week.)
15 min: Concluding comments. If new Yearbook has arrived, comment on pages 257-259. Also arrange for witnessing on December 25; encourage discernment; call at times that will least disturb householders on December 25 and January 1. Song 74.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 22
20 min: Song 73. Introduction, brief discussion of text and stimulating talk on “How Are Jehovah’s Witnesses Different?” Include some audience participation. (Watchtower, Oct. 15, 1974, pp. 629-631)
20 min: “Building Meeting Attendance.” Questions and answers. Conclude with brief, enthusiastic talk based on “A Fine Program of Spiritual Instruction,” and encourage any not yet enrolled in Theocratic Ministry School to do so.
20 min: Concluding comments. Use material from pages 5-14 of new Yearbook. Include appropriate comments on slogan on page 4. Regarding special arrangements for field service on January 1, 1975, publishers may use magazines rather than subscription offer, if desired. Song 82.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 29
20 min: Song 81. Introduction, text and comments, also talk on the question, “Is there any real objection to one of Jehovah’s witnesses ‘dating’ a non-Witness who respects the Christian’s beliefs?” (Watchtower, Oct. 1, 1974 p. 607) Make warm appeal in talk, showing why Scriptural position is best.
15 min: What Jehovah’s Witnesses Are Doing. Talk or discussion based on 1975 Yearbook, page 14, par. 3, through page 32. Encourage publishers to place Yearbook with Bible students, also to make gifts of it to relatives and acquaintances who might read its modern-day history of Jehovah’s witnesses.
15 min: Presenting the Good News. Questions and answers. Demonstrate points in paragraphs 3 and 4.
10 min: Concluding comments. Build up appreciation for special service meeting next week. Song 80.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 5
Please make up your own service meeting. Elders can select appropriate material. As a suggestion, might use some time to discuss new yeartext. See pages 260, 261 of new Yearbook.

