VOL. XXXIII MARCH 1 No. 5 
A.D. 1912-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

The Gospel St. Paul Preached 75 

A Comparison of Religions 75 

God of the Bible the God of All Grace 76 

The Prayers of the New Creation 77 

Answers Often Delayed 78 

Scriptural Rule for Adjusting 

Misunderstandings 81 

Let Us Beware of Busybodying 82 

How to Conduct a Church Trial 82 

Perfection of Organism Not Necessary to 
Trial for Life 83 

100 Years of Trial 83 

The Gospel Only for Sinners 84 

"Thy Disciples Fast Not" 85 

"The Light of the World" 85 

A Better Day Coming 86 

"Which Lighteth Every Man" 86 

Some Interesting Questions 87 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 87 

page 74 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. 
Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please 
address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R4987 : page 74 
"MILLENNIAL BEAN" SEED SUPPLY EXHAUSTED 

The requests for five of the prolific beans for seed by far 
exceed the supply donated by Sister Smith. We have filled 
the orders first received. 

In reply to various inquiries from those who requested 
these seed beans, we are informed by Sister Smith that there 
are advantages in planting them in an onion bed or row— 
at a distance of six feet. An insect, which proves destructive 
to the bean plant, seems to dislike the onions, and is thus 
kept away. After the onions are harvested, the beans grow 
very fast, if the ground is kept loose on the surface. It is 
also suggested that great care should be exercised in gathering 
the pods, not to injure the bushes, by pulling, or breaking 
off the leaves. If the first crop of beans is allowed to remain 
on the bushes until fully ripened, there will be no additional 
yield and the bush will die. If they are to bear repeatedly, 
the pods must be removed as soon as large enough 
to eat, we are told, and then new blossoms take the place 
of the first crop. 



page 74 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS IN GERMAN 

The Ottawa County "Zeitung," a German weekly newspaper, 
publishes Brother Russell's Sermons in full. Price 
per year with TOWER: domestic, $2; foreign, $2.75, through us. 



R4981 : page 75 

THE GOSPEL ST. PAUL PREACHED 

"For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the 
power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to 
the Jew first, and also to the Greek."— Rom. 1:16. 



THERE ARE MANY religions, and it is a 

mistake that we have perhaps said in the 

past that there is no religion but one. A 

religion would properly be considered "Any 

system of worship by which any people 

recognize the Almighty and seek to do Him 

honor." We are, therefore, to recognize 

the various great religions that are in the 

world in the sense that we could not properly 

ignore them. We have, for instance, 

the Confucian teaching, the Brahmin teaching, the Buddhist 

teaching, the Mohammedan teaching, the Jewish 

teaching and the Christian teaching. These all present 

themselves to us as religious teachings. They all believe 

themselves more or less rational; they all believe themselves 

more or less reasonable. Every man tries to think 

that his own theory on any matter is a reasonable theory; 

and he is proper in so doing. 

In harmony with our text, we propose to compare the 
religion of Jesus with all other religions. In the beginning, 
we state with the Apostle, "I am not ashamed of 
the Gospel of Christ." Whatever may be said of other 
gospels, we believe, as Christians, that in the Christian 
religion we have that of which no man need be ashamed. 
There may perhaps be certain features and forms of 
certain creeds of which we might be ashamed— that do 
not come up to our highest ideals. But the Christian 
religion, as presented in the Word of God, should be the 
Standard of Christendom; and of that we are not ashamed. 
It will compare with all other religions in the world, and 
come off victorious, in every sense of the word. All of 
these various religions seem to recognize that man is in 
an imperfect, unsatisfactory, sinful condition; therefore, 
each of these religions seeks to present certain tenets, 
or teachings, that will help man up out of his imperfect 
condition, back into harmony with his God. 

A COMPARISON OF RELIGIONS 

If we consider the teachings of the Mohammedans, we 
find that they have certain qualities which are very advantageous, 
and other qualities which we could not so 
highly commend. Their endeavor is not to do injury, 
but to make man better. Their theory is that mankind 
are fallen and need lifting up out of their fallen condition. 
The same may be said of the teachings of the 
Brahmin, the Confucianist and the Buddhist. They are 
all more or less presentations of what are supposed to 
be cures for man's fallen condition, cures for his unsatisfactory 
attitude. 

Some of these religions pronounce one kind of a 
penalty for those who will not accept them, and others 
declare other kinds. Some offer one kind of reward for 
those who accept and follow their teachings, while others 
offer other kinds of rewards. But all agree that man 
needs to be elevated and lifted up out of his fallen condition, 



which is sinful and unsatisfactory. There seems 

to be in every man, naturally, without any education on 

the subject, something which tells him that he is not perfect; 

that he is not in full accord with his own conscience, 

not in accord with his own highest ideals of the 

Divine mind. 

All religions, therefore, recognize this principle of sin 
and propose remedies therefor. We see the evidence of 
this as manifested in their disciples everywhere. Many 
seek to crucify the flesh in one form or another— some 
by flagellations, some by restraints upon the various liberties 
of life, some by holding their hands in the air for 
days, seeking to become holy and thus appease their god. 

But none of these things, in the light of the Gospel 
of Christ, seem to be the highest and noblest ideals. 
Doubtless all have done some good and uplifted some 
men out of the degradation in which they were. Mankind 
might have been worse off if it had not been for these 
religions. 

But now, if we compare these with the religion of 
Jesus Christ, we believe everything is to be said in favor 
of the religion of Christ. In the first place, all these 
religions more or less resemble the Jewish religion, which 
is of God, and hence all these religions are more or less 
in harmony with God's proposition. 

God's proposition to the Jews was, "Do these things 
and ye shall live," have everlasting life. That was the 
Covenant made by God with them at Mount Sinai, at the 
hands of Moses. They thought at first that they would 
surely be lifted up out of sin, because God had given 
them a Law, and by keeping it they would be perfect and 
be brought into harmony with God. In this they were 
mistaken, for, as they found out, as the centuries passed, 
none of them were able to keep the Law, because it is 
the measure of a perfect man's ability; and none of them 
could measure up to the perfect man. 

Israel found, therefore, as the Apostle states it, that 
"by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in 
God's sight." And they found also that the Law, instead 

R4982 : page 76 

of perfecting, justifying them, and giving them 

eternal life, brought to them a greater realization of sin 

than they ever had before. And this was the real blessing 

of the Law Covenant— it showed them their sinful condition 

and their inability to lift themselves out of it. 

But the Jews do not recognize that great fact today, for 

if they did they would be crying to God for mercy instead 

of hoping to keep the Law and thus justify 

themselves. 

The same thing might be said to be true of all the 
heathen religions. All offer help by which mankind may 
make themselves perfect, but none are able to make themselves 
perfect, and they all realize that they are sinners 
and imperfect to the last degree. There is, therefore, 



nothing that is logical in any of these religions, because 
they all start out to claim that a man ought to be perfect, 
ought to be holy, and are agreed that he is not. As 
before called attention to this agrees with the words of 
God with respect to Israel, "By the deeds of the Law 
shall no flesh be justified in His sight." God's Word 
agrees with all of these— that man is a sinner, that he 
cannot do the things that he would, that his ideals are 
to be and are higher than his capacity and ability. And 
so St. Paul declares, "We cannot do the things which 
we would." 

ALL THE RACE SOLD UNDER SIN 

Christianity answers that the reason is that we are 
fallen creatures, sold under sin. Who sold us, when and 
where? The Bible answers that "By one man's disobedience 
sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and 
so death passed upon all men." Death has passed upon 
the entire race and thus impoverished it mentally, morally 
and physically, so that now, because of the fall, we 
cannot do the things which we would like to do. 

The Bible tells us that originally Adam was not in 
our condition, but was perfect and could keep the Divine 
Law perfectly, but that "we are sold under sin." And 
so the Prophet David expresses the same thought, "Behold, 
I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother 
conceive me." So we behold that we are a race of sinners, 
imperfect mentally, morally and physically, and 
therefore unable to keep the Divine standard or Law. 
What, then, does Christianity offer us that no other religion 
offers us? Christianity offers us a Savior, and no 
other religion offers a Savior. 

Christianity recognizes that the condition came about 
by the disobedience of one man, Adam, and it sets forth 
Jesus as the One who redeems man from that death sentence 
that came upon our first parents: "As by a man 
came death, by a man comes also the resurrection of the 
dead"; "For as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive," writes St. Paul— "every man in his 
own order." Here, then, Christianity has a logical superiority, 
in that it provides for a satisfaction of Divine 
Justice. 

All religions say that it is Divine Justice that is opposed 
to sin, but Christianity offers a satisfaction for 
Divine Justice. "Christ died for our sins"; "He gave 
Himself a Ransom for all"; "He is the propitiation [satisfaction] 
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world," writes the Apostle. So, 
then, Christianity is not only more logical, but is more 
just— it recognizes Divine Justice. 

We must recognize that if God condemned the world 
understandingly and truly, as the Great Judge of mankind, 
there must be some satisfaction of Justice ere the 
Chief Justice of the Universe could set aside the penalty 
and release the culprit. Man has sinned and the great 



Chief Justice has passed the sentence, and there is no 
way to revoke that sentence, except by meeting it. And 
so Christianity sets forth that our Lord Jesus came into 
the world to meet the penalty, and that He, "by the grace 
of God, tasted death for every man."— Heb. 2:9. 

Christianity has another superiority over all other religions, 
and it is this: it recognizes a love and compassion 
upon the part of God that no other religion recognizes. 
All these religions do recognize a God, and we claim it 
makes very little difference whether they call Him Allah, 
or Jehovah, or some other name. They recognize, we 
believe, the same, one God, but they do not recognize His 
real traits of character. They perceive His Justice, and 
their own transgressions of Divine Justice, but they do 
not see the merciful provision that God has made. Their 
God is represented by the Chinese idol, which pictures to 
them the character of God. 

We remember a Chinese banner we once saw. The 
figure on this banner represented a very demon-like character, 
and lightning was represented as flashing from his 
closed fist. He was a god to be feared, one who would 
take vengeance upon them. 

THE GOD OF THE BIBLE IS THE GOD OF ALL GRACE 

The God of the Bible, however, while just, is not a 
vengeful God, not unkind; but, on the contrary, He is 
the God of All Grace, the Father of Mercies, from whom 
cometh every good and perfect gift. And the great Gift 
that He gave is the greatest of all gifts, the Gift of His 
Son, for man's sin, that thus He might offer a satisfaction 
to His own Justice. Nor was this arbitrarily at the 
expense of, or contrary to the will of the Redeemer; because 
the Scriptures make clear that it was by virtue of 
the "prize" set before our Lord; as we read, "For the 
joy that was set before Him, He endured the cross, despising 
the shame."— Heb. 12:2. 

This love of God is not content with merely the provision 
of the Savior, and the arrangement that if anybody 
shall hear and believe he shall be blessed; but this love 
of God proposes to go still further, namely, that He who 
thus redeems the race shall become the King of earth; 
and His scepter, His rule, shall be "from sea to sea, and 
from the river to the ends of the earth," until "every 
knee shall bow and every tongue confess" to the glory 
of God; and "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth as the waters cover the great deep." Thus 
every creature shall come to know that there is a God, 
and that the way He proposes to be just and merciful 
is through His Son, who is to be the great Deliverer of 
the race. 

In what way will this great Deliverer come? This is 
a part of the Gospel, a part of the "good tidings." It 
will be through His great Kingdom, which He will set 
up in His own due time. His Kingdom will not be merely 
for the rich or powerful, but for the poor also: "He shall 



lift up the poor from the dunghill," is a part of the 
prophecy. His power and influence will be the great 
moving principle that will level the whole world of mankind. 
As the Scriptures declare, all men are on a common 
level before God, for all have sinned and come short 
of the glory of God, and all are recipients of Divine 
mercy. 

The blessing of the Lord will be that all may come 
back; and when thus brought back to all that was lost 
in Adam and redeemed by Christ, they will be able to 
keep the Divine Law perfectly, and will therefore to all 
eternity be in covenant-relationship with God. For those 
who refuse to enjoy that blessing prepared for them, the 
Scriptures clearly declare that God has provided the 

R4982 : page 77 

Second Death— not a place of torment— "The soul that 
sinneth it shall die"; "The wages of sin is death." 

"THE CHURCH OF THE LIVING GOD" 

"But," someone may say, "what about the Church? 
You have been speaking about the world and what Jesus 
will do for it; what about the Church?" Those of us 
who have experienced this Salvation know that as a 
power it has not lifted us physically to perfection, but 
it has a power that has come into our hearts, into our 
minds, through faith, transforming, renewing us— our 
minds, our wills. The Lord's true people were once aliens, 
strangers and foreigners to the Lord, but by a knowledge 
of the Savior have become transformed in their lives, 
so that now they are seeking to walk, not after the flesh, 
but after the spirit, the spirit or mind of God, the Divine 
will. 

Here we see the difference between the Jew under his 
Covenant of Law and the Christian under the higher 
Covenant that the Lord has made at the present time. 
The Apostle said that the Jew could not do the things 
that he would; but he declares equally strongly that "the 
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit."— Rom. 8:1. 

How is this possible? Are we better than the Jews? 
Are we of less fallen nature than the Jews, or made 
perfect? Nay, verily. The Apostle explains that for the 
class called out during this Gospel Age there is a special 
arrangement in operation, and God deals with these according 
to their minds, their wills, their intentions, so 
that under this Covenant of Grace we are counted as 
fully keeping the Divine Law— the righteousness, the full 
meaning of the Law, is fulfilled in us who are walking 
not after the flesh but after the spirit— not up to the 
spirit, but after the spirit. 

But how could we be fully justified if not able to 
walk up to the spirit? The answer is that the blood 
cleanses us and commutes our sins; Christ imputes His 



perfection and righteousness to us, so that our best endeavors 
are accepted in Jehovah's sight as perfect, for 
we are justified, not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit. 

Another way in which the Gospel of Christ is superior 
to all others is that this Gospel is world-wide. No other 
Gospel of which we have knowledge is world-wide. The 
Gospel of the Son of God is that "Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man," rich and poor, 
Jew and Gentile, every nation and people and kindred 
and tongue. "There's a wideness in God's mercy like 
the wideness of the sea." We know of no other religion 
that is so unbiased, that recognizes no national lines, that 
has the thought that we are one race, which sprang from 
one man, condemned through one man, and redeemed 
through the Man Christ Jesus, and that all are to have 
a blessing— no other religion under the sun! 

The religion of Christ, of which we are not ashamed, 
is best in this, that it is the most God-like religion, because 
of its breadth, because of its justice, because of its 
impartiality, because of its love, its goodness and merciful 
qualities. It shows forth, as does no other religion, the 
Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power of Jehovah, our God. 
To Him be glory and honor and dominion forever! 



R4983 : page 77 

THE PRAYERS OF THE NEW CREATION 

PRAYER TO GOD, communion with Him, 

is a great privilege and an evidence of His 

favor. God does not grant us this privilege, 

however, in order that He might be 

informed of our desires, for since we are 

imperfect ourselves our desires cannot be 

perfect: "We know not what things to 

ask for as we ought;" and He does for 

us better than we know how to ask or think. 

Nor does God permit us to pray to Him 

that we may inform Him regarding matters here; for He 

knoweth the end from the beginning, as well as every 

intervening step. But He has instituted prayer for our 

benefit and comfort and instruction. 

The object of prayer is to bring the heart and the 
mind of the child of God into contact with the heart of 
God, that he may be enabled thus most fully to realize 
the Fatherhood of God, His love and His deep interest in 
every item of our welfare; that in deep affliction we may 
unburden our hearts to God and thus have forcibly 
brought to our attention His love and care and wisdom— 
for our encouragement, not His; for our strengthening, 
not His, and for our joy. 

This opportunity is not for us to instruct Jehovah 
how to arrange matters for the best, but to bring our 



hearts to realize Him as the Center of wisdom and power, 
that having unburdened our hearts, we may be prepared 
to listen for His answer and advice through His Word. 
And he whose knowledge of prayer is confined to the 
meager information he has imparted to God with "much 
speaking," and who has never learned to listen for the 
answer to his prayer from the Word of God, has, as yet, 
measurably failed to appreciate the object of prayer. 

Earnestness in God's service will bring His children 
to Him frequently, to realize at His feet His sympathy 
with them in the difficulties, discouragements and trials 
of life, as well as to ask His guidance and overruling of 
every affair of life, and through His Word to hearken 
to His wisdom, which will enable them to serve Him 
acceptably. 

The province of prayer is to ask for only such things 
as God has already declared Himself well pleased to 
grant. And while we may freely speak to Him as a 
Father, and tell Him how we understand His Word, and 
the confidence and trust we have in its ultimate fulfilment, 
yet we must not only avoid telling the Lord of our will 
and our plans, and what we would like, but we must avoid 
and put far from us any such spirit, and must recognize, 
and bring ourselves into full accord with His will and His 
plan for accomplishing it. If this thought were appreciated, 
it would cut short some of the "long prayers," 
"much speaking," and "vain repetitions" by which some 
endeavor to instruct the Lord in their wishes regarding 
every matter under heaven. It would send them speedily 
to the Word of God to search diligently the Plan of God 
that they might labor as well as pray in harmony with it. 

While assuring us that the Father cares for us, and 
is well pleased to have us come to Him with sincere 
hearts, the Master informs us of the conditions upon 
which we may expect an answer. He says, "If ye abide 
in Me, and My words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye 
will, and it shall be done unto you."— John 15:7. 

"ABIDE IN ME" 

The conditions of the above statement, or promise, are 
two; the first is, abiding in Christ. But what is it to 
abide in Christ? Only those can abide in Christ who are 
in Christ, who have come into Him by faith, repentance 

R4983 : page 78 

and consecration; and to abide in Him means that the 
faith will abide, the repentance for sin and the opposition 
to it will abide, and the consecration to the Lord and His 
service will abide, and it will be manifest that our will 
has been wholly consecrated— swallowed up in the will of 
Christ. 

The other condition is also a weighty one: "If My 
Word abide in you." Ah! how evident it is that our Lord 
meant to associate Himself and His Word, the Scriptures, 



in the minds, in the hearts, in the lives of all who are 
truly His! They must search the Scriptures to know the 
will of the Lord; to know what He has promised and 
what He has not promised; to know what they may ask 
and what they may not ask; and, ascertaining these, one 
fully consecrated— one controlled entirely by the will of 
God— will not want to be, to have, or to do anything except 
that which will be pleasing to the Lord in respect to 
himself. 

When this position has been reached, the will of Christ 
governing him, the words of Christ abiding in him, we 
can readily see that whatever would be asked by one thus 
well informed with respect to the Divine promises and 
fully submissive to the Divine will would be things which 
the Father would be pleased to grant in answer to his 
requests. 

These requests would probably be as simple as was 
the Master's petition when He prayed, "Not My will, but 
Thine, be done!" (Luke 22:42.) In such a condition 
prayers are always answered; but in such a condition the 
prayers would be very modest. One's prayers under such 
circumstances would be more a thanksgiving for blessings, 
an expression of confidence and trust, and the committal 
of his way unto the Lord, confidently realizing the 
promise that to him under such conditions, all things 
(even seeming disasters and troubles) shall work together 
for good. Hence, whatever came, such a one 
could realize his prayer answered. He could rejoice evermore 
because he is prepared to rejoice in tribulation as 
well as in prosperity, in the path of service. He has no 
will to oppose whatever God permits, knowing that it will 
work out good. 

Such, amongst the Lord's people, could not pray that 
their own will be done; for they have no will except 
God's. Those who abide in Christ, and in whom His 
Word abides, can pray for their enemies and those who 
despitefully use them and persecute them, though they 
cannot pray God to open the blinded eyes of their enemies 
at once, nor in their way. Realizing from the indwelling 
Word of God's promise that the blinded eyes shall all be 
opened to the Truth, they can abide His time. Going to 
God in prayer they may express their forgiveness of their 
persecutor, their interest in him, and their patient waiting 
for the day when "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth as the waters cover the sea"— ocean deep 
—and His will shall be done on earth even as it is done 
in heaven.— Isa. 11:9. 

ANSWERS OFTEN DELAYED 

The answer to our prayer is not always granted immediately; 
but after we have made sure that our requests 
are in accord with the promises, those things which lie 
very close to our hearts become our continual prayer, associating 
in our minds with all of life's duties and interests, 
the heart gravitating continually toward the thing 



we have desired of the Lord, and on suitable opportunities 
repeating to Him the request. This is the kind of 
prayer which the Lord commended, saying, "Men ought 
always to pray and not to faint." (Luke 18:1.) The 
Lord's people ought to continue asking for the right things 
with some degree of persistency, and should not grow 
weary, hopeless, faithless, faint in their hearts. 

Doubtless there are many reasons why the Lord does 
not promptly grant all of our requests which are in accordance 
with His will, in harmony with His Word. We 
may not know all of these reasons; but some of them are 
apparent. Undoubtedly one reason for the Lord's delay 
in answering us is often to test the strength and the depth 
of our desires for the good things that we request of 
Him. 

For instance, He informs us that He is more willing 
to give His Holy Spirit to us who ask than are earthly 
parents to give good things to their children. Yet the 
giving of His Holy Spirit is a gradual process; and we 
are enabled to receive it only in proportion as we are 
emptied of the worldly or selfish spirit. It requires time 
to become thus emptied of self and prepared for the mind 
of Christ; in some it requires longer for this than in 
others; but all need emptying in order to receive the 
refilling. 

He that seeketh findeth, but the more he seeketh the 
more he findeth; to him that knocketh it shall be opened, 
but his continual knocking and his increasing interest in 
the knocking means his increasing desire to enter, so that 
as the door of privilege, of opportunity, swings slowly 
open before him, his courage and his strength increase 
as he seeks to avail himself of the opening. Thus every 
way the blessing is greater than if the Lord were to 
answer the petitions hastily. 

We are to think of our Heavenly Father as rich and 
benevolent, kind and generous, yet wise as well as loving. 
We are to suppose that He will have pleasure in giving 
us the desires of our hearts if those desires are in harmony 
with His plan, which He has already framed on 
such lines as to include not only our very highest and 
best interests, but the highest and best interests of all 
His creatures. Then, whatever comes, His well-informed 
children can have all the desires of their hearts, because 
their hearts are in full accord with the Lord; and they 
desire nothing of the Lord except the good things of 
His purpose and promise. 

"DESIRE, UTTERED OR UNEXPRESSED" 

When thus considered, not as a begging arrangement, 
nor as an occasion of instructing the Lord as to our wills, 
but as a season of union and communion of heart with 

R4984 : page 78 

the Father, in which we may relieve our burdened or perplexed 



hearts and realize Divine sympathy, calling to mind 

Divine promises, reviewing Divine care, and expressing 

our confidence in God's many promises, thus bringing 

those promises afresh and close to our hearts, as though 

God now audibly uttered them in our hearing— thus considered, 

how proper, yea, how necessary is prayer to the 

true child of God! He cannot live without it. To break 

off this communion would be like stripping a tree of its 

leaves; their removal would stunt and hinder its 

development. 

But to suppose that Christian life depends solely upon 
prayer without earnest study of God's Word, is like supposing 
that a tree could flourish from its leaves only, 
without roots and soil. Both are needful. As good soil 
and roots will produce leaves and fruitage, so, likewise, 
the promises of God's Word absorbed by us will naturally 
lead to good works and to communion with God in prayer, 
without which the fruits of the Spirit would soon wither 
and disappear. 

No wonder, then, that Jesus both by precept and by 
example said, "Watch and pray" (Matt. 26:41), uniting 
the conditions necessary to our development. Some pray 

R4984 : page 79 

and neglect to watch; others watch and neglect to pray. 
Both these errors are serious; and it is not possible for 
us to decide which is the more serious neglect, since either 
would work disastrous loss of the great "prize" for which 
we are running. 

Nowhere is prayer defined as a duty, though its necessity 
is stated. The Father desireth such to worship 
Him as worship Him in spirit and in truth (John 4:23); 
and it would be contrary to this principle to define prayer 
as a duty, and to stipulate a set time or place or a formal 
manner. The earnestness of the service and the peculiarity 
of the circumstance will regulate the frequency and 
the subject matter of prayer. 

No form of prayer is furnished in the Scriptures. 
Even the Master, when asked by the disciples for instruction 
on the subject, gave them, not a form to repeat, but 
merely an idea or example of how to arrange their prayers 
to God. He did not say, Pray this prayer, but, "After 
this manner pray ye." Our prayers, then, should be after 
this manner— not an assortment of extravagant demands, 
but the simple expression of the earnest heart: first, 
acknowledging and paying homage to God as our Father, 
the Almighty and Hallowed One; second, expressing our 
expectation and trust that His Kingdom is coming according 
to promise, and our eagerness for it, and for the 
time when His will shall be done on earth as in Heaven; 
third, our reliance upon Him for "daily bread," which 
He has promised us; fourth, our acknowledgment that 
our ways are not perfect and of our reliance upon His 
favor (granted through Christ Jesus) for forgiveness; 
and our willingness to exercise forgiveness toward our 



debtors, toward those who trespass against us. 

"OUR FATHER, WHICH ART IN HEAVEN" 

The term, "Our Father," is one of special endearment. 
The affection of a true father for his child, being one of 
the most precious in the world, is used to illustrate the 
relationship of the Lord's consecrated members to the 
Creator. It is necessary to be some time in the School 
of Christ as disciples, learners, before we are able properly 
to appreciate the meaning of this word "Father" as 
applied to God; but the more we come to know of the love 
of God, which passes all understanding, and the more 
we are enabled to draw near to Him through faith and 
obedience, the more precious will this term Father become. 

"Hallowed be Thy name," expresses adoration, appreciation 
of Divine goodness and greatness, and a corresponding 
reverence. In addressing our petition to the 
Lord our first thought is to be, not a selfish one respecting 
ourselves, nor respecting the interests of others precious 
to us; but God is to be first in all of our thoughts 
and aims and calculations. We are to pray for nothing 
that would not be in accord with the honor of our Heavenly 
Father's Name; we are to wish for nothing for 
ourselves or for our dear ones that He would not fully 
approve and commission us to pray for. 

Perhaps no quality of heart is in more danger of being 
blotted out amongst professing Christians today than this 
thought of reverence for God. However much we have 
grown in knowledge, and however much we have gotten 
free from superstitions and errors, and however advanced 
in some respects is the Christian's position of today over 
that of a century ago, we fear that reverence has been 
losing ground, not only in the nominal church, but with 
many of the members of the one "Church of the Firstborn, 
whose names are written in heaven." (Heb. 12:23.) 
Every loss of reverence is a distinct disadvantage, both 
to the Church and to the world, paving the way to various 
evils, and ultimately to anarchy. 

As God and His glory and honor are to be first in the 
minds of His children, so their next thought should be 
for the coming glorious Kingdom, which He has promised 
shall bless the world. However much our own personal 
interests and affairs may be pressing upon us, and however 
much we may desire to have the Lord's blessing and 
guidance in them, they are not to outrank our appreciation 
of His beneficent arrangements which He has so 
clearly promised in His Word. We are to remember that 
the Kingdom, when it shall come, will be a panacea for 
every ill and every trouble, not only for us, but for the 
whole world of mankind. We are not, therefore, to permit 
our own personal needs to be too prominent, but are 
to remember that the whole creation is groaning and travailing 
in pain together, waiting for this glorious Kingdom 
and the blessing upon all the families of the earth, which 
our Heavenly Father has promised shall yet come through 



the Seed of Abraham. 

This thought respecting the Kingdom, its necessity, 
and the blessings that it will bring will keep prominently 
before our minds our own High Calling to joint-heirship 
with our Lord in this Kingdom. And in proportion as 
that hope is clearly before our minds it will be, as the 
Apostle explains, as "an anchor of the soul, both sure 
and steadfast, and which entereth into that within the 
veil. "--Heb. 6:19. 

This anchorage of hope in the future, in the Kingdom, 
will enable us to pass safely, and with comparative quiet, 
through the trials and storms and difficulties of this present 
evil world. More than this, our thoughts respecting 
the Kingdom will remind us that if we are to be heirs 
of the Kingdom it will be necessary that we have the appropriate 
discipline and training now. This thought in 
turn will make all the afflictions and trials of this present 
time seem to us light afflictions; for we know that they 
are working out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory. Thus the very offering of this prayer 
in its proper order will bring us a measure of relief from 
our perplexities, trials and disappointments before we 
reach the appropriate place to mention them at the Throne 
of grace. 

"THY WILL BE DONE ON EARTH" 

This petition offered from the heart implies that the 
one offering it has made a full consecration of his will, 
his heart, to the Lord; and that as he hopes for the 
Kingdom by and by to come and subdue all unrighteousness 
and to establish the Divine will from sea to sea, and 
from pole to pole, so now, the petitioner, being in accord 
with the Lord's will, and thus wishing that it might be 
universally in control, will see to it that this will is ruling 
in his own heart; that in his own affairs God's will is 
done to the best of his ability in his earthly condition, 
even as he hopes to have it perfected in the Kingdom 
soon to be established. 

No one can intelligently and honestly offer this petition, 
unless he both desires and endeavors to have the 
Lord's will done in himself while on earth. Thus a blessing 
comes to the one who offers this petition before he has 
asked any special blessing upon himself or others. The 
mere thought of the Divine arrangement brings a blessing, 
a peace, a rest, a satisfaction of heart. 

"GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD" 

The thought in this petition seems to be that of continual 
dependence upon the Lord, day by day, for the things 
needed— accepting for each day the Lord's providential 
care and direction of our affairs. Daily bread should 
here be understood in the broad sense of food and raiment 

page 80 



—things necessary. The Lord's people, who recognize 
Him as their Father, must trust Him as children, while 
seeking to use the various instrumentalities and opportunities 
within their reach. They are to provide the 
things necessary for themselves, yet to recognize the 
Divine provision and care which has pre-arranged matters 
so as to make their present conditions and blessings 
attainable. 

Agnosticism and Higher Criticism in general may 
deny, if they please, Divine providence in connection with 
the grains and other supplies for man's necessities; but the 
eye of faith sees behind these supplies the Love, the Wisdom 
and the Power of God, making ready for man's necessities, 
and giving the things necessary in such a manner 
as will be for the advantage of mankind— through sweat 
of face, etc. 

"FORGIVE US OUR SINS" 

To petition the Lord for forgiveness of sins implies 
that we are at heart opposed to sin, and that any sins committed 
have not been wilful; and that the Lord, according 
to His Covenant of grace with us, agrees to accept 
the intentions of our hearts instead of the actual, full, 
complete, perfect obedience to the Divine requirement, 
in thought, in word and in act. This petition, then, signifies 
that we recognize that the Robe of Christ's righteousness 
granted to us has become spotted or sullied; 
and that we desire to be cleansed, so that we may again 
be "without spot or wrinkle or any such thing." This 
cannot refer to wilful sins, for as the Apostle explains, 
"If we sin wilfully, after that we have received the 
knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice 
for sins," and hence, no more a basis for forgiveness; 
and the end of wilful sin is the Second Death. (Heb. 10:26.) 
It is, however, proper to remark that there are 
what might be termed mixed sins— sins in which a measure 
of wilfulness may have combined with a measure 
of ignorance or inherited weakness. 

In the case of such sins the Lord expresses His willingness 
to cancel the wrong upon its being promptly repented 
of; but He reserves to Himself the giving of stripes, or 
chastisements appropriate and necessary to His child as 
an instruction in righteousness and correction of weaknesses, 
etc. 

Happy are they who, with growth in grace and 
knowledge, find their hearts so fully in accord with the 
principles of the Divine arrangement that they will never 
transgress with any measure of wilfulness; but blessed 
also are those who, finding some measure of wilfulness 
in their deflection from the Divine rule, are pained thereby, 
and who, as the Apostle says, are led to discipline or 
correct themselves that they may the more quickly learn 
the lessons, and bring their bodies more completely into 
subjection to the new mind— "I keep under my body and 



bring it into subjection, lest that by any means, when I 
have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway." 
"For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be 
judged."--! Cor. 9:27; 11:31. 

"THOSE WHO TRESPASS AGAINST US" 

As we are imperfect and cannot keep the Divine Law, 
so likewise others are imperfect. As the degrees of deflection 
from the Divine Law vary with the degrees of 
the fall, so also we must expect that the trespasses of 
ourselves and others, one against another, will vary, according 
to the natural temperament, weakness, etc. As 
we realize that we have received, and will still need Divine 
compassion and mercy in respect to our shortcomings, 
so the Lord teaches us that we must exercise similar benevolence 
toward our fellow creatures, both in the Church 
and outside. 

Elsewhere He lays down this rule very stringently, 
that if we do not from our heart forgive those trespassing 
against us, neither will our Heavenly Father forgive us 
our trespasses. Thus the Lord would develop in His 
consecrated people the spirit of the Father, even as He 
instructed us, saying, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father 
which is in Heaven is perfect."— Matt. 5:48. 

Perfection is to be the standard. However far short 
of it we may come, we can have no lower standard; and 
in proportion as we are striving for that standard and 
realize our own weaknesses and imperfections, we should 
have proportionate compassion upon fellow creatures and 
their shortcomings toward us. This is love, sympathy, 
compassion; and whoever does not attain this degree of 
love which will have compassion upon others and their 
weaknesses, and which would be ready and glad to forgive 
them, is deficient in love; and whoever does not 
succeed in this matter to the extent of being able to love 
his enemies, so as to even pray for them, that person fails 
to reach the mark of character which the Lord demands, 
and he may be sure that his own deviations from perfect 
rectitude will not be overlooked; for he is lacking in the 
one important quality of love, which covers a multitude 
of sins of every kind. None, surely, will gain a place in 
the Kingdom class, in the Bride class, except those who 
have this forgiving quality, this quality of love. 

"BRING US NOT INTO TEMPTATION" 

We are to remember the words of the Apostle (James 1:13) 
to the effect that God tempteth no man, and are 
to apply this thought to our prayer. So our prayer will 
not signify that we fear that God will tempt us; but that 
we entreat Him that He may guide our steps, our cares 
in life, so that no temptation, no trial, shall come upon us 
that would be too severe for us; that He may bring us 
by a way in which we shall not be tempted above that 
we are able, and provide a way of escape when we are 



sore distressed. The Apostle assures us that this is the 
Divine will; and that such a prayer would be in accordance 
with it. He says that God will not suffer us to be 
tempted above that we are able, but will with every temptation 
provide also a way of escape. The temptations 
are of the Adversary, and of our own fallen natures- 
through our own flesh, and through the weaknesses of 
others. God is not responsible for these; but He is able 
to guide the way of His people that they shall not be 
overwhelmed in these natural difficulties, weaknesses, 
besetments, nor by the wiles of the Adversary. 

"DELIVER US FROM THE EVIL ONE" 

There never was a time when there was greater need 
of this petition than at the present. The Evil One is 
specially seeking to trap and ensnare the Lord's people 
at the present time; and the Scriptures inform us that 
God is permitting this; and that thus He is sending strong 
delusions upon the world and upon the nominal church. 
Our Father is permitting this because the time has come 
for a complete separation of the "wheat" from the "tares." 
He has promised, however, that those who are truly of 
the "wheat" class— the sanctified in Christ Jesus, who are 
seeking to walk in His steps— shall not be stumbled, shall 
never fall, but shall have an abundant entrance ministered 
unto them into the everlasting Kingdom. The question, 
then, is one of loyalty of heart to the Lord. 

The trial of this "day shall try the work of every man 
[in the Church] of what sort it is." This trial will be so 

page 81 

severe that if it were possible the "very elect" would be 
deceived; but this will not be possible; for the Lord will 
specially care for these. Nevertheless, the Lord will be 
inquired of by His people in respect to these matters 
which He has already promised, and as they pray, "Deliver 
us from the Evil One," they surely will labor in the 
same direction. It is our expectation that very shortly 
now the forces of evil will gain much greater strength 
than at present, "with all deceivableness of unrighteousness." 
Meantime the Lord is staying the adverse forces 
that His true people may put on the armor of God and 
be able to stand when the evil day shall come. 



R4984:page81 

THE SCRIPTURAL RULE FOR ADJUSTING MISUNDERSTANDINGS 

WE CANNOT IMAGINE a case in which a 
brother with average intelligence would 
need comfort and counsel in a misunderstanding 
other than that for which the 



Lord has provided in Matt. 18:15-17. If he 

has been in the habit of seeking sympathy 

in a busy-bodying manner, the sooner he 

knows that his course is wrong the better. 

He should learn to use his own mind along 

lines where there is positive instruction in 

the Scriptures. The Lord says to any one who has aught 

against his brother, "Go and tell him his fault between 

thee and him alone." If the matter is too small to mention 

to the brother, it is too small to notice and should 

be forgotten. 

There are no exceptions to the rule laid down in Matt. 18:15-17; 
but there might be, under some circumstances, 
an interpretation of the rule. For instance, if the matter 
were in a family, there might be circumstances in which 
it would be proper to go to the head of the family. If it 
were in an institution, where the individual might be 
merely a representative of the Society, it would be proper 
to go to the head of the Society. Such a course would 
result from following Matt. 18:15, in its logical trend. 
But these are minor applications of the rule, which is 
neither voided nor avoided, but in applying which wisdom 
is being used in determining how the matter may be carried 
out. 

There is no doubt that much of the trouble in the 
world is the result of misunderstanding. It therefore behooves 
every one of the Lord's people to "put on love, 
which is the bond of perfectness," and to overlook much 
of what others do. (Col. 3:14.) And yet it would be 
proper for one who thinks that he has been wronged to 
go to the offending brother and have a clear understanding. 
To do so would result favorably in nearly every 
case. 

The instruction in Matt. 18:15-17 is given, of course, 
only to the brethren, the Church, and is not, therefore, to 
be applied outside. But whoever learns to apply this rule 
to the brethren will find that it commends itself to his 
best judgment as a wise course of conduct in all the affairs 
of life. Thus his natural inclination will be to apply 
the same principles in connection with worldly matters 
and worldly people. He must, however, use wisdom in 
considering which would be the wise way to deal with 
the world. Some of the deep and precious things which 
belong to the Church the world would resent. So the 
Lord admonishes that we should not "cast our pearls before 
swine." 

While we are endeavoring to do good to all men, yet 
in the case of the brethren there should be no discrimination 
in this matter. We might say, however, that some of 
the Lord's people seem to be unduly and unreasonably 
exercised along some lines. For instance, if a brother 
should find another brother in the Truth who seemed to 
discriminate in his feelings and apparently to be more appreciative 
of another than of himself, he should not take 
offense. He should say, "There are differences of character 
and temperament; and Brother B. might commend 



himself to Brother A. more than would another. All that 
I may ask is that Brother A. shall love me; that he shall 
not hate me; that he shall not do me injury." Nothing 
in the Word of God indicates that the brethren are all to 
be esteemed alike! 

Our Lord Himself showed just such a discrimination 
in His love. He did it, however, "without partiality and 
without hypocrisy." But because of the differences in 
our fallen human nature some of the brethren are more 
congenial to us than are others. We should, therefore, 
be content to have the love of the brethren, and should 
endeavor to merit more of it— and to have our words and 
conduct such as to become more lovable to the brethren 
and thus to draw more of their esteem. The way to do 
this is, not by finding fault with those who do not love us 
up to the highest degree, but by trying to develop that 
character which would merit a fuller measure of love. 

If such a question as this be raised and is not treated 
along the lines of Matt. 18:15, one should advise thus: 
"Brother A. seems to have none but the kindest feelings 
toward you, dear brother." Then if Brother B. says that 
he does not receive Brother A.'s love and companionship 
as does Brother C, one might reply, "Well, my dear 
brother, have we not the right to have a special fellowship 
with one if we do no injury to another? I think that we 
have, and that we have the Lord's example in this direction. 
This does not mean that I should treat you unkindly. 
It is not wrong for a brother to have more or 
less of a preference, providing that he does not use this 
preference to offend another intentionally." 

VARYING DEGREES OF LOVE 

Love is not justice. Love cannot be commanded; it 
must be induced; and there must be a cause for the love. 
It would be thoroughly out of order for any one to tell 
us that we should love God if He were not a lovable 
Being. Similarly, how could we love any creature who 
is unlovely? We love the brethren because we see something 
of God-likeness in their good intentions, and in the 
fact that they have given their hearts to the Lord. 

In a case where the brother's flesh is much fallen, we 
have largely a compassionate love, rather than a loving 
admiration; for only in proportion as we see character-likeness 
to Christ can we truly love His followers. But 
we should regard every brother and every sister with a 
sincere desire to do them good; and the same love, of 
course, should extend, as we have opportunity, to the 
world in general. 

The great difficulty in cases of misunderstanding is 
that the Lord's counsel is not accurately followed. Good, 
honorable brethren, anxious to do right, who apparently 
would be quite competent to advise others, seem to think 
that theirs is a different case— seem not to exercise the 
proper judgment. Instead of going to the brother and 
saying, kindly, "Brother, I have come to see you in reference 



to a little matter, following the advice of Matt. 18:15," 
he, on the contrary, meets the brother and says, 
"Brother, you have done so and so." He goes to the 

R4985 : page 82 

brother, not to be reconciled, but rather, dictatorially, to 
show him that there is something wrong. This is not the 
right way to go about a matter. As surely as Justice is 
the foundation of God's Throne, just so surely are those 
who pursue this course failing to follow the principles 
of justice; they are failing to develop the Lord's character 
and will fail to win the prize. 

The spirit of the Lord's injunction is to help a brother, 
not to twit him, nor to anger him, nor to tease him; not 
to entrap him into saying what he did not intend to say, 
nor to distort the meaning of what he has said. Such is 
not the right spirit. No brother should be approached in 
this manner. But the matter should be considered in the 
most kindly way; and if then— in spite of all that one 
can do— the wrong is continued, we should have nothing 
more to say. Some might say, "He did not apologize." 
The Lord did not say anything about his apology. But 
if he recognizes that he is wrong and fails to apologize, 
he is doing himself injury. 

LET US BEWARE OF BUSYBODYING 

If the second step in Matt. 18:15-17 be found necessary, 
it should be taken only after very deliberate thought 
and prayer, with the desire to make sure of doing the 
Lord's will. First of all, one should make sure that the 
matter is of sufficient importance to ask the brethren to 
go along ! and that it is something against us, not against 
another; that it is not busybodying; that it is something 
that is being done now. If this is the case, take two 
others along. Do not say, "If I ask you to go along, be 
sure to stand by me." We may be the ones in error; and 
if we are we should be more anxious to be corrected ourselves 
than to have the other brother corrected. 

If we make sure that the matter is important, we 
should select two that we think would be friends of the 
brother injuring us— fair-minded, honorable people in the 
Church. Then, after the party has met with the offending 
brother and discussed the case, it would be proper for 
these brethren to advise us. If the advice were something 
that we could follow, we should do so and bring 
peace and harmony. 

But if this course should avail nothing and the injurious 
actions should continue, then it would be proper 
for us to bring the matter to the attention of the Church. 
The two brethren who went with us, and decided with us 
that it was impossible to persuade the evil-doer to alter 
his course, should say to the Elders of the Church that 
they had a case to present for a hearing; but they should 
not make charges. The Church is merely to hear the 



matter, to see whether there is any real cause of complaint. 
But at this stage of the affair they know merely 
that there is a case to be heard. Then the Elders should 
call a special meeting for such a purpose, saying to the 
Church that there is a case to be brought before the Class, 
and asking what time would be convenient for them to 
hear the matter. Then the Church should decide when 
to call a meeting to consider the case. 

This would be the time for the one against whom the 
complaint lodges to say to the Elders, "It is true that 
there were charges made against me by the brother, and 
that two others afterward came with him. But I claim, 
brethren, that the charges are not true, that the matter is 
one of my private concern, and that others have nothing 
to do with it;" or whatever he wishes to say. Then there 
must be brought evidence to show that there is really a 
matter to come before the Church, that it is not merely a 
case of busybodying; for the Church must not meet together 
to participate in busybodying. 

Then it would be proper for the Elders to learn 
enough to decide whether or not the Church would be 
busybodying in this man's affairs— merely enough to inform 
themselves whether it were a matter to come before 
the Church. If they thought that it was not, they should 
say to the offended one, "This brother is not doing you 
an injury." But if either of the parties still thought that 
it should be brought before the Church-that Matt. 18:15-17 
had been followed as far as possible to this 
point— and if the Elders of the Class were unwilling to 
bring it before the congregation, then it would be proper 
for the congregation to determine whether or not they 
would hear the case, and their hearing should be final. 

HOW TO CONDUCT A CHURCH TRIAL 

In any matter heard before the congregation there 
should be an opportunity for each one interested to present 
his side of the case— the one to state his trouble and 
the other to answer. At no stage of the proceedings 
should unkind words be permitted. The person who attempted 
to use them should be considered reprehensible 
on that account, and his conduct worthy of being judged 
a misdemeanor. This course is the one which the Lord 
evidently intended should be followed. The point, however, 
always to be borne in mind is whether people are 
really busybodying in other men's matters— a course 
which should not be encouraged, either by the Class or 
by the Elders. People waste a great deal of time in evil 
counsels, in a manner quite contrary to the Golden Rule 
and to Matt. 18:15. 

If the congregation, after patiently hearing definite, 
positive charges of sufficient importance, finds that notwithstanding 
these various steps the brother against whom 
complaint is made has really been doing wrong and is 
continuing to do so, they should decide that he is guilty 
as charged. The vote of the Church should be unanimous, 



if possible; all partisanship should be ignored. Since they 
are not condemning any one to eternal torment, nor judging 
him in any way, their advice must not carry with it 
any penalty whatever. They are merely advising the 
brother that his conduct is contrary to the Scriptures; 
and that if he does not change his course, they cannot 
longer treat him as one of the Lord's people. 

In disfellowshipping him, they are not to ill-treat him; 
for we do not act so with publicans and sinners. But we 
would not ask a publican or a sinner to take part in the 
service, either as an Elder or as a Deacon or in any 
other capacity; so the offending brother is not to be 
asked to offer prayer, or to do anything that an outsider 
would not be asked to do. Thus the congregation would 
withdraw their fellowship. He is a brother still, but not 
in the best of standing; for he has neglected to hear the 
voice of the brethren in the way that the Lord has 
directed. 

It might be possible, however, for a whole class to 
go astray in its judgment in a matter, and to decide 
against a brother who was in the right. This brother 
might then say, "My dear brethren, I appreciate your 
view in this matter; and I am sorry that anything in my 
course should seem to be worthy of condemnation. I 
promise you that I will modify the matter as best I am 
able. Although in justice to myself I cannot alter my 
view, nevertheless, in respect to your united voices I will 
not in the matter follow my judgment, which I feel is 
the correct one. And if, therefore, I suffer some injustice, 
the Lord will count it to me in the nature of a 
sacrifice for the sake of His Body, the Church. So, then, 
dear brethren, while thanking you for your kindly expressed 

R4985 : page 83 

sentiment, I still wish you to know that it does 

not do me justice. And I think that you will inform me 

of your change of mind on the subject if you ever should 

change." 

If the brother were really in the wrong, he might 
say, "Well, then, put me out!" The Class might say, 
"We are not putting you out. Do not say that you will 
withdraw from us. We will not take your remark for 
your answer. We hope that the Lord will have you see 
that our action has been most kindly, brotherly, and that 
it is a part of our duty now to conform to the views of 
the Class. If the Lord shows us that we are wrong, we 
shall be very glad to acknowledge it. But in the meantime, 
dear brother, we do not wish to offend you, but 
merely desire to do our duty to the Lord and to His 
Word." 

This course would be the proper one; we should not 
erect a barricade between brethren. But it would be 
very easy to do injury to such a brother by saying, "Well, 
never show your face here again unless you take back 
every word you have said." The majority of people have 



so much self-esteem that they would not go back after 
such a statement; whereas they might do so if the Spirit 
of the Lord, the Spirit of love and justice is manifested. 



R4985 : page 83 

PERFECTION OF ORGANISM NOT NECESSARY TO TRIAL FOR LIFE 

"He must reign till He hath put all enemies under His feet; the 
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death."— I Cor. 15:25,26. 

THE DIVINE arrangement respecting Messiah's 
Kingdom seems very clearly stated 
in the Scriptures. Our text above, if no 
other, proves that Messiah's Kingdom will 
not be dealing with perfect conditions. By 
the sealing of the New Covenant He will 
make satisfaction for the sins of the world; 
and those of the world who prove worthy 
have God's assurance of attaining eternal 
life. The great work will be that of uplifting 
mankind out of sin and death conditions. For this 
reason He will rule as King and will officiate as the great 
Priest. The basis for this is the fact that our Lord Jesus 
purchased the world through the merit of His sacrifice. 
"Where a tree falleth, there shall it be." (Eccl. 1 1:3.) 
So, as mankind go down into death, there they remain. 
In the awakening from death there will be a resuscitation 
to practically the same conditions— mentally, morally and 
physically— which they had before they went into the 
tomb. If mankind came back from the tomb perfect, no 
one would have any way of identifying himself. If one 
were raised perfect in every thought and word and act, 
he would not know himself; for all those things composing 
his identity would be gone. Hence, he would have 
no way to distinguish himself from the rest of mankind! 
The world will be resuscitated with the same kind of intelligence 

R4986 : page 83 

in which they went down into death. But theirs 
is a death condition, and the very object of Messiah's 
Kingdom is to uplift out of that condition, and to raise 
up that which was lost to the perfection of man's nature. 
The Scriptures show us that at the end of the thousand 
years of Christ's reign the whole world will be 
turned over to the Father; and the race will then have 
a trial time, a testing, just as Adam had when he was in 
Eden. For "a little season" Satan will have the power 
to tempt mankind as he tempted Mother Eve. But the 
world should then be so thoroughly established in righteousness 
of heart that nothing which Satan or any other 
being could bring upon them in the way of temptation 
would make them sin; and those who will not have learned 



to hate sin and to love righteousness will not be fit for 
eternal life. We read that fire [judgments] will come 
down from heaven and destroy such. 

ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF TRIAL 

But we are to remember that there is another trial 
which precedes that occurring at the end of the Millennial 
Age. From the very time when the Kingdom shall have 
been established, the world will be on trial. Under The 
Christ's beneficent rule some will avail themselves of the 
opportunity to rise gradually back to the perfection of 
human nature, lost in Eden; others, apparently, according 
to the Scriptures, will still maintain an attitude of rebellion, 
loving sin and hating righteousness. These will be 
granted a hundred years (Isa. 65:17-25) of trial, even 
though they do not come to perfection of mind and body, 
because of their rebellious attitude of heart. 

Such are spoken of as children, in comparison with 
others of that day who will live on and become perfect. 
Messiah, as the great Judge, will cause such to die accursed, 
condemned, cut off from further opportunity of 
attaining life; for such will not have benefited by the 
merit of Christ and the Kingdom of Christ. And if this 
would be true of their condition after one hundred years, 
we may infer that if any, who during the first hundred 
years had proved faithful, should during the second hundred 
years assume a position against righteousness, 
such would then be cut off from life. 

"THE SAINTS SHALL JUDGE THE WORLD" 

"Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the 
world?" (I Cor. 6:2.) We certainly know it. The work 
of giving mankind the necessary knowledge and assistance 
will be in the hands of Christ and the Church. The final 
sentence against sinners will be destruction, death, as is 
clearly shown in the parable (Matt. 25:31-46) where Jesus 
(with the Church) is pictured in power and great glory 
judging the world, "For God hath appointed a day in 
which He will judge the world in righteousness by that 
Man whom He hath ordained" (Acts 17:31)— the Day of 
the great Messiah, the antitypical Moses— Jesus, the Head, 
and the Church, His Body. The parable shows that the 
work of the Millennial Age will completely separate the 
"sheep" class from the "goats"— the "sheep" being on the 
right hand (place of favor) and the "goats" at the left 
(place of disfavor). At the end of the Age Messiah will 
destroy the goat class and, in the Father's name, bless all 
the sheep class. But nothing is more evident than that 
the trial for life or death will proceed during all the Millennial 
Age— throughout all that thousand-year Judgment 
Day. 

MERIT IMPUTED BY THE GREAT ADVOCATE 



Now the Church is on trial for life or death, and Christ 
gives us an imputation of His merit and thus covers our 
weaknesses and shortcomings. By and by, He will give 
the world actual perfection on condition of perfect obedience. 
But now, under the great Advocate's imputation of 
righteousness, the decision regarding the Church comes 
in a few years from the time when we reach the point of 
consecration unto death. If this time is sufficient for the 
accomplishing of the trial of the Church, then we can see 
that a hundred years is ample time for the world to see 

R4986 : page 84 

whether they will make even a little progress upward on 
the Highway of Holiness. 

The testing of the Church we recognize as a fact; for 
the Apostle points it out to us. If those who are now 
consecrated should fall away into sin, there remains no 
more sacrifice for sins. (Heb. 10:26,27.) Why? Because 
the imputation of Christ's merit will not be repeated 
to any. If we get the imputation of Christ's merit in this 
present life, then there will be no further imputation for 
us. Those who do not get the imputation of Christ's merit 
now, as the Church, will never get it; but instead they will 
get the benefit of the New Covenant. The effect, however, 
in either event, will be a life or death trial and a 
life or death sentence. 

"BE THOU FAITHFUL" 

In the case of the Church, if we were faithful until the 
very last day of our experience and on that day proved 
unfaithful, it would certainly settle the matter as to our 
future. Similarly, we may say of the world that, if any 
should prove unfaithful during their trial in the next Age, 
their trial would end immediately and, undoubtedly, the 
sentence would be to the Second Death. In other words, 
the trial continues until each individual has been either 
rewarded or punished; and every act down to the last has 
to do with the sentence of that trial. 

In Ezekiel there is an intimation along this line, where 
God says, "But if the wicked will turn from all his sins 
that he hath committed, and keep all My statutes, and do 
that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall 
not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed, 
they shall not be mentioned unto him; in his righteousness 
that he hath done he shall live. ...But when the righteous 
turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth 
iniquity,. ..shall he live? All his righteousness that 
he hath done shall not be mentioned; in his trespass that 
he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in 
them shall he die." (Ezek. 18:21-24.) This seems to be 
the principle of Divine Justice, and one to which we can 
all readily assent, and which we can recognize as just and 
righteous altogether. "Just and true are Thy ways, Thou 
King of saints." 



R4986 : page 84 

THE GOSPEL ONLY FOR SINNERS 

--MARK 2:13-22.-MARCH 24.- 

Text:— "I came not to call the 
righteous, but sinners."— Verse 17. 

THE TERM "Publican" in Jesus' day was applied 

to Jews who served the Roman Government 

as tax collectors in Palestine. The 

name was a reproach because the Jews held 

to the Abrahamic promise that the whole 

world should be blessed by them as God's 

peculiar people. They held that this meant 

that they should not only be free from all 

other governments, but that they should be 

the masters of the world. And if so, all 

other nations should be paying them tribute and they 

should pay tribute to none. The most public-spirited Jews, 

therefore, declined to be the agents of the Roman Government 

in the matter of collecting tribute or taxes, and 

the tribute-takers or publicans were looked upon with disdain 

as being unfaithful to their religion and to their 

nation. 

The term "sinner," as frequently used in this study and 
elsewhere in the Gospels, was applied to all Jews who 
were careless in respect to the orthodoxy of their day, 
for the orthodox Jew of that time (and today) took pride 
in his religion and boasted of his holiness— as, for instance, 
the word "Pharisee" signifies "holy person"— one 
scrupulously careful in observing the smallest details of 
the Law. There was a wide breach between these zealous 
followers of Moses' Law and the mass of the nation who, 
because of not making special profession, were altogether 
classed as "sinners," or persons not up to the orthodox 
standard of carefulness of form, ceremonies, etc. 

The Pharisees would tolerate and eat with the Sadducees, 
although the latter were practically unbelievers, 
because they were of the wealthier and therefore more 
respectable class; but they entirely ignored and would 
not eat with their less particular brethren, whom they 
in general styled "sinners," regardless of their having true 
moral status. 

Our Lord's disciples were nearly all gathered from this 
lower or less orthodox and less educated class of Jews. 
Because of our Lord's talents the Pharisees would have 
been glad to have Him as one of their number, provided, 
of course, that He would side with them and uphold them 
in their more or less hypocritical pretentions of perfection 
and holiness. But Jesus denounced the claims of the 



Pharisees as hypocritical, and told the common people 
plainly that there were "none righteous, no, not one"— 
that all needed Divine mercy, and that really the humble 
and contrite would be much more acceptable to God than 
the boastful, the proud, the self-conceited. 

MATTHEW THE PUBLICAN 

Today's study tells of the call of Matthew to be one of 
the twelve Apostles. His original name was Levi, just 
as Peter's original name was Simon. He belonged to 
the Levitical tribe, but his acceptance of service under the 
Romans as a tax collector socially degraded him and 
classed him as a "Publican." Perhaps the quality of independence 
and humble-mindedness which influenced this 
man to become a tax collector and to brave the scorn of 
his fellow-countrymen were qualities which really favored 
him in respect to the Divine invitation to become a disciple 
of Jesus. We may be sure this was true from the 

R4987 : page 84 

fact that Jesus gave him a special invitation to become 
His disciple, and from the fact that he was in the heart 
condition to forsake all of his earthly goods that he might 
be a member of the Messianic class. We cannot suppose 
that the Master would call to discipleship any but a noble 
character, nor can we suppose that any others would have 
accepted the call as did Matthew. 

Matthew was a householder and promptly invited 
Jesus and His followers to dinner. He invited in also 
numbers of his friends, and these, like himself, were of 
the ostracized class— publicans and sinners. The scribes 
and Pharisees watched Jesus closely, and when they perceived 
that He ate and mingled with the less respectable 
and less orthodox, they disesteemed Him, also, and put 
the question squarely to Jesus' disciples: "How is it that 
your Master eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners, 
and yet claims to be holy?" 

This afforded Jesus the opportunity which He desired 
of giving a great lesson in a few words. He replied to 
them, "They that are whole have no need of a physician, 
but they that are sick; I came to call, not the righteous, 
but sinners." Here we have the key to much of the misunderstanding 
of the Gospel in that day and now. The 

R4987 : page 85 

first lesson that all must learn is that all sin is condemned 
of God— the little and the large— and that all unrighteousness 
is sin, and that there is "none righteous, no, not one." 
In other words, each must learn that he himself is a 
sinner, and under Divine sentence and needing forgiveness, 
before he can come into fellowship with God or 
become partaker of God's provision for eternal life. The 
publicans and sinners were indeed condemned of God, and 



the scribes and Pharisees, members of the same imperfect 

race, were also under Divine sentence; but the latter did 

not admit their sinfulness and imperfection nor seek 

Divine forgiveness, while the former, admitting their sins, 

were the more ready to accept forgiveness. Jesus illustrated 

this matter in one of His parables saying, A certain 

Pharisee went to the temple to pray and, full of self-confidence, 

thanked God that he was not as other men, 

nor even like the poor Publican near him. The Publican 

also prayed; but in humility, feeling that he was a sinner, 

besought Divine forgiveness. Jesus declared that the less 

moral man, the less scrupulously careful man, the Publican, 

was nearer to Divine Justice than the more careful, 

more upright, more orthodox Pharisee, because the latter 

failed to acknowledge his sins, his imperfections, which 

could be forgiven only through their acknowledgment. 

Hence the declaration of Jesus that He "came not to call 

the righteous, but sinners." There were none righteous 

to call, for all are sinners, and those who thought themselves 

righteous had a barrier before them which hindered 

their coming to the Lord under the call of this Age. 

"THY DISCIPLES FAST NOT" 

About that time a fasting season was observed by the 
Pharisees, and also by those who had accepted the teachings 
of John the Baptist; but Jesus had said nothing to 
His disciples about fasting up to that time. Now the question 
arose, Why was this? The Savior's explanation was 
that while He was with them it should properly be considered 
a time of rejoicing and feasting rather than a 
time of fasting and sorrow. Would a betrothed woman 
sorrow and weep and fast while her betrothed was present? 
Nay. Yet, in subsequent days, after his departure, 
in her loneliness, and especially if she thought of the long 
delay in his coming to receive her to become his wife, she 
would sorrow. So Jesus intimated it would be with His 
followers. They would have plenty of opportunity to 
weep and fast after He would be gone and while waiting 
for His return. 

Fasting should not be considered a matter of obligation 
or command, but rather a voluntary sacrifice of present 
and temporal good things that the mind and heart might 
go out the more earnestly after the things not seen as 
yet, but hoped for. Thus for eighteen centuries God's 
people have been fasting and praying and waiting and 
longing for the Bridegroom's return. But in the time of 
His presence, their fellowship with Him, their joy in the 
realization of the completed promise, will wipe away their 
tears and "give them beauty for ashes, and the oil of joy 
for. ..the spirit of heaviness." 

THE CHURCH A NEW CREATION 

It was difficult for the Savior's hearers to get a proper 
focus upon His teachings. They could understand John 



the Baptist's preaching of repentance and reformation; 
but when Jesus declared, "The Law and the Prophets 
were until John, and since then the Kingdom of Heaven 
is preached"— this was so radical a proposition as to be 
difficult for the masses to grasp. What could be higher 
than the Law and the Prophets? What door could be 
opened to the followers of Jesus which had not been 
open to their forefathers? Was not their Jewish nation 
God's Kingdom? Did not King David sit "upon the 
throne of the Lord"? Was it not promised that Messiah 
should sit upon David's throne? 

Sympathetically we must concede that it was difficult 
for the Jews to understand that before the blessing could 
come to natural Israel, another, spiritual Israel, must be 
selected. By way of emphasizing this thought, our Lord 
gave two parabolical illustrations, saying, No man sews 
a piece of unshrunken cloth upon an old garment, because 
the shrinking of the new cloth would pull away the old 
and increase the difficulty. Likewise, no one would think 
of putting new wine which had not yet finished its fermentation 
into old wineskins, whose elasticity had been 
exhausted, for the old wineskins would be burst by the 
fermentation of the new wine. 

These illustrations show that the Gospel teaching is 
not a patch upon the Jewish Law, but is a new proposition. 
And the new wine of the Gospel Dispensation must 
be put into new wineskins that will be able to stand the 
stress of the fermentation sure to come. Thus our Lord 
did not attempt to engraft His teachings upon the Jews, 
but called out of Judaism a special class, which the 
Scriptures denote as "New Creatures in Christ." It is 
to these that the new wine of the Gospel Message is 
committed, and these are to experience the fermentation 
incidental to the preparation for the Kingdom— trials, 
disciplines and testings. 



R4987 : page 85 

"THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD" 

-QR. REVIEW-MARCH 31. ~ 

"Text:— "The people which sat in darkness saw great light; and 
to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light 
is sprung up."— Matthew 4:16. 

IN THE BIBLE symbols light stands as the 

representative of God, of Christ, of the 

Church, of Truth, of influences for righteousness, 

which by and by as the Sun of 

Righteousness shall arise with healing in 

its beams for the cure of all the masses of 

the earth. It will scatter the darkness of 

sin, ignorance and superstition— the works 



of the Prince of Darkness, who will then 

"be bound for a thousand years that he 

may deceive the nations no more until the thousand years 

are finished." Of the heavenly Father we read, "God is 

light, and in Him is no darkness at all." 

Of Jesus we read, "I am the light of the world." Of 
the Church in her present condition we read, "Let your 
light so shine before men that they may see your good 
works and glorify your Father which is in Heaven." "Hide 
not your light under a bushel, but set it on a candlestick 
that it may give light unto all that are in the house." 
Nevertheless, "The darkness hateth the light, neither 
cometh to the light," and "the whole world lieth in the 
Wicked One"— in darkness. Notwithstanding the faithfulness 
of Jesus and the few light-bearers enlightened 
with the Holy Spirit of which they are begotten, still 
"darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the 
heathen." 

This same thought pervades the Scriptures from first 
to last, namely, that for six thousand years, from the time 

R4988 : page 86 

of the entrance of sin to the second coming of Jesus, the 
world will be subject to a reign of sin and death— it will 
be under a pall of darkness, ignorance, superstition, sin, 
etc. The only ones who will see the path of righteousness 
distinctly will be those guided by the "lantern"— God's 
Word. They are represented as saying, "Thy Word is 
a lamp to my feet and a lantern to my footsteps." St. 
Peter, writing to the Church from the same standpoint, 
declares, "We (the Church) have a more sure Word of 
prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as 
unto a light that shineth in a dark place until the day 
dawn."-Psa. 119:105; 2 Peter 1:19. 

The Prince of Darkness has been in command for 
centuries. The only lights of the past were the noble 
Prophets of the Jewish line whose lights affected few in 
their own nation, and were not discernible at all amongst 
the heathen world. John the Baptist, we are told, was 
a burning and shining light, and Jesus was a still more 
brilliant light, and His faithful few during the past 
eighteen centuries have shined forth, reflecting their 
Master's light. But all of these have had comparatively 
little influence in the world. It still lies in the Wicked 
One— in darkness, seeing not, neither understanding Divine 
things; it is still "waiting for the manifestation of 
the sons of God." 

A BETTER DAY COMING 

Our text tells of a better day sure to come. It is not 
sure to come because of the operation of the evolutionary 
law, for the natural law would seem to contradict such 
a thought. Darkness leads on to darkness more intense, 
and while light begets light, darkness begets darkness, and 



the masses are in the darkness, and in the Wicked One, 
the Prince of Darkness. Never, then, might we hope for 
the abolishment of darkness except in the way in which 
God has foretold it— through the establishment of Messiah's 
Kingdom— through the shining forth of the Son 
of Righteousness— the Church in glory.— Matt. 13:43. 

Our text is a quotation from the Old Testament; it 
had a beginning of its fulfilment in our Savior and in 
the Apostles. The people of Palestine, long in doubt, 
uncertainty, etc., saw a great light in Jesus and His teachings. 
And throughout this Gospel Age, for more than 
eighteen centuries, this great Light has been exercising 
a feeble influence amongst men. The Light itself has 
been pure— the Divine Word and the principles of Divine 
righteousness. But, alas! few have been faithful in receiving 
the light in its purity and in reflecting it forth 
upon others. 

In general the light has been corrupted by human 
selfishness, by sin. As a consequence the name Christian 
today does not stand for all the blessed light and truth 
and grace and faithfulness to God and to the principles 
of love which the Master showed forth and inculcated. 
Instead the name Christian today is borne by about four 
hundred millions of humanity, many of whom, judged by 
the Divine standard of their "fruits," are children of the 
Wicked One, children of darkness, who merely use the 
garment of light, the name Christian, as a heavenly livery 
whereby to appease their own consciences and to increase 
their opportunity for selfishness and acquisition, quite 
contrary to the Leader whom they profess to be following, 
"the True Light." 

"WHICH LIGHTETH EVERY MAN" 

The Apostle declares that Jesus "is the true light 
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." 
(John 1:9.) The expression, "true light," implies that 
there are false or imitation lights, and of these we know 
that there are many— lights of heathendom and lights of 
Christendom. The only true light, however, is that which 
shone forth in our Savior's teachings and example. It 
has thus far enlightened only a few, a "little flock." 
These, like their Master, are urged to let their light shine 
before men that others may take knowledge that they 
have been with Jesus and learned of Him— that they are 
His disciples, His followers, bearing, in His footsteps, 
the same light which shone forth from Him. 

After eighteen centuries of experience of the light 
battling with the darkness, and at times being almost 
quenched thereby, we might well ask, what hope is there 
that this prophecy will ever be fulfilled— that Jesus, as 
the Light of the world, will enlighten every man born 
into the world? The Bible answers that God will fulfil 
this very matter in His own time, but that God's time 
cannot be hastened— that before the world will be enlightened, 
a saintly class, the Church, the Bride of Christ, 



must be enlightened, and must be completed and glorified 
together with her Lord. 

FOR ONE THOUSAND YEARS THE SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 
WILL SHINE FORTH 

Then, and not until then, will the Savior and His 
Church in glory be the great Sun of Righteousness which 
will arise over the earth, and shine forth for the healing 
of the people, for the scattering of the darkness of sin 
and the lies of error— the bringing of life, peace, joy and 
blessing to all who will accept the favor in harmony with 
the Divine requirements; but to smite down and utterly 
destroy the Night, and those who will still love darkness, 
and would corrupt the earth. 

For a thousand years the glorious Sun of Righteousness 
(Christ and the Church, His Bride), will shine out. 
The work will be thorough and complete. Adam and his 
every child will be fully brought to a knowledge of the 
Truth, and will enjoy the blessed opportunity of coming 
back into harmony with God, by the restitution process, 
of which St. Peter tells us in Acts 3:19-23. This will 
not mean that the world will ever become members of the 
Bride class, or ever attain the spirit nature. It means 
restitution to the condition first enjoyed by Adam, lost 
by sin, but redeemed by the sacrifice finished at Calvary. 
It means human perfection to all the willing and obedient 
of Adam's race through the heavenly Second Adam and 
the heavenly Second Eve. 

It means a world-wide Paradise, filled with the blessings 
of the Lord, who has promised that the earth, as 
His footstool, shall be made glorious. It means that, with 
the destruction of the wilfully disobedient, this earth will 
be like heaven. The Savior's prayer will reach fulfilment; 
God's will shall be done on earth even as it is done in 
heaven. This in turn will mean that "every knee will 
bow and every tongue confess," both of the things in 
heaven and of the things on earth, to the glory of God. 
And this signifies that there shall be no more sighing, no 
more crying, no more dying on earth, even as none of 
these things are in heaven. 

Then our text will have most ample fulfilment— all 
mankind shall see the great Light which God has provided; 
even those "in the shadow of death" must come 
forth, that all may be enlightened by this "true Light 
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." 
O, the happy day that is coming to our poor, sin-cursed 
earth! There shall be no more curse, thank God! Instead 
of the curse shall be the Divine blessing; "and every 
creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth shall 
be heard saying, 'Praise and glory and honor and dominion 
and might be unto Him that sitteth upon the Throne, 
and unto the Lamb, forever'"! 



aR4988 : page 87 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
FEAR THE ADVERSARY'S TACTICS 

Question.— "Your Adversary, the devil, as a roaring 
lion walketh about, seeking whom he may devour; whom 
resist, steadfast in the faith." (I Pet. 5:8.) In what 
sense does the Adversary go about as a roaring lion? 

Answer.— The Scriptures give us various illustrations 
of Satan, the "angel of light." He is compared to a serpent, 
a roaring lion, etc. Of course, he does not fill all of 
these pictures at one moment, nor does he go about as a 
roaring lion all the time. It is the custom of the lion to 
roar when in pursuit of food. The roar of the lion makes 
his prey— including human beings— semi-paralyzed. From 
personal observation, we see that fear is one of the most 
disastrous things for the Lord's people to have— except 
"fear of the Lord," which is proper fear. As God incites 
by love, so Satan incites through fear, through false doctrines, 
the root of error, which so terrorizes mankind as 
to the future. This kind of influence from the Adversary 
is what is meant by the Apostle. But we are to resist 
Satan. 

Once the Apostles were under threat from the Jewish 
Sanhedrin; and they prayed, "Now, Lord, behold their 
threatening s." This statement, however, does not prove 
that the men of the Sanhedrin were devils, nor that they 
were viciously inclined of themselves. So today there are 
some people more or less beclouded by the threatenings of 
those who are seeking to intimidate the Lord's people. 
We are to be of good courage. When we hear the roaring 
of the lion we are to remember that the Lord is on our 
part and that He does not cause us to fear. The thought 
that Satan opposes us and that we are contending, not 
merely with the fallen flesh, but also with wicked spirits 
in high positions of power, would appal us if we did not, 
by positiveness of decision, acquire great help from other 
unseen powers. From the instant that we resist temptation 
and stand up for the Lord and His cause we become strong 
in the Lord and in the power of His might. "If God be 
for us, who can be against us?" 

LIGHT INCREASES RESPONSIBILITY 

Question.— "If I had not come and spoken unto them, 
they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their 
sin."— John 15:22. Please explain. 

Answer.— Our Lord explained to the Scribes and 
Pharisees that the light of His teaching gave a greater 
responsibility to those who heard it than to those who 
had not heard it. If they had never come in contact with 
the light, they would never have sinned against the light; 

R4989 : page 87 



and therefore, their sin was greater in proportion to the 
greater blessing. 

So it is today. If you had never had your eyes opened, 
if you had never heard more than the heathen, then you 
would not have any more sin than other heathen people 
whose eyes have never been opened. But when you sin 
with a measure of wilfulness against the light and knowledge, 
your sin will be the greater. Your responsibility is 
in proportion to the light. This seems to be the reasonable 
view of the matter. 



DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FRUITS AND GRACES OF SPIRIT 

Question.— What is the difference between "the fruits 
of the Spirit" and "the graces of the Spirit?" 

Answer.— The expression "fruits of the Spirit" has 
very much the same significance as "graces of the Spirit." 
One term might be proper to use at one time and the 
other at another time, according to the figure of speech 
which would be appropriate. If we were speaking of a 
quality which was being developed, it would be proper to 
think of the fruitage of the Spirit— those beautiful qualities 
worked out in our lives through the indwelling of 
the Spirit of God. If we were speaking more particularly 
of the individual and his conduct, we might more appropriately 
say that the graces which he manifested and 
which he had developed were brought out through his 
possession of the Holy Spirit, through his possession of 
the spirit of love. 



page 87 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study VII.— The Law of the New Creation. 
APRIL 7 

(55) What should be our earnest endeavor with respect 
to reaching the mark? P. 373, par. 2. 

(56) When we have reached the mark, will there be no 
further trials for us? P. 373, par. 3. 

(57) Will the Law of Love be the standard for all accounted 
worthy of everlasting life at the close of the Millennial 
Age? P. 374, par. 1. 

THE GOLDEN RULE 

(58) What is the Golden Rule, and how is it superior to 
the highest standard of the natural man? P. 375, par. 1. 

(59) How does this rule affect our relationship toward 



God and toward the brethren? P. 376, par. 1, 2. 

(60) Explain how we are "changed from glory to glory" 
through obedience to the Golden Rule. P. 376, par. 3. 

APRIL 14 

THE PERFECT LAW OF LIBERTY 

(61) Does the Law of Love, the "law of liberty," leave 
the New Creation without proper restraints? P. 377, par. 1. 

(62) Will the world of mankind be under this law of 
liberty during the Millennial Age? P. 378, par. 1, first half. 

(63) How do the New Creation properly exercise their 
liberty? P. 378, par. 1, last half. 

(64) What reward will be given those who faithfully use 

the liberty wherewith Christ makes free, and why is it essential 
that the New Creation be especially developed and tested 
as to perfect love? P. 378, par. 2. 

APRIL 21 

Series VI., Study VIII-The Rest or Sabbath of the New 
Creation. 

(1) Since the New Creation is in no sense under the Law 
Covenant, why was Jesus subject to the Law of the Mosaic 
Sabbath? P. 379, par. 1. 

(2) How and when did allegiance to the Law Covenant 
given to the Jews cease as respected Jesus and His followers? 
P. 380, par. 1. 

(3) Was it difficult for the Jews to realize that the middle 
wall of partition between them and the Gentiles was broken 
down by the death of Christ? P. 380, par. 2. 

(4) To what purpose was the Jewish Sabbath originally 
appointed? Was there anything in the Scriptures forbidding 
these new converts to preach the Gospel on this day of the 
week? P. 381, par. 1. 

(5) Was the early Church commanded of the Lord to 
specially observe the seventh day (or Sabbath day) or any 
other day in the week? P. 381, par. 2. 

APRIL 28 

(6) What were the teachings of the Apostles to the 
Church respecting the various feasts and seasons and days of 
the Jewish Law? And was the use by the Apostles of the 
Jewish Synagogue on the Jewish Sabbath an endorsement of 
the Jewish system? P. 382, par. 1, first half. 

(7) Is the Gospel message affected by the building in 
which, or the day on which, it is proclaimed? P. 382, par. 1, last. 

(8) What are the facts respecting the claim that the 
Christian Sabbath was instituted by the Roman Catholic 
Church? P. 382, par. 2. 

(9) When and because of what circumstances did the 

proper observance of the first day of the week have its beginning? 
P. 383, par. 1. 



(10) What was commemorated in the "breaking of bread" 
on the first day of the week by the early Christians, and what 
did it signify? P. 384, par. 1. 



page 89 


