Welcome to the “Godly Devotion” District Conventions
WHAT a fine theme we have for this year’s district convention: “Godly Devotion”! And what a fine example of godly devotion Jesus Christ set for us! No wonder that the apostle Paul was inspired to write regarding him: “Indeed, the sacred secret of this godly devotion is admittedly great: ‘He was made manifest in flesh, was declared righteous in spirit, appeared to angels, was preached about among nations, was believed upon in the world, was received up in glory.’”​—1 Timothy 3:16.
Our district convention will strengthen us to be persons of true godly devotion, as was Jesus. So, first of all, we want to make sure that we let absolutely nothing interfere with our taking in this spiritual feast. Therefore, let us be in our seats Friday morning at 10:20 to enjoy the musical presentation and thus be in the right frame of mind to benefit fully from the program that follows. The theme chosen for the first day is “Serving a God Exacting Exclusive Devotion,” based on Exodus 20:5. The chairman’s address is most fitting: “Welcome, You People of Godly Devotion!” On the first day, we will also be edified by talks that show why Jehovah insists on godly devotion and why we need to learn the secret of godly devotion. There will also be exciting information about the identity of the true God. Also, in view of the problems that our youths face, there will be a special message for them.
Saturday’s theme is “Godly Devotion Means Great Gain,” based on 1 Timothy 6:6. In the morning, we will receive instruction on just what it takes to pursue godly devotion. And, of course, there will be a talk on baptism for those ready to enter a life course of godly devotion. Saturday afternoon we will have impressed upon us the need of loyalty to “the faithful and discreet slave,” and then we will learn how we can manifest deeds of godly devotion in the family circle.
“Repudiate Ungodliness and Live With Godly Devotion,” taken from Titus 2:12, is the theme for Sunday. In the morning, we will receive some timely instruction warning us against “the man of lawlessness” and against going astray in matters of food and drink, grooming, and recreation. (2 Thessalonians 2:3) This will be followed by a modern-day drama stressing the importance of subjecting ourselves to God. The public talk in the afternoon will present the good news that deliverance is near for people of godly devotion. Our spiritual feast will close with a discussion showing that “Our Continued Training With Godly Devotion Is Beneficial.”
So come prepared to follow in your Bible the references of the speakers and to jot down salient points from the talks in a notebook. Taking notes is a great aid to concentration and to benefit fully from what one hears. And let us never overlook the fact that much work is required for a convention to function efficiently and smoothly and that many hands make light work. By volunteering to help, we will realize the greater happiness of giving.​—Acts 20:35.
So may our godly devotion impel us to come to this convention and motivate us to get the most out of it. May we leave strengthened and determined to lead lives of godly devotion ever more fully.

