Does Anyone Really Care?
Did you ever feel alone and helpless, as if no one really understood the problems you were facing? And even if they knew about them, you felt that they did not really care.
WHEN problems arise, our life can seem like a storm that will not let up. At times, we might even conclude that what we are experiencing is so devastating and so unjust that we simply cannot bear it any longer. That is often the case when we suffer from emotional traumas, depression, debilitating accidents, chronic diseases, or something similar. We may feel so helpless and hopeless that we wonder where we can turn for comfort. Does anyone really care?
“The God of All Comfort” Cares
God is described in the Bible as “the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort.” (2 Corinthians 1:3) God, whose name is Jehovah, knows we need comfort. The Bible uses “comfort” in various forms over a hundred times, assuring us that God not only understands what we face but also desires to comfort us. This knowledge convinces us that even when others do not seem to notice, understand, or care about our plight, Jehovah God does.
The fact that Jehovah cares for people as individuals is clearly seen from the Scriptures. “The eyes of Jehovah are in every place,” says the Bible, “keeping watch upon the bad ones and the good ones.” (Proverbs 15:3) Similarly, at Job 34:21, we read: “His eyes are upon the ways of man, and all his steps he sees.” Jehovah sees what we do—good or bad—and he is aware of our circumstances, so that he can respond in ways he sees fit. This is confirmed in the words of Hanani the seer, or prophet, to King Asa of Judah: “As regards Jehovah, his eyes are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.”—2 Chronicles 16:7, 9.
Jehovah keeps watch over us for another reason. Jesus explains: “No man can come to me unless the Father, who sent me, draws him.” (John 6:44) Jehovah cares enough to search a person’s heart to see if it is inclined toward him. If it is, he can respond in ways truly amazing. For example, in the Dominican Republic, a woman was in the hospital for cancer surgery. She beseeched God to help her to find the true religion. Just then, her husband brought her a brochure entitled What Does God Require of Us?a which he had received that morning from one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who called at his home. The woman read the brochure and realized that this was God’s answer to her prayer. She accepted a Bible study with the Witness, and in less than six months, she dedicated her life to God and was baptized.
In the Bible book of Psalms, we find many heartwarming expressions by ancient Hebrew psalmists, such as King David, that describe Jehovah’s loving care for his servants. At Psalm 56:8, we find King David pleading to God: “Do put my tears in your skin bottle. Are they not in your book?” As shown by this analogy, David knew that Jehovah was aware not only of his suffering but also of its emotional impact. Jehovah was aware of David’s pain and remembered what David went through emotionally that caused his tears. Truly, our Creator watches over all those who endeavor to do his will, “those whose heart is complete toward him.”
Another Bible passage that describes God’s loving care is the famous 23rd Psalm. The opening words liken God to a loving shepherd: “Jehovah is my Shepherd. I shall lack nothing.” A Middle Eastern shepherd cares for each of his sheep, even naming each one. Daily he calls each sheep to him and lovingly strokes it and looks for injuries. If he finds any, he applies oil or ointment to hasten the healing process. If the sheep is sick, the shepherd might have to force medicine down its throat and literally hold it up so that it will not lie down and die. Surely that is a fine word picture of how Jehovah cares for those who turn to him.
Prayer and the Resurrection—Proof That God Cares
These and other beautiful psalms are not recorded in the Bible for us just to read and enjoy. They show us how faithful servants of God in the past have poured out their hearts to Jehovah to express their need for God’s help as well as their gratitude for the guidance and blessings from him. Such expressions demonstrate clearly that those ancient servants of God firmly believed that God cared for them. Reading and meditating on these heartfelt words can help us to feel the same about God. The provision of prayer is a powerful evidence that God cares.
Sometimes, however, we are so overwhelmed by a problem that we do not even know how to pray about it. Does that prevent Jehovah from knowing our distress? Romans 8:26 answers: “The spirit also joins in with help for our weakness; for the problem of what we should pray for as we need to we do not know, but the spirit itself pleads for us with groanings unuttered.” This scripture tells us that the inspired prayers of God’s servants in the past may reflect our feelings and thus find a hearing ear from Jehovah, the “Hearer of prayer.”—Psalm 65:2.
The resurrection hope is another convincing proof of God’s interest in each individual. Jesus Christ said: “The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his [Jesus’] voice and come out.” (John 5:28, 29) The Greek term used here is properly translated “memorial tombs” and not simply “graves.” It conveys the thought that the life record of the person who has died is remembered by God.
Just think, to bring someone back to life, God has to know everything about that one, including what he looked like, his inherited and acquired traits, and his complete memory! (Mark 10:27) God’s memory of that one does not fade even after thousands of years. (Job 14:13-15; Luke 20:38) Thus, billions who have died are in Jehovah God’s memory in full detail—convincing proof that God cares about us individually!
Jehovah Is a Rewarder
What must we do to receive God’s loving concern and care? Primarily, we must show that we trust and obey him, that we have faith in him. The apostle Paul points out the relationship between having faith and enjoying God’s care. He wrote: “Without faith it is impossible to please him well, for he that approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.”—Hebrews 11:6.
Note that the kind of faith that pleases God involves two aspects. First, we must “believe that he is,” that is, we must believe that God exists and that he is our Supreme Ruler, deserving of our obedience and worship. Second, we must believe that he is “the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.” True faith includes believing that God is interested in the welfare of all who earnestly seek to do his will and that he rewards them. By studying God’s Word and associating with those who obey him, you too can come to have the kind of faith that merits God’s reward and loving care.
Many people today believe that God takes no interest in human affairs. But as we have seen, the Bible clearly shows that God very much cares for those who demonstrate true faith in him. Even though life today is often filled with distress, worries, disappointments, and hurt, we need not despair. Jehovah God does care. In fact, he lovingly invites us to turn to him for support. “Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself, and he himself will sustain you,” says the psalmist. “Never will he allow the righteous one to totter.”—Psalm 55:22.
[Footnote]
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Box/Picture on page 29]
Scriptures to Strengthen Your Faith in God’s Loving Care for You
“As regards Jehovah, his eyes are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.”—2 CHRONICLES 16:9
“Do put my tears in your skin bottle. Are they not in your book?”—PSALM 56:8
“Jehovah is my Shepherd. I shall lack nothing.”—PSALM 23:1
“O Hearer of prayer, even to you people of all flesh will come.”—PSALM 65:2
“You will call, and I myself shall answer you. For the work of your hands you will have a yearning.”—JOB 14:15
“He that approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.”—HEBREWS 11:6
“Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself, and he himself will sustain you. Never will he allow the righteous one to totter.”—PSALM 55:22

