Aid Others to Search for Jehovah
1 It was to unfaithful Israelites that the appeal was directed: “Search for Jehovah, you people, while he may be found. Call to him while he proves to be near.” (Isa. 55:6) This indicated that Jehovah’s toleration of unfaithfulness had a limit. At the time of the execution of his judgment it would be too late to “search” for him, to come into a good relationship with him.
2 The position of all mankind today is similar to that of the unfaithful Israelites. Through us, as his witnesses, Jehovah is appealing to humans everywhere to come into an approved standing before him. (Acts 17:30, 31; 1 Tim. 2:3, 4) The time for this is now greatly reduced.
3 The criticalness of the situation certainly impresses upon us the importance of being whole-souled in our efforts to aid others to “search” for Jehovah. This should stir us to devote as much time to Kingdom-preaching as possible.
4 At times we meet people who say, “I get everything I need from my church.” But they need to be made aware of the seriousness of their situation. As was suggested in the November Kingdom Ministry, you might ask whether their church has explained to them the meaning of Revelation 18:4. Have you been doing that? After reading or paraphrasing the text, show that this is an appeal on the part of God to his people. If they can be helped to recognize the importance of knowing what “Babylon the Great” is and of acting in harmony with that knowledge, they may be willing to study the Bible with you.
5 In the month of January we will be going back into the territory covered with Kingdom News No. 17. That powerful message directed against false religion needs to be followed up. Some people may have questions. Do not let cold weather discourage you from having a full share. Endeavor to participate in the house-to-house work regularly each week. The sooner we are at the doors of those who received the tract, the sooner they may be helped to act on what they have read. The Watchtower is a fine instrument in assisting them to do just that. The material it contains has been prepared with them in mind. Be enthusiastic about encouraging them to subscribe.
6 In helping people to search for Jehovah, we do not want to overlook the many who shared with us for the first time in tract distribution. They will need help to learn how to be effective Witnesses, using the Bible. Many will appreciate it if you offer them help. Will you do that?
7 May the month of January find all of us using every opportunity to help others to search for Jehovah.
[Blurb on page 1]
Aid Others to Search for Jehovah While He May Be Found.

