Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Certainly a lot of things have happened here at Bethel in recent weeks.
There was a big increase in the printing and placement of magazines world wide last year. So, now about a hundred brothers and sisters have been transferred from Brooklyn to Watchtower Farm to provide magazine supplies from the facilities there.
Meanwhile, here at Brooklyn the night shift in the factory has been expanded to increase book production. Since November 5 the night workers alone have been producing an average of some 80,000 additional books during each work period. In just one week recently over a million books were completed by the combined shifts! We rejoice that the interest you are finding in the field requires this great quantity of literature.
About the middle of November the first copies of the 1974 Yearbook came off the bindery lines. At Bethel we get some of the very first copies, and we have been reading about two pages from it each morning at breakfast. Have you been reading it? Don’t miss it! It looks like it is just what we need to prepare us for what lies ahead. And, as a suggestion, if there are any who were at one time associated with your congregation but have become inactive, why not take them a copy? When they read about the faithfulness and endurance of their brothers around the world it may prove to be just what they need.
As you know, the “Divine Victory” assemblies have not all been held as yet. Brother Knorr attended some of the recent ones and he said that in Mexico there were nineteen simultaneous assemblies, with 5,607 baptized. The total attendance of 170,091 was almost 110,000 more than the number of publishers. Just think of it! In Mexico City the crowd was so great that people even climbed onto the roof to get a glimpse inside. In Guatemala, where 493 were baptized, the attendance of 9,856 was about triple the number of publishers. Isn’t it marvelous to know that so many are showing a desire to learn about the approaching divine victory?
And now, how about the distribution of Kingdom News No. 17? After having seen what it contains, we were excited about it. When you write about other things, no doubt you will share with us experiences had in this special work. It is our prayer that this message will aid many more to get out of “Babylon the Great” and into Jehovah’s organization.
May Jehovah bless you richly as you continue to aid others to search for our loving God. We send you a warm expression of our love.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

