Presenting the Good News​—With a Willingness to Adjust to Circumstances
1 Everyone is busy these days, including us. The daily schedule of activity keeps family members in most households scurrying about trying to get everything done. When we locate someone who shows interest in the truth, it may be quite difficult to make contact with the person later because of conflicting schedules. When this happens, are you willing to make some adjustment in your personal activity to accommodate the individual? If we truly have a tender affection for sheeplike ones, then we will try to work out things for their advantage, showing a willingness to inconvenience ourselves, if necessary, to help them.​—1 Cor. 10:24; Rom. 15:1, 2.
2 Some communities have many shift workers who are required to work at odd hours. If you find such a person who shows interest, would you be willing to call early in the morning or perhaps late at night to conduct a study?
3 Wives who want to study will often request that you conduct a study at a time when the husband and the children can be present. In other situations, there may be opposing relatives in the home and you will be asked to come at a time when they are absent. Some circumstances might require that you conduct the study in your own home or possibly somewhere else. Would you do so?
4 It is not unusual to locate an interested person who can study only at a time when you have no car available or you are unable to get someone to go with you. If it is necessary, would you be willing to take public transportation or even walk to get there? If there is no one to accompany you, would you go alone if it were safe to do so?
5 It is a common thing to make arrangements for a study and find, after you get there, that something unavoidable has come up that prevents them from having the study. If they sincerely appreciate the study and ask you to return later during the day or possibly another day during the week, would you gladly do so?
6 Many congregations have territories that are not worked regularly because they are a distance away and considerable traveling is required to work them. Do you feel enough concern for the people in that area so that you are willing to spend the extra time and travel expense necessary to reach them?
7 Often it is difficult to find people at home on the weekend when most of us are able to share in the field service. If it were suggested in your congregation, would you be agreeable to an adjustment in meeting times or service arrangements so that your efforts would accomplish greater good?
8 An opportunity for a good study may present itself at a time that your family has set aside for recreation or caring for personal matters. Would your family members be agreeable to making other arrangements or even to forgo something unnecessary so that you could conduct a Bible study?
9 Of course, it is up to each one of us to decide the extent to which we can reasonably adjust our affairs to accommodate those who want help. However, if we feel like Paul, we will be willing to ‘impart our own souls,’ working night and day to assist sheeplike ones to learn of the hope that can save their lives.​—1 Thess. 2:8, 9.
[Blurb on page 4]
Can You Cover All Your Territory with the Subscription Offer?

