What About Those Who Still Hold Back?
1 Most of us know of interested persons in our territory who have responded favorably to the Kingdom message. We have studied with some through the Truth book and, in some cases, other publications as well. They attend meetings from time to time, show a willingness to be identified with Jehovah’s witnesses and profess to accept most of the fundamental teachings of God’s Word. Yet, they do not join us in the preaching work. They hold back from ‘disowning themselves’ and getting baptized. (Matt. 16:24; 28:19) Is there something more that we can do to help them?
2 Such ones may have a knowledge of Jehovah’s purposes but have yet to acquire the necessary love for him. (Eph. 3:18, 19) Put simply, the truth may be in their head but not yet in their heart.
3 In studying with them, encourage them to give thought to the implications of what they are learning. Reason with them in such a way that they will ask themselves: What will this ultimately mean for me and my family? If they have learned, for example, the identifying traits of the true religion, can they honestly say that their former religion is the true one? If not, then it must be a false one and part of the empire of false religion for which God’s Word clearly foretells destruction in the near future. Logical reasoning dictates that ties maintained with that system will ultimately bring death.
4 Try to get them to think in terms of applying what they learn. For example, they may have learned that the celebration of certain holidays is not pleasing to God. The question now is, What will they do when these celebrations come along? How will they react when their relatives, friends and working companions try to involve them?
5 Sometimes they hold back because of reluctance to accept some fundamental truth. They may frankly tell you, for example, that they are unable to take firm stand on the use of blood transfusions. After reviewing what the Bible has to say on the matter, try to help them to analyze the basis for their objection. Can they honestly say that the Bible is not clear on the subject? Probing questions may reveal that they actually hold back, not because they cannot see the Bible’s teaching, but because they fear the reactions of others if they follow it. The issue, then, boils down to one question: Whom will they try to please​—God or man?​—Prov. 29:25.
6 Time grows short and the need for a definite stand becomes increasingly urgent. With discernment in our teaching, we may be able to cultivate their heart appreciation so that they will take their stand on Jehovah’s side while there is still opportunity.

