Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 13
12 min: Song 102. Introduction, text and comments. Also, choice portions of Branch Letter.
15 min: “Aid Others to Search for Jehovah.” Questions and answers. Invite audience to read and comment on scriptures.
15 min: Improving Your Ability in the House-to-House Ministry.
Two new publishers approach experienced brother to request assistance. They have shared in tract distribution; one has done magazine work. Would like to learn to use Bible at doors, to share in offering subscriptions, etc.
Discuss together and demonstrate as in “practice session” the following: (1) Introduction that is simple, friendly, really touches on something that is on mind of average householder. (2) Use of Bible. Actually read from it where possible; sometimes it is better to quote or to paraphrase text. In current sermon, we have several verses, all on the same page. Discuss brief comments that can be made on the scriptures. (3) Offering subscription. Show an appealing subject in current issue; read some comments from left hand column on page 2, offer enthusiastically. (4) If questions are raised, simply answer from what you have learned. “Make Sure” can help you to locate scriptures. If you do not know the answer, offer to find it and to return.
Experienced publisher arranges to spend some time personally working with each of the other two in field ministry this weekend.
 8 min: Accounts report. Also review with congregation appropriate points from instructions on “How to Handle Subscriptions Properly” (in congregation file).
10 min: Concluding comments. Include comments on 2 Peter 3:13, 14, 17, 18. “Watchtower” study material for January 20 and 27 is timely and vital for all of Jehovah’s people; urge all to attend. Song 107.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 20
15 min: Song 115. Introduction, text and comments. Include Theocratic News, also Question Box.
10 min: “Reaching Those Who Speak Another Language.” Discuss article, also local plans. Encourage magazine work this week.
12 min: Are You Using the “Comprehensive Concordance”? Discourse.
It is a provision to help us improve our knowledge and effective use of God’s Word. Ideas on how to use it:
To find a scripture that you remember having read or heard. Look under any word that you know is in the text. If you know approximately where it is in the Bible, start looking in that part of the list; it will save time. If you have difficulty in locating a particular text, use suggestions on page 6 of “Concordance.”
If you simply want scriptures on a particular subject, but have none in mind, look up that subject and then select appropriate texts from those listed.
As part of your teaching on a home Bible study, you could show the student how to use it. This may enable him to study more productively on his own. Illustrate: Variations of the word “soul” appear almost a thousand times; “immortality” only three times, and never with the word “soul.” To emphasize God’s love, under “loving-kindness” show 26 listings for 26 verses of Psalm 136. Significance of name “Jehovah” is shown by the fact that over 25 pages are required to list the occurrences of this name.
Parents might use it effectively in teaching children. For example, quiz them on a variety of subjects for which they must find a Bible answer; have them use “Concordance” along with Bible. Or, if a child needs to have a certain matter impressed on his mind, possibly because he has been negligent in caring for assigned chores, he might be assigned to look up the fourteen references under “lazy” and to list the various reasons given in those verses for avoiding laziness.
No doubt you have a copy of the “Comprehensive Concordance” in your home library; make good use of it.
23 min: Meeting Together Even in the Face of Difficulties.
Audience discussion; include reading of selected portions from “1974 Yearbook.” Plan carefully in advance, considering available time.
Ask audience: (1) Why do we come together for meetings? (Deut. 31:12; Rom. 1:11, 12) (2) Why is it important to meet together regularly? (Heb. 10:25; 1 Cor. 10:12) (3) What could you do about obeying these Bible commands if our work were banned and this Kingdom Hall were closed? (“Organization” book, p. 186)
There is much that we can learn from the experiences of our brothers in Germany. Beneficial to do so; the same enemy, Satan, is still trying to disrupt our service to God; we personally may feel greatly increased pressure in days to come.
Arrange in advance for publishers to answer these questions by reading or paraphrasing brief excerpts: (4) Once banned, where did our brothers meet? (Highlight locations mentioned in “Yearbook” on p. 130, par. 1; p. 145, par. 4; p. 146, par. 2; p. 152, par. 1; p. 181, par. 3.) (5) How did they show discretion as to the time of arrival at the meetings? (“yb” p. 135, par. 3) Good to consider whether we would appreciate meetings enough to go that early. (6) What precautions did the brothers take while meeting together? (“yb” p. 144, par. 5; p. 194, par. 3) (7) If under ban, what literature could we use for study at our meetings? (“or” p. 186; “yb” pp. 114, 115; p. 191 par. 4; p. 194, par. 1)
If we are determined to be obedient to Jehovah, and rely on him, he will bless our efforts. Briefly relate experience in “Yearbook” on pp. 135-138, emphasizing that those brothers risked life and freedom to meet together; not one held back. And, despite danger, they also went out to call on their neighbors with the Kingdom message. As of now we have much freedom; use it wisely. Be sure to attend public talk and “Watchtower” study this week; the study material is vital. Share fully in the field ministry.
Conclude with Song 7.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 27
15 min: Song 3. Introduction, text and comments. Include talk on article “How Strong is Your Love of Truth?” from October 1, 1973, “Watchtower.”
10 min: Experiences in Field Ministry. Plan in advance. Invite publishers to relate experiences enjoyed during recent weeks. Might include results from offering “Watchtower” subscription, also Kingdom News No. 17 and joy of making return visits.
15 min: Improving Your Ability in Disciple-making.
Two publishers approach experienced brother to request help in making return visits, starting Bible studies. To date, they have only gone from door to door, but not called back; feel unqualified.
Discuss together and demonstrate, as appropriate, the following: (1) What to note on House-to-House Record with a view to making return call. (2) What to do on initial call to prepare the way for return visit. (3) Preparing for the call. Keep it simple, but stress value of preparation, having something definite in mind that fits needs of specific householder. (4) How to use chapter 1 of “Peace and Security” book to start a study. Point out the grouping of paragraphs on first two pages; can cover this briefly and then concentrate on Scriptural material starting with paragraph 9. Emphasize that all the needed material is right there in the book. Discuss what to do if questions arise to which new publisher does not know the answer. (5) When to make return visits; value of spending some time in this work regularly each week.
 5 min: Benefited by the “Yearbook.”
Two publishers walk up aisle toward platform. One mentions that he read something very interesting in “Yearbook.” Reads aloud experience from India, on page 20, par. 4. Both comment on fact that angels are directing field ministry (Rev. 14:6; Matt. 25:31, 32); want to put themselves in position to be used by the angels; mention arrangements for witnessing on weekend; make plans to go out together.
15 min: Concluding comments. Incorporate choice items from “Insight on the News,” in recent issues of “The Watchtower”; emphasize Scriptural viewpoint. Encourage use of magazines in field service. Song 6.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 3
13 min: Song 20. Introduction, text and comments. Family discusses; then chairman analyzes with father what was done and what can be done to involve all the family and help them to appreciate how it affects their lives.
10 min: Thorough Territory Coverage. It is important for everyone to hear the Kingdom message. Draw from audience comments on what they do when no one is at home; effort put forth to call back; reaching persons in apartment houses, permanent hotel residents, etc. Have one or two well-organized publishers comment on how they keep their service records so that they stay in good condition and are not lost. If some territory is in special need of attention, inform congregation.
15 min: “What About Those Who Still Hold Back?” Talk, along with experiences about helping such persons. Discuss application of material to local needs. Emphasize reaching heart as we teach. If certain ones do not progress, explain why it may be best to discontinue studying with them.
12 min: Presenting the Good News. Questions and answers. Include any local experiences that fit this material.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include any appropriate Announcements. Comment on Hebrews 10:36. Song 21.

