
August
Tuesday, August 1

Father, forgive them.​—Luke 23:34.



Jesus was likely referring to the Roman soldiers who drove the nails through his hands and feet. Jesus refused to allow the injustices he had suffered to make him bitter and resentful. (1 Pet. 2:23) Like Jesus, we need to be willing to forgive others. (Col. 3:13) Some, including relatives, may oppose us because they do not understand our beliefs and our way of life. They may lie about us, humiliate us in front of others, destroy our literature, or even threaten to cause us physical harm. Rather than harboring resentment, we can ask Jehovah to open the eyes of those who oppose us so that they may one day see the truth. (Matt. 5:44, 45) At times, we may find it hard to forgive, especially if we have experienced gross injustices. But if we allow bitterness and resentment to take root in our heart, we hurt ourselves. (Ps. 37:8) When we decide to forgive, we are choosing not to let negative experiences make us bitter.​—Eph. 4:31, 32. w21.04 8-9 ¶3-4




Wednesday, August 2

How often they . . . made him feel hurt.​—Ps. 78:40.



Has one of your loved ones been disfellowshipped from the congregation? That can be heartbreaking! Think how heartbroken Jehovah must have been when members of his own angelic family turned their back on him! (Jude 6) And imagine how hurt he was at seeing his beloved people, the Israelites, rebel against him time and again. (Ps. 78:41) Be assured that our loving heavenly Father is also hurt when someone you love leaves him. He understands the grief you are experiencing. He will compassionately provide you with the encouragement and the support you need. When a precious son or daughter leaves Jehovah, it is common for the parents to wonder what more they could have done to help their young one stay in the truth. One brother said: “I blamed myself. I had nightmares about it.” A sister who faced a similar situation, agonized: “What did I do wrong as a mother? I felt that I must have failed to inculcate the truth in my son.” w21.09 26 ¶1-2, 4




Thursday, August 3

[They] perceived that they were uneducated and ordinary.​—Acts 4:13.



Some feel that God’s people cannot teach about the Bible because they have not graduated from recognized theological schools. But they need to examine the facts. That is what the Gospel writer Luke was determined to do. He made it a point to trace “all things from the start with accuracy.” He wanted his readers to “know fully the certainty of the things” they had heard about Jesus. (Luke 1:1-4) The Jewish people in ancient Beroea were like Luke. When they first heard the good news about Jesus, they consulted the Hebrew Scriptures to confirm what they were being told. (Acts 17:11) In a similar way, people today need to examine the facts. They must compare what they are taught by God’s people with what the Scriptures say. They also need to study the record of Jehovah’s people in modern times. If they do a proper “background check,” they will not allow prejudice or hearsay to blind them. w21.05 3 ¶7-8




Friday, August 4

Open your hearts wide.​—2 Cor. 6:13.



Is there someone in your congregation to whom you can extend hospitality? There may be times when fellow Christians would especially appreciate our association. Some may find it difficult to be around unbelieving relatives during holidays. Others may find certain dates, such as the anniversary of the death of a loved one, very painful. When we offer to spend time with brothers and sisters who are experiencing such challenges, we show them that we “genuinely care.” (Phil. 2:20) There are many reasons why a Christian could at times feel alone. Yet, we must never forget that Jehovah is fully aware of such feelings. He provides us with what we need, often by means of our fellow Christians. (Matt. 12:48-50) In turn, we show Jehovah our appreciation for his loving arrangement when we do our best to support our spiritual family. No matter how we may sometimes feel, we are never alone because Jehovah is always by our side! w21.06 13 ¶18-20




Saturday, August 5

Maintain your conduct fine among the nations, so that when they accuse you of being wrongdoers, they may be eyewitnesses of your fine works and, as a result, glorify God.​—1 Pet. 2:12.



Jesus remained positive and kept preaching even though some were indifferent to his message. Why? He knew how much the people needed to know the truth, and he wanted to give as many as possible an opportunity to accept the Kingdom message. He also knew that some who initially were indifferent would eventually respond. Consider what happened in his own family. During Jesus’ entire three-and-a-half-year ministry, none of his brothers became his disciples. (John 7:5) Yet, after his resurrection, they became Christians. (Acts 1:14) We do not know who will eventually accept the Bible truths we teach. Some people take longer than others to respond to our message. Even those who choose not to listen to us see our good conduct and positive attitude, and they may eventually begin to “glorify God.” w21.05 18 ¶17-18




Sunday, August 6

As you go, preach, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”​—Matt. 10:7.



When Jesus was on the earth, he gave his followers a two-fold commission. He told them to preach the good news of the Kingdom, and he showed them how to go about it. (Luke 8:1) Among other things, Jesus prepared his disciples for both a negative and a positive response to the Kingdom message. (Luke 9:2-5) He also foretold the extent of their preaching activity, telling them that his followers would give “a witness to all the nations.” (Matt. 24:14; Acts 1:8) In addition, he told his followers to teach potential disciples to observe all the things he had commanded. Jesus indicated that this vital work would continue even down to our day, “until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matt. 28:18-20) And in the revelation he gave to John, Jesus clearly indicated that all his disciples are expected to help others learn about Jehovah.​—Rev. 22:17. w21.07 2-3 ¶3-4




Monday, August 7

Let us not become egotistical, stirring up competition with one another, envying one another.​—Gal. 5:26.



In the world today, many people are selfishly motivated by a spirit of competition. A businessman may resort to cutthroat tactics to get ahead of his competitors. An athlete in a sporting event may deliberately injure a player on the other team in order to win the game. A student competing for a place at a prestigious university may cheat on the entrance exams. As Christians, we recognize that such conduct is wrong; it is part of “the works of the flesh.” (Gal. 5:19-21) However, could it be that some of Jehovah’s servants might stir up competition in the congregation without even realizing it? That is an important question because a spirit of competition can affect the unity of our brotherhood. We do well, then, to consider the examples of faithful men and women in Bible times who did not give in to the spirit of competition. w21.07 14 ¶1-2




Tuesday, August 8

Happy is anyone who shows consideration to the lowly one; Jehovah will rescue him in the day of calamity.​—Ps. 41:1.



Loyal love moves us to reach out to those in distress. Kindhearted brothers and sisters today willingly stick with those in the congregation who are despondent or depressed. They love their brothers and sisters, and they are eager to do whatever they can to help them. (Prov. 12:25, ftn.; 24:10) This is in line with the apostle Paul’s admonition: “Speak consolingly to those who are depressed, support the weak, be patient toward all.” (1 Thess. 5:14) Often the most effective way you can help a discouraged brother or sister is by lending a listening ear and by reassuring him or her of your love. Your kind attention to one of Jehovah’s precious sheep does not go unnoticed by our God. Proverbs 19:17 states: “The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, and He will repay him for what he does.” w21.11 10 ¶11-12




Wednesday, August 9

Taste and see that Jehovah is good; happy is the man who takes refuge in him.​—Ps. 34:8.



What can we do now to prepare for the future? We need to be content and to find our greatest joy in our relationship with Jehovah. The better we get to know our God, the more convinced we will be of his ability to protect us when Gog of Magog attacks. The words of today’s text explain why David knew that he could count on Jehovah’s support. David often relied on Jehovah, and his God never disappointed him. When young, David faced the Philistine giant Goliath and told that formidable warrior: “This very day Jehovah will surrender you into my hand.” (1 Sam. 17:46) Later, David was in the service of a king, Saul, who tried a number of times to murder him. But “Jehovah was with” David. (1 Sam. 18:12) Because David had experienced Jehovah’s help in the past, David knew he could count on Him during his present trials. w22.01 6 ¶14-15




Thursday, August 10

All the sons of God began shouting in applause.​—Job 38:7.



In all that he does, Jehovah patiently takes whatever time is needed to complete his work. He does so both for the glory of his name and for the benefit of others. Consider, for example, the step-by-step manner in which Jehovah prepared the earth for mankind. When describing it, the Bible speaks of his setting “its measurements,” sinking “its pedestals,” and laying “its cornerstone.” (Job 38:5, 6) He even took the time to reflect on his work. (Gen. 1:10, 12) Can you imagine how the angels felt as they saw Jehovah’s creative works gradually taking shape? How exciting that must have been for them! Why, at one point, they began “shouting in applause.” What do we learn? Jehovah’s creative works took many thousands of years to accomplish, but when Jehovah surveyed everything that he had created so thoughtfully, he pronounced it “very good.”​—Gen. 1:31. w21.08 9 ¶6-7




Friday, August 11

Well done, good and faithful slave!​—Matt. 25:23.



In Jesus’ parable, a man was about to go on a trip. Before leaving, he called his slaves and gave each of them talents with which to do business. Taking into consideration their individual abilities, the man gave five talents to one slave, two to another, and one to a third slave. The first two slaves cared for these assets diligently. The third slave, however, did nothing with the money he was given, and he was dismissed from the master’s service. The first and the second slave took very seriously the responsibility they had been given and worked hard to serve their master. As a result, they doubled the master’s talents. Their diligence and skill were richly rewarded. Not only did their master rejoice but he judged them worthy of taking on even more responsibility! w21.08 21 ¶7; 22 ¶9-10




Saturday, August 12

Yet once more . . . I will shake the heavens and the earth.​—Hag. 2:6.



Jehovah has shown great patience during these last days. He does not want anyone to be destroyed. (2 Pet. 3:9) He has given all an opportunity to repent. But his patience has limits. Those who reject this opportunity will find themselves in a situation similar to that of Pharaoh in Moses’ day. Jehovah said to Pharaoh: “By now I could have thrust my hand out to strike you and your people with a devastating plague, and you would have been wiped out from the earth. But for this very reason I have kept you in existence: to show you my power and to have my name declared in all the earth.” (Ex. 9:15, 16) All the nations will eventually have to know that Jehovah is the only true God. (Ezek. 38:23) The shaking mentioned in today’s text will mean everlasting destruction for those who, like Pharaoh, refuse to acknowledge Jehovah’s right to rule. w21.09 18-19 ¶17-18




Sunday, August 13

Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep.​—Rom. 12:15.



Do you feel pained at heart because a loved one has been disfellowshipped? And what if it seems that some in the congregation say things to you that make you feel worse? Realistically, not everyone will respond in an ideal way. (Jas. 3:2) We are all imperfect, so do not be surprised if some struggle with what to say or even unintentionally make comments that cause you pain. Remember the apostle Paul’s admonition: “Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint.” (Col. 3:13) Continue to support faithful family members. They need your love and encouragement now more than ever. (Heb. 10:24, 25) At times, family members of disfellowshipped ones have felt that they too have been excluded from association with the congregation. Do not let that happen! Young people whose parents have left the truth especially need commendation and encouragement. w21.09 29 ¶13-14; 30 ¶16




Monday, August 14

A wise person listens and takes in more instruction.​—Prov. 1:5.



When an older one and a younger one talk with each other, both benefit. (Rom. 1:12) You younger ones will enrich your appreciation for the way Jehovah cares for his faithful servants, and the older one will feel dignified. He will enjoy recounting to you how he has received Jehovah’s blessings. Physical beauty usually fades with age, but those who are loyal to Jehovah become more beautiful to him with each passing year. (1 Thess. 1:2, 3) Why is that true? Because over the years, they have allowed God’s spirit to mold them and refine them. The more we get to know our precious older brothers and sisters, honor them, and learn from them, the more we will view them as priceless treasures! The congregation grows stronger not only when younger ones treasure older ones but also when older ones value younger ones. w21.09 7 ¶15-18




Tuesday, August 15

Stop judging that you may not be judged; for with the judgment you are judging, you will be judged.​—Matt. 7:1, 2.



We must keep on guard against harshness and strive to be “rich in mercy,” like our God. (Eph. 2:4) Mercy is more than just a feeling. In fact, mercy has been defined as “compassion in action.” All of us, then, can look carefully at the needs in our family, our congregation, and our community. Surely there are many opportunities to show mercy! Is someone in need of comfort? Can we offer practical help, perhaps providing some food or doing some thoughtful deed? Might a reinstated Christian need some comforting, upbuilding association? Can we share the comforting message of the good news with others? (Job 29:12, 13; Rom. 10:14, 15; Jas. 1:27) If we are alert to such needs, we will see that there are opportunities all around us to show mercy. When we show mercy, how we must delight our heavenly Father, the God who is “rich in mercy”! w21.10 13 ¶20-22




Wednesday, August 16

Jehovah is my Shepherd. I will lack nothing.​—Ps. 23:1.



In Psalm 23, David mentions things that are truly of lasting value​—the abundant spiritual blessings he enjoys by accepting Jehovah as his Shepherd. Jehovah leads him “in the paths of righteousness,” and He loyally supports David in good times and in bad times. David acknowledges that his life in Jehovah’s “grassy pastures” will not be trouble free. At times, he may get discouraged, as if walking “in the valley of deep shadow,” and he will have enemies. But with Jehovah as his Shepherd, David will “fear no harm.” In what way did David “lack nothing”? Spiritually speaking, he had everything he needed. His happiness was not dependent on material things. David was satisfied with what Jehovah provided. What mattered most to him was the blessing and the protection of his God. From David’s words we can see how important it is for us to have a proper view of material things. w22.01 3-4 ¶5-7




Thursday, August 17

Each person will receive his own reward according to his own work.​—1 Cor. 3:8.



Early witnesses of Jehovah faced unresponsive listeners. For example, Noah was “a preacher of righteousness,” likely for decades. (2 Pet. 2:5) No doubt, he hoped that others would respond favorably to his preaching, but Jehovah gave no such indication. Rather, when instructing Noah to build the ark, God said: “You must go into the ark, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons’ wives with you.” (Gen. 6:18) And considering the dimensions and capacity of the ark that God told him to build, Noah may have realized that any response to his preaching would be limited. (Gen. 6:15) As matters turned out, not one person from that violent world responded to Noah’s preaching. (Gen. 7:7) Did Jehovah view Noah as a failure? Not at all! In God’s eyes, Noah was a successful preacher because he faithfully did what Jehovah had asked him to do.​—Gen. 6:22. w21.10 26 ¶10-11




Friday, August 18

I was full when I went, but Jehovah made me return empty-handed.​—Ruth 1:21.



Imagine how Ruth must have felt on hearing those words from Naomi! Ruth had gone out of her way to help Naomi. Ruth had wept with her, comforted her, and walked with her for days on end. Despite all of this, Naomi said: “Jehovah made me return empty-handed.” With those words, Naomi did not even acknowledge the support of Ruth, who was standing next to her. How painful that must have been for Ruth! Yet, she stuck with Naomi. (Ruth 1:3-18) Today, a sister in distress may initially speak to us in a hurtful way​—despite all our efforts to help her. But we try not to take it personally. We stick with our sister who is in need, and we ask Jehovah to help us find a way to bring her comfort. (Prov. 17:17) A sister in need of assistance may at first refuse our help. Still, loyal love will move us to do our best to stick with her.​—Gal. 6:2. w21.11 11 ¶17-19




Saturday, August 19

Become holy yourselves in all your conduct.​—1 Pet. 1:15.



In the Bible, the words “holy” and “holiness” basically refer to moral and religious cleanness or sacredness. The terms can also convey the idea of being set aside to serve God. In other words, we will be considered holy if we are morally clean, if we worship Jehovah acceptably, and if we have a close personal relationship with him. The very thought that we can have a personal relationship with our holy God is enough to take our breath away, especially when we consider what the Bible teaches us about Jehovah’s holiness. Jehovah is pure and clean in every way. We learn this from a description of him that was given by seraphs​—angelic creatures who are close to his throne. Some of them testified: “Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of armies.” (Isa. 6:3) Of course, in order to have a close relationship with their holy God, the angels themselves must be holy​—and they are. w21.12 3 ¶4-5




Sunday, August 20

Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, making the best use of your time.​—Eph. 5:15, 16.



Young people are often concerned about the best way to spend their life. On the one hand, school guidance counselors and unbelieving family members may urge them to pursue higher education in preparation for a prestigious career in the world. That path would likely consume a great deal of their time. On the other hand, parents and friends in the congregation may encourage young people to spend their life in Jehovah’s service. What can help a young person who loves Jehovah to make the best decision? He would benefit by reading Ephesians 5:15-17 and meditating on it. After reading these verses, a young person might ask himself: ‘What is “the will of Jehovah”? What decision will please him? Which path will result in my making the best use of my time?’ Remember, “the days are wicked,” and this system ruled by Satan will soon come to an end. w22.01 27 ¶5




Monday, August 21

His brothers were, in fact, not exercising faith in him.​—John 7:5.



When did James become a loyal follower of Jesus? After Jesus was raised from the dead, “he appeared to James, then to all the apostles.” (1 Cor. 15:7) That meeting with Jesus marked a turning point in James’ life. He was present when the apostles awaited the promised holy spirit in an upper room in Jerusalem. (Acts 1:13, 14) Later, James had the joy of serving as a member of the first-century governing body. (Acts 15:6, 13-22; Gal. 2:9) And sometime before 62 C.E., he was inspired to write a letter to anointed Christians. That letter is of benefit to us today, whether our hope is heavenly or earthly. (Jas. 1:1) According to the first-century historian Josephus, James was executed at the order of the Jewish High Priest Ananias the Younger. James remained faithful to Jehovah until he finished his earthly course. w22.01 8 ¶3; 9 ¶5




Tuesday, August 22

My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?​—Matt. 27:46.



One lesson we can learn from today’s text is that we must not expect Jehovah to shield us from challenges that test our faith. Just as Jesus was tested to the limit, we too must be prepared to prove faithful to death if necessary. (Matt. 16:24, 25) However, we have the assurance that God will not let us be tested beyond what we can bear. (1 Cor. 10:13) Another lesson we learn is that, like Jesus, we may suffer unjustly. (1 Pet. 2:19, 20) Those who oppose us do so, not because we have done something wrong, but because we are no part of the world and we bear witness to the truth. (John 17:14; 1 Pet. 4:15, 16) Jesus understood why Jehovah allowed him to suffer. Unlike him, however, faithful worshippers under trial have sometimes wondered why Jehovah allowed certain things to happen. (Hab. 1:3) Our merciful and patient God understands that such ones do not lack faith; they need the comfort that only he can provide.​—2 Cor. 1:3, 4. w21.04 11 ¶9-10




Wednesday, August 23

May my prayer be as incense prepared before you.​—Ps. 141:2.



Jehovah will accept our worship if it is in harmony with his purpose and is being offered with love and respect. We know that Jehovah deserves to be worshipped, and we want our gift of worship to be of the best possible quality. One way we worship Jehovah is when we pray to him. The Scriptures compare our prayers to the carefully prepared incense that was offered at the tabernacle and later at the temple. That incense was pleasing to God. Similarly, our heartfelt prayers are “a pleasure” to him, even if we use very simple words. (Prov. 15:8; Deut. 33:10) It warms Jehovah’s heart to hear us express our love and gratitude to him. He wants us to share with him our concerns, our hopes, and our desires. Before approaching Jehovah in prayer, why not give careful thought to what you are going to say? In doing so, you will offer the best possible “incense” to your heavenly Father. w22.03 20 ¶2; 21 ¶7




Thursday, August 24

You who suffer tribulation will be given relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels.​—2 Thess. 1:7.



At Armageddon, it will not be up to us to decide who will receive Jehovah’s mercy and who will not. (Matt. 25:34, 41, 46) Will we be able to trust in Jehovah’s judgments, or will they be a stumbling block for us? Clearly, we need to strengthen our trust in Jehovah now so that we will trust him implicitly in the future. Imagine how we will feel in God’s new world. False religion will be gone, and so will the greedy commercial system along with the political system that has oppressed people and caused untold misery throughout history. Poor health, old age, and the death of loved ones will no longer be part of our daily experience. Satan and the demons will be confined for a thousand years. The consequences of their rebellion will be gone. (Rev. 20:2, 3) How grateful we will then be that we trusted in Jehovah’s way of doing things! w22.02 6-7 ¶16-17




Friday, August 25

Happy are the peacemakers.​—Matt. 5:9.



Jesus took the initiative to make peace and encouraged others to settle their disputes. He taught them that they must make peace with their brother if they wanted Jehovah to accept their worship. (Matt. 5:23, 24) And he repeatedly helped the apostles to settle their dispute over which one among them was the greatest. (Luke 9:46-48; 22:24-27) To be a peacemaker, we need to do more than just avoid causing conflicts. We need to take the initiative to make peace and to encourage our brothers and sisters to settle their differences. (Phil. 4:2, 3; Jas. 3:17, 18) We can ask ourselves: ‘What am I willing to sacrifice in order to make peace with others? When a brother or a sister hurts my feelings, do I hold a grudge? Do I wait for the other person to take the initiative to restore peace, or do I take the first step, even if the other person seems to have caused the problem?’ w22.03 10 ¶10-11




Saturday, August 26

There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.​—Acts 20:35.



Long ago, the Bible foretold that God’s people would “offer themselves willingly” in Jehovah’s service under the direction of his Son. (Ps. 110:3) That prophecy is certainly being fulfilled today. Each year, Jehovah’s zealous servants devote hundreds of millions of hours to the preaching work. They do so voluntarily and at their own expense. They also take time to support their fellow believers physically, emotionally, and spiritually. Appointed brothers spend countless hours preparing meeting parts and shepherding fellow believers. What is the motivation behind all this work? It is love​—love for Jehovah and love for neighbor. (Matt. 22:37-39) Jesus set an outstanding example in putting the interests of others ahead of his own. We are trying our best to follow his footsteps. (Rom. 15:1-3) Those who imitate him will reap benefits. w22.02 20 ¶1-2




Sunday, August 27

You should not withhold the wages of a hired worker all night until morning.​—Lev. 19:13.



In the agricultural society of Israel, hired laborers were to be paid at the end of each workday. To hold back the wages of such a worker would deprive him of the money he needed to feed his family that day. Jehovah explained: “He is in need and his life depends on his wages.” (Deut. 24:14, 15; Matt. 20:8) Today many employees are paid once or twice a month, not every day. However, the principle set out at Leviticus 19:13 is still valid. Some employers take advantage of their employees by paying them an amount that is far below what is fair. They know that these workers may have little choice but to continue working for starvation wages. In a sense, such employers are ‘withholding the wages of a hired worker.’ A Christian who has a business would want to take this point to heart. w21.12 10 ¶9-10




Monday, August 28

I am thirsty.​—John 19:28.



After all that Jesus had suffered, he must have been very thirsty. He needed help to quench his thirst. Jesus did not consider it to be a sign of weakness to express how he felt; nor should we. For much of our life, we may have preferred not to tell others about our needs. But if the time comes when we need help, we should not hesitate to ask others for assistance. For example, if we are older or infirm, we may have to ask a friend to give us a ride to a grocery store or to a doctor’s appointment. If we are downhearted or discouraged, we may need to ask an elder or other mature Christian friend to provide a listening ear or to share “a good word” to cheer us up. (Prov. 12:25) Let us remember that our brothers and sisters love us, and they want to help us in “times of distress.” (Prov. 17:17) But they cannot read our minds. They may not know that we need help unless we take the initiative to say something. w21.04 11-12 ¶11-12




Tuesday, August 29

If you become discouraged in the day of distress, your strength will be meager.​—Prov. 24:10.



Change is challenging for many of us. Some who served in a form of special full-time service for a long time have received a change of assignment. Others have had to relinquish a cherished privilege because of their age. It is normal to feel disappointed when such a change affects us. We cope better with change when we look at things from Jehovah’s perspective. He is accomplishing great things today, and we have the unique privilege of being his fellow workers. (1 Cor. 3:9) Jehovah’s love for us will not change. Consequently, if a change in the organization affects you personally, avoid getting caught up in the whys and wherefores behind the change. Rather than long for “the former days,” prayerfully look for the good in the change. (Eccl. 7:10) Keep a positive attitude. Thus we will remain joyful and faithful even when our circumstances change. w22.03 17 ¶11-12




Wednesday, August 30

Jehovah, Jehovah, a God . . . showing loyal love to thousands.​—Ex. 34:6, 7.



To whom does Jehovah show loyal love? The Bible mentions that we can love many things, such as “agriculture,” “wine and oil,” “discipline,” “knowledge,” “wisdom”​—to name a few. (2 Chron. 26:10; Prov. 12:1; 21:17; 29:3) Loyal love, however, is never extended to things or concepts; it is shown only to people. But Jehovah does not show loyal love to just anyone. He shows it to those who are in a special relationship with him. Our God is loyal to his friends. He has a wonderful purpose for them, and he will not give up on them. Jehovah has shown love to mankind in general. Jesus told a man named Nicodemus: “God loved the world [of mankind] so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.”​—John 3:1, 16; Matt. 5:44, 45. w21.11 2 ¶3; 3 ¶6-7




Thursday, August 31

By your endurance you will preserve your lives.​—Luke 21:19.



Life in this system is hard, and we may be confronted with even more difficult challenges in the future. (Matt. 24:21) How we yearn for the day when all of that will be behind us​—long forgotten and never to be repeated! (Isa. 65:16, 17) Clearly, we need to continue to strengthen our endurance. Why? Because Jesus said: “By your endurance you will preserve your lives.” (Luke 21:19) Thinking about how others are successfully enduring trials similar to ours can strengthen our endurance. Who is the best example of endurance? Jehovah God. Does that answer surprise you? It might until you think about it. This world is under the control of the Devil, and it is riddled with problems. Jehovah has the power to end it in an instant, but he is waiting for a future day to do that. (Rom. 9:22) In the meantime, our God keeps on enduring until that appointed time arrives. w21.07 8 ¶2-4




