
December
Friday, December 1

They will listen to my voice.​—John 10:16.



Jesus compared his relationship with his followers to the close bond between a shepherd and his sheep. (John 10:14) That comparison is appropriate. The sheep know their shepherd and respond to his voice. A traveler experienced this firsthand. He reported: “We wanted to film some sheep and tried to make them come near. But they did not follow us because they did not know our voices. Then a small shepherd boy came along; hardly had he called them when they followed along.” The experience of that traveler reminds us of Jesus’ words regarding his sheep​—his disciples. He said: “They will listen to my voice.” But Jesus is in heaven. How can we say that we are listening to him? A key way we show that we are listening to our Master’s voice is by applying his teachings in our life.​—Matt. 7:24, 25. w21.12 16 ¶1-2




Saturday, December 2

All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.​—Rom. 3:23.



The apostle Paul had been a headstrong, harsh persecutor of Christians. But later, he acknowledged his shortcomings and was willing to change his attitude and personality. (1 Tim. 1:12-16) With Jehovah’s help, Paul became a loving, compassionate, humble shepherd. He chose to trust in Jehovah’s forgiveness rather than dwell on his failings. (Rom. 7:21-25) He did not expect to be perfect. Instead, he worked hard to improve his Christian personality and humbly relied on Jehovah’s help to accomplish his work. (1 Cor. 9:27; Phil. 4:13) Elders are not appointed because they are perfect. Jehovah, though, does expect them to admit their mistakes and to cultivate a Christian personality. (Eph. 4:23, 24) An elder should examine himself in the light of God’s Word and make any needed adjustments. Then Jehovah will help him to be happy and successful.​—Jas. 1:25. w22.03 29-30 ¶13-15




Sunday, December 3

Stop judging.​—Matt. 7:1.



What should we do if we detect that we have judged a fellow believer? We must remember that we are to love our brothers. (Jas. 2:8) We should also earnestly pray to Jehovah, begging him to help us to stop judging. We can work in harmony with our prayers by taking the initiative to speak with the person we have been critical of. We might ask him to work with us in the field ministry or to join us for a meal. As we get to know our brother better, we can try to follow the example of Jehovah and Jesus by looking for the good in him. In this way, we show that we are listening to the fine shepherd’s command to stop judging. Just as literal sheep listen to the voice of their shepherd, Jesus’ followers listen to his voice. Whether we are part of the “little flock” or the “other sheep,” may we continue to listen to and obey the voice of the fine shepherd.​—Luke 12:32; John 10:11, 14, 16. w21.12 19 ¶11; 21 ¶17-18




Monday, December 4

He rejected the advice that the older men gave him.​—1 Ki. 12:8.



When Rehoboam became king of Israel, his subjects came to him with a request. They asked him to lighten the load that his father, Solomon, had laid upon them. Commendably, Rehoboam consulted with the older men of Israel to see how he should reply to the people. The older men advised the king that if he did what the people asked, they would always support him. (1 Ki. 12:3-7) Apparently, Rehoboam was not satisfied with that advice, so he consulted the men who had grown up with him. They counseled him to add to the burdens of the people. (1 Ki. 12:9-11) Rehoboam could have asked Jehovah which advice he should follow. Instead, he listened to the younger men. The consequences were disastrous for Rehoboam and for the people of Israel. In our case, the advice we receive may not always be what we want to hear. Still, if it is based on God’s Word, we should accept it. w22.02 9 ¶6




Tuesday, December 5

The glory of young men is their strength.​—Prov. 20:29.



A person who is humble and modest will focus, not on the inexperience of young ones, but on their strengths. He will view them, not as competitors, but as fellow workers. Older ones view younger ones as gifts from Jehovah for which they are grateful. As their energy decreases, older ones are thankful that those who have the strength of youth are willing and able to fill the need and serve the congregation. The Bible character Naomi is an excellent example of an older one who gratefully accepted help from a younger one. At first, Naomi urged her widowed daughter-in-law Ruth to return to her own people. However, when Ruth insisted on accompanying Naomi back to Bethlehem, she accepted Ruth’s loyal support. (Ruth 1:7, 8, 18) And what a blessing that was for both women! (Ruth 4:13-16) Humility will move older ones to follow Naomi’s example. w21.09 10-11 ¶9-11




Wednesday, December 6

God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed.​—Heb. 6:10.



Our heavenly Father understands our individual circumstances. Maybe you can do more than many whom you know and love. Or you may not be able to do as much as others do, perhaps because of your age, health, or family responsibilities. Do not be discouraged. (Gal. 6:4) Jehovah will not forget your work. As long as you are giving your best and with the right motive, he will be pleased. Jehovah sees even the intentions of your heart. He wants you to be happy and satisfied with the worship you are able to give him. We already have peace of mind because we know that Jehovah helps his worshippers when they experience problems. (Isa. 41:9, 10) We certainly have good reasons to be happy as we worship our loving Father, who is worthy “to receive the glory and the honor” from all his creation!​—Rev. 4:11. w22.03 24 ¶16; 25 ¶18




Thursday, December 7

I hurry and do not delay to keep your commandments.​—Ps. 119:60.



We want to imitate Jesus, but we should not be discouraged if we fail to imitate Jesus perfectly. (Jas. 3:2) A student artist cannot perfectly imitate the work of a master artist. But as the student learns from his mistakes and strives to follow the example of the master artist as closely as possible, he will keep improving. Similarly, if we act on what we have learned through personal Bible study, doing our best to correct any flaws we may have, we can successfully follow the model that Jesus left for us. (Ps. 119:59) We live in a world that is dominated by selfishness. But Jehovah’s people stand out as different. We have been touched by the self-sacrificing spirit of Jesus, and we are determined to follow his example. (1 Pet. 2:21) As we do our best to imitate Jesus’ self-sacrificing attitude, we too will experience the joy of gaining Jehovah’s approval. w22.02 24 ¶16; 25 ¶18




Friday, December 8

Some things in them are hard to understand.​—2 Pet. 3:16.



One way that Jehovah provides direction to his people today is by means of his Word, the Bible. If we take the time to ponder over what Jehovah is teaching us, we will be able to follow his direction and accomplish our preaching work. (1 Tim. 4:15, 16) Another way that Jehovah provides direction is by means of “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) At times, this slave may give direction that we do not fully understand. For example, we may receive specific instructions designed to prepare us to survive a natural disaster that we think is unlikely to occur in our area. What should we do if we feel that the instructions given are not practical? Think about Bible accounts that we have read. Sometimes God’s people received direction that did not appear to be practical from a human standpoint but turned out to be lifesaving.​—Judg. 7:7; 8:10. w22.03 18-19 ¶15-16




Saturday, December 9

Father, into your hands I entrust my spirit.​—Luke 23:46.



With complete confidence, Jesus said the words of today’s text. Jesus knew that his future depended on Jehovah, and he was certain that his Father would remember him. What can we learn from Jesus’ words? Be willing to put your life in Jehovah’s hands. To do that, you must “trust in Jehovah with all your heart.” (Prov. 3:5) Consider the example of Joshua, a 15-year-old Witness with a terminal illness. He refused to accept medical procedures that violate God’s law. Shortly before he died, he told his mother: “Mom, I’m in Jehovah’s hands. . . . I can tell you this, Mom, with all certainty: I know Jehovah is definitely going to bring me back in the resurrection. He has read my heart, and I truly love him.” Each of us would do well to ask, ‘If I were to face a life-threatening situation that tests my faith, would I put my life in Jehovah’s hands and trust in him to remember me?’ w21.04 12-13 ¶15-16




Sunday, December 10

Whoever refreshes others will himself be refreshed.​—Prov. 11:25.



Jehovah’s people are strengthened by means of the ministry. When we share Bible truths with others, we feel refreshed and invigorated, whether they respond positively or not. Because of their circumstances, some may feel that they are not able to do much in the ministry. If that is how you feel, remember that Jehovah is pleased if you do your best. Jehovah sees and appreciates our desire to share in the ministry even if we are housebound. He can open opportunities for us to give a witness to caregivers or medical personnel. If we compare our present activity with what we were able to do in the past, we may become discouraged. But if we recognize how Jehovah is helping us now, we will have the strength we need to endure any trial with joy. We do not know which of the seeds of truth that we plant may take root and start to grow.​—Eccl. 11:6. w21.05 24-25 ¶14-17




Monday, December 11

Why did you despise the word of Jehovah by doing what is bad in his eyes?​—2 Sam. 12:9.



Greed led King David to forget what Jehovah had given him, including wealth, prominence, and victory over many of his enemies. David gratefully acknowledged that God’s gifts were “too numerous to recount!” (Ps. 40:5) But at one point, David forgot what Jehovah had given him. Although David had several wives, he let an improper desire for another man’s wife develop in his heart. The woman was Bath-sheba, and her husband was Uriah the Hittite. David selfishly had sexual relations with Bath-sheba, and she became pregnant. As if the adultery were not bad enough, David arranged for Uriah to be killed! (2 Sam. 11:2-15) What was David thinking? Did he imagine that Jehovah could not see? That once faithful servant of Jehovah gave in to selfish greed and paid dearly for it. Happily, though, in time David admitted his error and repented. How thankful he was to have Jehovah’s favor again!​—2 Sam. 12:7-13. w21.06 17 ¶10




Tuesday, December 12

Not that we of ourselves are adequately qualified . . . , but our being adequately qualified comes from God.​—2 Cor. 3:5.



We may lack confidence in our ability to conduct a Bible study. Perhaps we feel that we should have more knowledge or skill as a teacher before we can study with someone. If this is how you feel, consider three factors that can bolster your confidence. First, Jehovah considers you qualified to teach others. Second, Jesus, who has ‘all authority in heaven and on the earth,’ has authorized you to teach. (Matt. 28:18) And third, you can rely on others to help you. Jesus relied on what his Father taught him to say and speak, and so can you. (John 8:28; 12:49) In addition, you can ask your field service group overseer, a qualified pioneer, or an experienced publisher to help you to start and conduct a Bible study. One way you could gain confidence is by sitting in on a Bible study conducted by one of these publishers. w21.07 6 ¶12




Wednesday, December 13

The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much, and the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also in much.​—Luke 16:10.



As the end of this system of things draws near, we need to trust in Jehovah’s way of doing things as never before. Why? During the great tribulation, we may receive instructions that seem strange, impractical, or illogical. Of course, Jehovah will not speak to us personally. He will likely provide direction through his appointed representatives. That will hardly be the time to second-guess the direction or to view it with skepticism, wondering, ‘Is this really coming from Jehovah, or are the responsible brothers acting on their own?’ How will you fare during that crucial time in human history? The answer might be indicated by how you view theocratic direction now. If you trust the direction we receive today and readily obey, you will likely do the same during the great tribulation. w22.02 6 ¶15




Thursday, December 14

What have I done compared with you?​—Judg. 8:2.



With Jehovah’s backing, Gideon and his 300 men had a remarkable victory for which they could have taken great pride. The men of Ephraim met Gideon, not to commend him, but to quarrel with him because they had not been asked to join the fight. (Judg. 8:1) Gideon gave them a specific example of how Jehovah had blessed them. As a result, the men “calmed down.” (Judg. 8:3) Gideon willingly set pride aside in order to maintain peace among God’s people. From the example of the Ephraimites, we learn that we should not become more focused on protecting our own honor than on honoring Jehovah. As family heads and elders, we can learn a lesson from Gideon. If someone is upset by something we did, we should try to see things from his perspective. We can also commend the person for what he has done well. That will require humility on our part. But peace is worth much more than our personal pride. w21.07 16-17 ¶10-12




Friday, December 15

Let us make man in our image.​—Gen. 1:26.



Jehovah honored us by making us in his image. Because we are made in God’s image, we can develop and manifest many of his wonderful qualities, such as love, compassion, loyalty, and righteousness. (Ps. 86:15; 145:17) As we cultivate such qualities, we honor Jehovah and prove that we are grateful to him. (1 Pet. 1:14-16) When we behave in a way that pleases our heavenly Father, we are happy and satisfied. And by making us in his image, Jehovah gave us the ability to become the kind of people he wants in his family. Jehovah prepared a special home for us. Long before he created the first man, Jehovah prepared the earth for humans. (Job 38:4-6; Jer. 10:12) Because he is thoughtful and generous, Jehovah provided an abundance of good things for us to enjoy. (Ps. 104:14, 15, 24) At times, he reflected on his creative work, and he “saw that it was good.”​—Gen. 1:10, 12, 31. w21.08 3 ¶5-6




Saturday, December 16

The fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.



All of us have the assignment to preach and make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Rom. 10:14) Would you like to sharpen your skills in this all-important work? Set specific goals as you study and apply what you learn in the Teaching brochure. When considering goals for yourself, do not neglect one of the most important​—cultivating Christian qualities. (Col. 3:12; 2 Pet. 1:5-8) No doubt all of us wish we could do more for Jehovah than we can do at present. In God’s new world, we will be able to serve him to the full. Meanwhile, by taking advantage of whatever opportunities are available to us, we can add to our joy and reduce any feelings of disappointment. Even more important, we will bring honor and praise to Jehovah, our “happy God.” (1 Tim. 1:11) So let us find joy in the privileges we have! w21.08 25 ¶18-20




Sunday, December 17

Whoever approaches God must believe that he is.​—Heb. 11:6.



If you were raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, you likely learned about Jehovah from an early age. You were taught that he is the Creator, that he has an appealing personality, and that he has a loving purpose for mankind. (Gen. 1:1; Acts 17:24-27) Many people, however, do not believe that God exists, let alone that he is the Creator. Instead, they believe that life started by chance and then slowly evolved to complex forms of life. Some of these individuals are highly educated. They may claim that science has proved the Bible wrong and that faith in a Creator is for people who are ignorant, weak, or naive. No matter how long we have been one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, we all need to keep building our faith. In doing so, we will not be misled by “the philosophy and empty deception” taught by men who contradict God’s Word.​—Col. 2:8. w21.08 14 ¶1-3




Monday, December 18

You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power.​—Rev. 4:11.



Abel, Noah, Abraham, and Job demonstrated their respect and love for Jehovah by means of their obedience, faith, and sacrifices. They clearly did their best to honor Jehovah, and their worship was acceptable to him. Jehovah then gave the Mosaic Law to Abraham’s descendants. This series of laws included instructions about how to worship Jehovah in a way that he approved. After Jesus’ death and resurrection, Jehovah no longer required obedience to the Mosaic Law. (Rom. 10:4) Christians were to follow a new law, “the law of the Christ.” (Gal. 6:2) They could obey this “law,” not by adhering to a long list of dos and don’ts, but by imitating Jesus’ example and following his teachings. Today, too, Christians do their best to follow the Christ in order to please Jehovah and “find refreshment” for themselves.​—Matt. 11:29. w22.03 20-21 ¶4-5




Tuesday, December 19

He often went into the desolate areas to pray.​—Luke 5:16.



Jehovah listens to his children. He heard many prayers offered by his Son when he was on earth. He heard Jesus pray about weighty decisions, such as when he selected his 12 apostles. (Luke 6:12, 13) Jehovah also heard Jesus pray when he was in distress. Just before his betrayal, Jesus fervently prayed to his Father concerning the difficult test he was about to face. Jehovah not only heard Jesus’ prayer but also sent an angel to strengthen His dear Son. (Luke 22:41-44) Today, Jehovah continues to listen to the prayers of his servants, and he answers them at the right time and in the best possible way. (Ps. 116:1, 2) Consider how a sister in India personally experienced this. She had been dealing with severe emotional problems, and she earnestly prayed to Jehovah about the matter. She writes: “The May 2019 JW Broadcasting® program about how to deal with worry and anxiety was just the right thing for me. It was an answer to my prayers.” w21.09 21-22 ¶6-7




Wednesday, December 20

[Flee] to the mountains.​—Luke 21:21.



Can you imagine how difficult it was for those first-century Christians to leave almost everything they had and start over? It took faith on their part to rely on Jehovah for their basic needs. But they were not without help. Five years before the Romans surrounded Jerusalem, the apostle Paul gave the Hebrews some valuable advice: “Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. For he has said: ‘I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.’ So that we may be of good courage and say: ‘Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?’” (Heb. 13:5, 6) No doubt those who took to heart Paul’s advice before the Roman invasion found it easier to adapt to what might have been a modest lifestyle in their new home. They were certain that Jehovah would care for their basic needs. w22.01 4 ¶7, 9




Thursday, December 21

[Jehovah’s] mercy is evident in all his works.​—Ps. 145:9.



When we think of a merciful person, we may picture someone who is kind, warmhearted, compassionate, and generous. The story Jesus told about the neighborly Samaritan may come to mind. That man of another nation “acted mercifully toward” a Jew who had fallen among thieves. The Samaritan “was moved with pity” for the injured Jew and lovingly arranged for his care. (Luke 10:29-37) This illustration highlights a beautiful quality of our God​—mercy. That quality is a facet of God’s love, and he displays it each day in the way that he deals with us. There is another aspect of mercy that may come to mind. It involves holding back punishment when there is a basis for doing so. In that sense, Jehovah has certainly been merciful toward us. “He has not dealt with us according to our sins,” the psalmist said. (Ps. 103:10) At other times, though, Jehovah may provide firm discipline to an erring one. w21.10 8 ¶1-2




Friday, December 22

My loyal love will not be removed from you.​—Isa. 54:10.



Jehovah shows his loyal love only to those who have an approved relationship with him​—his servants. This is evident from statements made by King David and by the prophet Daniel. For example, David said: “Continue showing your loyal love to those who know you.” “The loyal love of Jehovah is for all eternity toward those who fear him.” And Daniel declared: “O Jehovah the true God, [who] shows loyal love to those who love him and keep his commandments.” (Ps. 36:10; 103:17; Dan. 9:4) According to these inspired expressions, Jehovah shows loyal love to his servants because they know him, fear him, love him, and keep his commandments. Jehovah reserves his loyal love for his people, his true worshippers. Before we began serving Jehovah, we received the love that God shows to mankind in general. (Ps. 104:14) However, as his worshippers, we also benefit from his loyal love. w21.11 4 ¶8-9




Saturday, December 23

It is Jehovah your God you must worship.​—Matt. 4:10.



Come what may, we are determined to obey Jesus’ words above. Today many follow charismatic church leaders. Enthusiasm for such men sometimes borders on idolatry. People pack their churches, buy their books, and donate heavily to the causes these leaders promote. Some individuals hang on to their every word. It is hard to imagine that these churchgoers could be more excited if Jesus himself were to appear to them! In contrast, true worshippers of Jehovah have no clergy. Although we respect those who are taking the lead, we accept Jesus’ clear teaching: “All of you are brothers.” (Matt. 23:8-10) We do not idolize men, whether they are religious leaders or political rulers. And we do not support their causes. Rather, we remain neutral and separate from the world. In these areas, we stand out as different from the many groups of professed Christians.​—John 18:36. w21.10 20 ¶6-7




Sunday, December 24

I am Jehovah your God . . . You must not have any other gods besides me.​—Ex. 20:2, 3.



Every Christian who wants to become holy must ensure that nothing or no one comes between him and his relationship with his God. And because we bear the name Jehovah’s Witnesses, we are determined to avoid any actions that would disgrace or profane his holy name. (Lev. 19:12; Isa. 57:15) For the Israelites, recognizing Jehovah as their God involved keeping many laws. Leviticus 18:4 says: “You should carry out my judicial decisions, and you should keep my statutes and walk in them. I am Jehovah your God.” Chapter 19 includes some of those “statutes” for Israel. For example, verses 5-8, 21, 22 deal with animal sacrifices. Those were to be made in a way that would not ‘profane a holy thing of Jehovah.’ Reading those verses should move us to want to please Jehovah and to offer him acceptable sacrifices of praise, as Hebrews 13:15 urges us to do. w21.12 5-6 ¶14-15




Monday, December 25

May you rejoice with the wife of your youth.​—Prov. 5:18.



Young couples today can benefit from the experience of others who have learned to rely on Jehovah. Some couples may have spent decades serving in the full-time ministry. Why not seek their advice if you feel the need to assess your goals? This is a way to show that you are trusting in Jehovah. (Prov. 22:17, 19) Remember, marriage is a gift from Jehovah. (Matt. 19:5, 6) He wants married couples to enjoy that gift. Young couples, why not examine how you are spending your life? Are you doing all you can to show Jehovah how much you appreciate the gifts he has given you? Talk to Jehovah in prayer. Search his Word for principles that apply to your situation. Then heed the advice that Jehovah gives you. You can be certain that you will have a happy and rewarding life if you build your marriage around serving Jehovah! w21.11 19 ¶16, 18




Tuesday, December 26

We all make mistakes many times.​—Jas. 3:2, ftn.



James kept the right view of himself. James did not feel that his family background or his privileged assignments made him special or placed him above his brothers and sisters. He referred to his fellow worshippers as “my beloved brothers.” (Jas. 1:16, 19; 2:5) He did not give the impression that he was perfect. The lesson: Remember that we are all sinners. We must not think that we are somehow superior to those whom we teach. Why not? If we give our student the impression that we are flawless, he may conclude that he could never measure up to God’s requirements. But when we honestly admit that it has not always been easy for us to follow Scriptural principles and we explain how Jehovah has helped us to overcome our challenges, we will help our student to see that he too can serve Jehovah. w22.01 11-12 ¶13-14




Wednesday, December 27

Keep this mental attitude in you that was also in Christ Jesus.​—Phil. 2:5.



The more we think like Jesus, the more we will act like him and the more successful we will be in reflecting his personality. (Heb. 1:3) We may think: ‘Jesus is perfect. I will never be completely like him!’ If you feel that way, remember these facts. First, you were designed to be like Jehovah and Jesus. So you can choose to imitate them, and you can succeed at least to some degree. (Gen. 1:26) Second, God’s holy spirit is the most powerful force in the universe. With its help, you can accomplish things that you could never do on your own. Third, Jehovah does not expect you to display the fruitage of the spirit perfectly now. In fact, our loving Father has set aside 1,000 years for those with an earthly hope to become perfect. (Rev. 20:1-3) What Jehovah requires of us now is to try our best and to rely on him for help. w22.03 9 ¶5-6




Thursday, December 28

There is not a word on my tongue, but look! O Jehovah, you already know it well.​—Ps. 139:4.



Prayer is not the only avenue we can use to strengthen our bond with Jehovah. A study of God’s Word and attendance at congregation meetings can also help us to draw closer to God. Is there anything you can do to make the best use of study periods and the time you spend at congregation meetings? Ask yourself, ‘What tends to interfere with my concentration during the meetings or when I am trying to study?’ Could it be receiving calls, emails, or text messages on your smartphone or on some other electronic device? When you notice that your mind is wandering during a study period or a congregation meeting, ask Jehovah to help you focus. It may not be easy to set your concerns aside and focus on spiritual things, but it is essential that you do so. Pray for the peace that will guard not only your heart but also your “mental powers.”​—Phil. 4:6, 7. w22.01 29-30 ¶12-14




Friday, December 29

Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise.​—Prov. 22:17.



King Uzziah rejected counsel. He entered a section of Jehovah’s temple where only the priests were allowed to be, and he attempted to offer incense. The priests of Jehovah said to him: “It is not proper for you, Uzziah, to burn incense to Jehovah! It is only the priests who should burn incense.” How did Uzziah react? If he had humbly accepted the counsel and left the temple immediately, Jehovah might have forgiven him. Instead, “Uzziah . . . became enraged.” Why did he reject the counsel? He evidently felt that as king, he had the right to do whatever he wanted. But Jehovah did not see it that way. As a result of his presumptuous act, Uzziah was struck with leprosy and “remained a leper until the day of his death.” (2 Chron. 26:16-21) Uzziah’s example teaches us that, no matter who we are, if we reject Bible-based counsel, we will lose Jehovah’s approval. w22.02 9 ¶7




Saturday, December 30

Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out, so that seasons of refreshing may come from Jehovah himself.​—Acts 3:19.



A person who is controlled by “the old personality” generally thinks and acts in a fleshly way. (Col. 3:9) He may be selfish, prone to anger, unthankful, and proud. He may enjoy viewing pornographic material and watching immoral or violent movies. No doubt he has some good qualities, and he may feel guilty about the bad things he says or does. But he lacks the motivation to change his thinking and conduct. (Gal. 5:19-21; 2 Tim. 3:2-5) We are imperfect, so none of us can completely remove all bad thoughts and desires from our heart and mind. At times, we will do or say something that we will regret. (Jer. 17:9; Jas. 3:2) But when we strip off the old personality, fleshly attitudes and practices no longer control us. They no longer identify who we are as a person.​—Isa. 55:7. w22.03 3 ¶4-5




Sunday, December 31

With humility consider others superior to you.​—Phil. 2:3.



Elders, look for the good qualities that your brothers and sisters possess. Each one is imperfect; yet, each one has qualities we can admire. True, elders may from time to time need to adjust the thinking of a brother or a sister. But like the apostle Paul, elders should strive to look beyond a person’s irritating words and actions. Instead, they do well to focus on that individual’s love for Jehovah, his endurance in serving God, and his potential for doing good. Elders who have a positive view create a warm and nurturing environment in the congregation. Remember that Jehovah is not asking you to be perfect; he is asking you to be faithful. (1 Cor. 4:2) You can be sure that God also values what you do in his service. Jehovah will never “forget your work and the love you showed for his name by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones.”​—Heb. 6:10. w22.03 31 ¶19, 21




