
February
Wednesday, February 1

Jehovah is near to all those calling on him.​—Ps. 145:18.



Jehovah is keenly interested in the welfare of all his worshippers. He is near to each one of us, and he notices when we feel overwhelmed by discouraging feelings. (Ps. 145:18, 19) Consider how attentive Jehovah was to his prophet Elijah. That faithful man lived during a difficult time in Israel’s history. Worshippers of Jehovah were being severely persecuted, and Elijah was a special target of powerful enemies who opposed God. (1 Ki. 19:1, 2) What may also have troubled Elijah was the feeling that he was the only prophet left serving Jehovah. (1 Ki. 19:10) God quickly took note of Elijah. Jehovah sent an angel to reassure His prophet that he was not alone​—that there were still many other God-fearing Israelites! (1 Ki. 19:5, 18) Jesus warmly reassured his disciples that they would gain a vast spiritual family. (Mark 10:29, 30) And Jehovah, the Head of our spiritual family, promises that he will support those who want to serve him.​—Ps. 9:10. w21.06 8-9 ¶3-4




Thursday, February 2

The one who is from God listens to the sayings of God.​—John 8:47.



Many are stumbled because our Bible-based teachings expose false religious ideas. Clergymen teach their flocks that God punishes the wicked in hell. They use that false teaching to maintain control over the people. As Jehovah’s servants, who worship a God of love, we expose that false teaching. The clergy also teach that the soul is immortal. We expose the pagan origin of that doctrine, which​—if true—​would make the resurrection irrelevant. And contrary to the belief in predestination that many religions embrace, we teach that man has free will and can choose to serve God. How do religious leaders respond? Often, they are furious! If we love the truth, we must accept the sayings of God. (John 8:45, 46) Unlike Satan the Devil, we stand fast in the truth. We never compromise our beliefs. (John 8:44) God requires that his people “abhor what is wicked” and “cling to what is good,” just as Jesus did.​—Rom. 12:9; Heb. 1:9. w21.05 10 ¶10-11




Friday, February 3

Oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.​—Jas. 4:7.



What if we discover that we have given in to pride or greed? We can escape! The apostle Paul said that those who “have been caught alive by” the Devil can still escape from the snare. (2 Tim. 2:26) Never forget, Jehovah is stronger than Satan. So if we accept Jehovah’s help, we can escape from any snare or trap that the Devil has set. Of course, rather than have to escape from Satan’s snares or traps, we should avoid them altogether. We can do so only with God’s help. So beg Jehovah daily to help you recognize if those ugly qualities have begun to influence your thinking and actions. (Ps. 139:23, 24) Never allow them to get a grip on you! For thousands of years, Satan has been the hunter. But soon he will be bound and eventually destroyed. (Rev. 20:1-3, 10) We long for that day. Until then, stay alert to Satan’s snares. Work hard to prevent pride or greed from dominating you. Be determined to “oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.” w21.06 19 ¶15-17




Saturday, February 4

Beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.​—Matt. 9:38.



Jehovah rejoices when a person accepts Bible truth and shares that truth with others. (Prov. 23:15, 16) How great Jehovah’s joy must be when he sees what is happening today! For example, despite a global pandemic during the 2020 service year, 7,705,765 Bible studies were conducted, which helped 241,994 people to dedicate themselves to Jehovah and get baptized. These new disciples will, in turn, conduct Bible studies and make more disciples. (Luke 6:40) Without doubt, we make Jehovah happy when we share in the disciple-making work. Making disciples is hard work, but with Jehovah’s help we can play a part in teaching new ones to love our heavenly Father. Could we set the goal of starting and conducting at least one Bible study? We may be surprised to see what will happen if we use every appropriate occasion to ask those whom we meet to study with us. w21.07 6-7 ¶14-16




Sunday, February 5

Because of my delight in the house of my God, there is also my private treasure of gold and silver that I am giving to the house of my God.​—1 Chron. 29:3.



King David made substantial donations from his personal wealth to support the construction of the temple. (1 Chron. 22:11-16) When we no longer have the physical strength to participate in theocratic construction projects, we can continue to support these projects by means of our contributions, to the extent that our circumstances allow. And we can help younger ones to benefit from the experience we have acquired. In regard to generosity, consider the example set by the apostle Paul. He invited Timothy to join him in the missionary work, and Paul shared his preaching and teaching methods with this younger man. (Acts 16:1-3) Paul’s training helped Timothy to be effective in spreading the good news. (1 Cor. 4:17) Timothy, in turn, used Paul’s methods to train others. w21.09 12 ¶14-15




Monday, February 6

There are jealousy and strife among you.​—1 Cor. 3:3.



What can we learn from the examples of the disciple Apollos and the apostle Paul? Both men had an excellent knowledge of the Scriptures. Both were prominent and influential teachers. And both had helped to make many disciples. But neither man viewed the other as a rival. (Acts 18:24) In fact, some time after Apollos left Corinth, Paul urged him to return there. (1 Cor. 16:12) Apollos used his gifts in a good way​—to proclaim the good news and to strengthen his brothers. We can also be sure that Apollos was a humble man. For example, there is no record that he took offense when Aquila and Priscilla “explained the way of God more accurately to him.” (Acts 18:24-28) The apostle Paul was aware of the good work done by Apollos. But Paul did not feel threatened by him. Paul’s humility, modesty, and reasonableness are seen in the counsel that he gave to the congregation in Corinth.​—1 Cor. 3:4-6. w21.07 18-19 ¶15-17




Tuesday, February 7

Many will be made righteous.​—Rom. 5:19.



Adam and Eve deliberately disobeyed God, so they deserved to be disinherited by him. But what of their offspring? Jehovah lovingly made a provision for deserving ones among them to be adopted into his family. He did this by means of the sacrifice of his only-begotten Son. (John 3:16) As a result of Jesus’ sacrifice, 144,000 integrity-keeping humans are adopted as God’s sons. (Rom. 8:15-17; Rev. 14:1) Additionally, untold millions of other faithful ones are obediently doing God’s will. They have the prospect of full membership in God’s family after the final test at the end of the Millennium. (Ps. 25:14; Rom. 8:20, 21) Even now they address Jehovah, their Creator, as “Father.” (Matt. 6:9) Resurrected ones too will be given the opportunity to learn what Jehovah expects of them. Those who respond well to his direction will eventually also become members of his family. w21.08 5 ¶10-11




Wednesday, February 8

Make sure of the more important things.​—Phil. 1:10.



The apostle Paul had been assigned a ministry, and for decades he viewed that ministry as one of the more important things. He preached “publicly and from house to house.” (Acts 20:20) In fact, he took advantage of every opportunity to preach! For example, while waiting for his companions in Athens, he introduced the good news to a distinguished group of people, with some positive results. (Acts 17:16, 17, 34) Even while in “prison bonds,” Paul preached to those who were around him. (Phil. 1:13, 14; Acts 28:16-24) Paul made the best use of his time. He often invited others to join him in the ministry. For example, on his first missionary tour, he took John Mark, and on his second, Timothy. (Acts 12:25; 16:1-4) No doubt Paul endeavored to teach these men how to organize a congregation, how to carry out the shepherding work, and how to become effective teachers.​—1 Cor. 4:17. w22.03 27 ¶5-6




Thursday, February 9

[God] is not far off from each one of us.​—Acts 17:27.



Some do not believe in a Creator because they say that they believe only in what they can see. They make exceptions, of course, for such unseen things as gravity, which is, after all, a reality. The type of faith mentioned in the Bible involves evidence for other “realities that are not seen.” (Heb. 11:1) It takes time and effort to study the evidence for ourselves, and many people lack the motivation they need to do the work. A person who does not investigate the evidence for himself may conclude that there is no God. After studying the evidence, some scientists have become convinced that God created the universe. Originally, they simply assumed that there was no Creator because creation had never been taught in university. However, they have now come to know and love Jehovah. Actually, all of us must build our faith in God, no matter what our educational background. w21.08 14 ¶1; 15-16 ¶6-7




Friday, February 10

Jehovah is good to all, and his mercy is evident in all his works.​—Ps. 145:9.



Jesus used a parable about a lost son to paint a heartwarming picture of how much Jehovah loves to show mercy. The son had left home and “squandered his property by living a debauched life.” (Luke 15:13) Later, he repented of his immoral course, humbled himself, and returned home. How did his father respond? Jesus said: “While [the son] was still a long way off, his father caught sight of him and was moved with pity, and he ran and embraced him and tenderly kissed him.” The older man did not humiliate his son. Rather, he mercifully forgave the young man and welcomed him back to the family. The lost son had sinned greatly, but on the basis of his repentance, his father forgave him. The merciful father in the illustration represents Jehovah. In this touching way, Jesus illustrated his Father’s willingness to forgive sinners who sincerely repent.​—Luke 15:17-24. w21.10 8 ¶4; 9 ¶6




Saturday, February 11

God for the first time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.​—Acts 15:14.



Today many religious leaders have done everything in their power to conceal the fact that God has a personal name. They have removed it from their Bible translations and, in some cases, have banned the use of that name in their religious services. Can anyone deny that Jehovah’s Witnesses are the only ones who give Jehovah’s name the respect and honor it deserves? We are making God’s personal name more widely known than any other religious group! In that regard, we are doing our very best to live up to our name, Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Isa. 43:10-12) We have produced over 240 million copies of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, which uses Jehovah’s name in places where it has been omitted by other Bible translators. And we produce Bible-based publications that promote Jehovah’s name in more than 1,000 languages! w21.10 20-21 ¶9-10




Sunday, February 12

If one of your brothers becomes poor among you . . . , do not harden your heart or be tightfisted toward your poor brother.​—Deut. 15:7.



We worship Jehovah when we help fellow Christians who are in need. Jehovah promised to repay Israelites who showed favor to the poor. (Deut. 15:10) Yes, each time we help a fellow worshipper who is in need, Jehovah views it as a gift to Him. (Prov. 19:17) For example, when Christians from Philippi sent a gift to the prisoner Paul, he called it “an acceptable sacrifice, well-pleasing to God.” (Phil. 4:18) Look around the congregation and ask yourself, ‘Is there someone I can help?’ Jehovah is pleased when he sees us use our time, energy, skills, and material things to help those in need. He considers that to be part of our worship. (Jas. 1:27) True worship requires time and effort. But it is not burdensome. (1 John 5:3) Why not? Because it is done out of love for Jehovah and our brothers and sisters. w22.03 24 ¶14-15




Monday, February 13

He makes his sun rise on both the wicked and the good.​—Matt. 5:45.



Before we can show compassionate concern for our brothers and sisters, we need to consider what challenges they are facing. For example, a sister may have a serious health problem. She never complains about it, but she would likely appreciate some practical help. Would she welcome a little assistance with preparing meals or cleaning the house? A brother may have lost his job. Would a modest monetary gift, perhaps given anonymously, help tide him over until he finds another job? We should not wait until our brothers and sisters ask for our help before we show compassion. Like Jehovah, we can take the initiative. He makes the sun rise on us daily without our even asking for it! And the warmth of the sun sustains everyone, not just those who are thankful. Would you not agree that by providing for our needs, Jehovah is expressing his love for us? How we love Jehovah for being so kind and generous! w21.09 22-23 ¶12-13




Tuesday, February 14

You, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; you abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.​—Ps. 86:5.



God’s loyal love moves him to be forgiving. When Jehovah observes a sinner who is repentant and who rejects his sinful course, loyal love moves Him to be forgiving. The psalmist David stated about Jehovah: “He has not dealt with us according to our sins, nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve.” (Ps. 103:8-11) David himself knew from painful experience how heavy the burden of a guilty conscience can be. But he also learned that Jehovah is “ready to forgive.” What moves Jehovah to be forgiving? The answer is recorded in today’s text. Yes, as David said in prayer, Jehovah forgives because he abounds in loyal love for all those who call on him. When we sin, it is appropriate​—even healthy—​to feel remorse. It can move us to repent and take steps to correct our mistakes. w21.11 5 ¶11-12




Wednesday, February 15

Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.​—Matt. 6:9.



Jehovah loves his name, and he wants everyone to respect it. (Isa. 42:8) But for some six millenniums, his good name has been reproached. (Ps. 74:10, 18, 23) This started when the Devil (meaning “Slanderer”) accused God of depriving Adam and Eve of something they needed. (Gen. 3:1-5) Ever since then, Jehovah has been falsely accused of depriving humans of what they truly need. Jesus was concerned about the reproach that was being heaped on his Father’s name. Jehovah has the absolute right to rule the heavens and the earth, and his way of ruling is the very best. (Rev. 4:11) But the Devil has tried to mislead angels and humans into thinking that God does not have that right. Soon, the issue will be settled once and for all. Jehovah will be vindicated as he proves that his Kingdom alone can establish real peace and security on earth. w21.07 9 ¶5-6




Thursday, February 16

I will exult in Jehovah; I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.​—Hab. 3:18.



It is natural for a family head to want to provide sufficient food, clothing, and shelter for his wife and children. Are you facing economic hardship? If so, this is a difficult time for you. However, as challenging as your circumstances are, you can use this time to build your faith. Prayerfully read Jesus’ words recorded at Matthew 6:25-34 and meditate on them. Consider modern-day experiences that prove that Jehovah provides for those who stay busy in theocratic activities. (1 Cor. 15:58) Doing so will strengthen your confidence that just as your heavenly Father has helped others in similar circumstances, he will help you. He knows what you need, and he knows how to provide it. As you experience Jehovah’s help in your life, your faith will grow stronger so that you can endure greater trials in the future. w21.11 20 ¶3; 21 ¶6




Friday, February 17

If anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father, Jesus Christ.​—1 John 2:1.



The faith of many Christians has been sustained by the teaching of the ransom. They have kept on preaching despite opposition and have endured all sorts of trials right on into old age. Consider the example of the apostle John. He loyally preached the truth about Christ and the ransom, likely for more than 60 years. When he was in his late 90’s, he was apparently considered to be such a threat to the Roman Empire that he was imprisoned on the isle of Patmos. His crime? “Speaking about God and bearing witness concerning Jesus.” (Rev. 1:9) What an outstanding example of faith and endurance! John expresses his deep love for Jesus and his appreciation for the ransom in his inspired writings. They contain over 100 references either to the ransom or to the benefits that the ransom makes possible. (1 John 2:2) Clearly, John deeply appreciated the ransom. w21.04 17 ¶9-10




Saturday, February 18

You must not curse a deaf man or put an obstacle before a blind man.​—Lev. 19:14.



Jehovah expected his people to show consideration for those who had physical limitations. For example, the Israelites were not to curse a deaf man. Such cursing involved threatening someone or calling down evil on him. What a terrible thing to do to a deaf man! He could not hear what was being said about him, so he would not be in a position to defend himself. Furthermore, in Leviticus 19:14 we learn that God’s servants were not to “put an obstacle before a blind man.” One reference work comments regarding people with physical challenges: “In the ancient Near East [they] tended to be exploited and abused.” Perhaps some inconsiderate person would place an obstacle before a blind man out of spite or out of some perverted sense of humor. How unkind! By means of this command, Jehovah helped his people to see that they should show compassion to those who were disadvantaged. w21.12 8-9 ¶3-4




Sunday, February 19

Jacob became very frightened and anxious.​—Gen. 32:7.



Jacob was worried that his brother might still be nursing a grudge against him. So he fervently prayed to Jehovah about the matter. Then, he sent a generous gift to Esau. (Gen. 32:9-15) Finally, when the estranged brothers met face-to-face, Jacob took the initiative to show honor to Esau. He bowed to Esau​—not once, not twice, but seven times! With humble and respectful action, Jacob made peace with his brother. (Gen. 33:3, 4) We learn a lesson from how Jacob prepared to meet his brother and how he approached Esau. Jacob humbly asked Jehovah for help. Then he followed through on his prayer by taking steps to make his reunion with his brother as pleasant as possible. When the brothers met, Jacob did not argue with Esau about who was right and who was wrong. Jacob’s goal was to make peace with his brother. Can you imitate Jacob’s example?​—Matt. 5:23, 24. w21.12 25 ¶11-12




Monday, February 20

God is greater than our hearts and knows all things.​—1 John 3:20.



When you think about Jesus’ dying to cover your sins, you may say, ‘I do not feel worthy of that honor.’ Why might you feel that way? Our imperfect heart might deceive us, making us feel worthless or unlovable. (1 John 3:19) At such times, we need to remember that “God is greater than our hearts.” Our heavenly Father’s love and forgiveness are far stronger than any negative feelings that may lurk in our heart. We need to convince ourselves to accept Jehovah’s view of us. To do that, we must study his Word often, pray to him frequently, and associate regularly with his loyal people. Why is doing those things so important? You will see Jehovah’s warm personality more clearly. You will perceive his tender feelings for you. Meditating on a portion of God’s Word each day can help you think more clearly, “setting things straight” in your mind and heart.​—2 Tim. 3:16. w21.04 23-24 ¶12-13




Tuesday, February 21

To God I will cry out, and he will hear me.​—Ps. 77:1.



To build strong faith, more is required than merely taking in knowledge. We need to meditate on what we are learning. Consider the experience of the writer of Psalm 77. He was distressed because he felt that he and his fellow Israelites had lost Jehovah’s approval. Those anxious thoughts kept him up at night. (Verses 2-8) What did he do? He told Jehovah: “I will meditate on all your activity and ponder over your dealings.” (Verse 12) Of course, the psalmist was well-aware of the things Jehovah had done for His people in the past, but the anxious man wondered: “Has God forgotten to show his favor, or has his anger caused his mercy to cease?” (Verse 9) The psalmist meditated on Jehovah’s activity and on the fact that God had shown mercy and compassion in the past. (Verse 11) The result? The psalmist became convinced that Jehovah would not abandon His people. (Verse 15) w22.01 30-31 ¶17-18




Wednesday, February 22

They are all living to him.​—Luke 20:38.



How does Jehovah feel about faithful men and women who have died? He longs to see them again! (Job 14:15) Can you imagine how much Jehovah misses his friend Abraham? (Jas. 2:23) Or Moses, with whom he spoke “face-to-face”? (Ex. 33:11) And how he must yearn to hear David and the other psalmists sing their beautiful songs of praise! (Ps. 104:33) Although these friends of God are sleeping in death, Jehovah has not forgotten them. (Isa. 49:15) He remembers every detail of their personality. One day, he will bring them back to life, and he will once again hear their earnest prayers and accept their worship. If you have lost a loved one in death, may these thoughts console and comfort you. When the rebellion began in Eden, Jehovah knew that conditions would get worse before they got better. Jehovah hates the wickedness, injustice, and violence in the world today. w21.07 10 ¶11; 12 ¶12




Thursday, February 23

We should love . . . in deed and truth.​—1 John 3:18.



When we show such love, we also show appreciation for the ransom. Why? Because Jesus gave his life not just for us but also for our brothers and sisters. If he was ready to die for them, they clearly have great value in his eyes. (1 John 3:16-18) We express our love for our brothers and sisters by the way we treat them. (Eph. 4:29, 31–5:2) For example, we help them when they are sick or when they are enduring severe trials, including natural disasters. But what should we do when a fellow believer does or says something that offends us? Are you inclined to hold a grudge? (Lev. 19:18) If so, follow this advice: “Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.” (Col. 3:13) Every time we forgive our brother or sister, we prove to our heavenly Father that we truly appreciate the ransom. w21.04 18 ¶12-13




Friday, February 24

Use [your gift] in ministering to one another.​—1 Pet. 4:10.



We may work hard for Jehovah, and we may help many progress to baptism. But we realize that any success we have is only because of Jehovah’s blessing. From the examples of Apollos and the apostle Paul, we learn another lesson​—the more prominence we have, the greater our opportunity to promote peace. How grateful we are when appointed men promote peace and unity by basing their counsel on God’s Word and by focusing attention, not on themselves, but on our model, Christ Jesus! (1 Cor. 4:6, 7) Each one of us has some God-given talent or ability. We may feel that the part we play is small. But the small acts that promote unity are like the small stitches that hold a garment together. May we work hard to remove from ourselves any trace of a competitive spirit. Let us be determined to do all we can to promote peace and unity in the congregation.​—Eph. 4:3. w21.07 19 ¶18-19




Saturday, February 25

Your brother will rise.​—John 11:23.



You can be convinced that you will see your dead loved ones again. Jesus’ tears as he gave comfort to his grief-stricken friends are proof that the resurrection is close to his heart! (John 11:35) You can support those who grieve. Jesus not only wept with Martha and Mary but also listened and spoke reassuringly to them. (John 11:25-27) We can do the same for those who grieve. Dan, an elder who lives in Australia, says: “After losing my wife, I needed support. Several couples made themselves available day and night just to listen to me. They let me grieve, and they were not embarrassed by my tears. They also offered practical help, such as washing my car, shopping for groceries, and cooking meals when I felt unable to care for these tasks myself. And they prayed with me often. They proved to be true friends and brothers who are ‘born for times of distress.’”​—Prov. 17:17. w22.01 16 ¶8-9




Sunday, February 26

The one who listens to life-giving reproof is at home among the wise.​—Prov. 15:31.



Jehovah wants what is best for us. (Prov. 4:20-22) When he counsels us by means of his Word, a Bible-based publication, or a mature fellow believer, he is expressing his love for us. (Heb. 12:9, 10) Focus on the content, not the delivery. At times, we may feel that the counsel was not given in the best manner. Of course, anyone giving counsel should try to make it as easy as possible to accept. (Gal. 6:1) But if we are the one being counseled, we do well to focus on the message​—even if we feel that it could have been delivered in a better way. We might ask ourselves: ‘Even if I do not appreciate the manner in which the counsel was given, is there some truth to what was said? Can I look past the imperfections of the messenger and benefit from the message itself?’ It would be wise on our part to find a way to benefit from any counsel we receive. w22.02 12 ¶13-14




Monday, February 27

The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise.​—Ps. 19:7.



Jehovah knows that it will take time and effort for us to avoid wrong thinking and bad habits. (Ps. 103:13, 14) However, through his Word, his spirit, and his organization, Jehovah gives us the wisdom, strength, and support that we need to change who we are. Use the Bible to examine yourself closely. God’s Word acts like a mirror; it can help you to analyze the way that you think, speak, and act. (Jas. 1:22-25) And Jehovah is always ready to come to your aid. He knows best how to help you; he knows what is in your heart. (Prov. 14:10; 15:11) So get into the habit of praying to him and studying his Word each day. Be convinced that Jehovah’s standards are best. We can benefit from everything that Jehovah asks us to do. Those who live by his standards gain self-respect, a purpose in life, and genuine happiness.​—Ps. 19:8-11. w22.03 4 ¶8-10




Tuesday, February 28

Set your hearts upon its ramparts. Inspect its fortified towers, so that you may tell about it to future generations.​—Ps. 48:13.



We worship Jehovah as we build and maintain places of worship. The Bible says that the work of making the tabernacle and its furnishings was “holy work.” (Ex. 36:1, 4) Today, too, Jehovah views the work of constructing Kingdom Halls and other theocratic facilities as sacred service. Some brothers and sisters spend much time engaging in these activities. Do we not appreciate this vital contribution to the Kingdom work? Of course, they also engage in the preaching work. Some of them may even want to be pioneers. Congregation elders can show their support for the construction activities by not hesitating to appoint these hardworking men and women as pioneers when they qualify. Whether we are skilled in construction work or not, all of us can share in keeping the buildings clean and in good repair. w22.03 22 ¶11-12




