
January
Sunday, January 1

Blind guides is what they are.​—Matt. 15:14.



Jesus courageously denounced the hypocritical religious practices of his day. For example, he exposed the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, who were more concerned with how they washed their hands than with how they cared for their parents. (Matt. 15:1-11) Jesus did not allow the negative reaction of the religious leaders to stop him from speaking the truth. Jesus also exposed false religious teachings. He did not say that all religious beliefs are acceptable to God. Rather, he spoke of many who would be on the spacious road that leads to destruction, whereas only a few would be on the cramped road to life. (Matt. 7:13, 14) He made it clear that some would appear to serve God, but in reality they were not serving him. He warned: “Be on the watch for the false prophets who come to you in sheep’s covering, but inside they are ravenous wolves. By their fruits you will recognize them.”​—Matt. 7:15-20. w21.05 9 ¶7-8




Monday, January 2

Her face was no longer downcast.​—1 Sam. 1:18.



Hannah was married to a Levite named Elkanah, who loved her very much. But Elkanah had another wife, Peninnah. Elkanah loved Hannah more than he loved Peninnah; however, “Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.” Because of this, Peninnah taunted Hannah “relentlessly in order to upset her.” Hannah became very upset! “She would weep and not eat.” Yet, there is no record that Hannah tried to take revenge. Instead, she poured out her heart to Jehovah and trusted that he would make matters right. (1 Sam. 1:2, 6, 7, 10) What can we learn from Hannah’s example? If someone tries to compete with you in some way, remember that you are in control of the situation. You do not have to allow yourself to be drawn into the competition. Instead of repaying evil for evil, try to make peace with the person. (Rom. 12:17-21) Even if he does not respond, you will maintain your inner peace. w21.07 17 ¶13-14




Tuesday, January 3

Keep your eyes open and guard against every sort of greed.​—Luke 12:15.



Greed led Judas Iscariot to become a despicable traitor. He did not start out that way though. (Luke 6:13, 16) Judas was evidently capable and dependable, for he was in charge of the money box. But at some point, Judas began to steal, despite having heard Jesus’ repeated warnings about greed. (Mark 7:22, 23; Luke 11:39) Judas’ greed became evident during an incident that happened not long before Jesus was put to death. Jesus and his disciples, including Mary and her sister, Martha, were guests of Simon the leper. During the meal, Mary got up and poured on Jesus’ head perfumed oil that cost a lot of money. Judas and the other disciples got very upset. The other disciples may have felt that the money could be better used in the ministry. But Judas’ motive was different. He “was a thief,” and he wanted to steal money from the box.​—John 12:2-6; Matt. 26:6-16; Luke 22:3-6. w21.06 18 ¶12-13




Wednesday, January 4

Miserable man that I am! Who will rescue me?​—Rom. 7:24.



Do you sometimes feel weighed down by many responsibilities, unable to cope with them all? If so, you would understand Paul. He felt anxiety, not just for one congregation but “for all the congregations.” (2 Cor. 11:23-28) Do chronic health problems often rob you of your joy? Paul was afflicted by a persistent “thorn in the flesh,” which may have been a physical ailment, and he was desperate to be rid of it. (2 Cor. 12:7-10) Are you discouraged by your own imperfections? So was Paul at times. He called himself a “miserable man” because of his relentless battle with his own imperfections. (Rom. 7:21-24) Despite facing various tests and discouraging circumstances, Paul kept on serving Jehovah. What gave him the strength to do so? Although he was keenly aware of his imperfections, he had unwavering faith in the ransom. w21.04 22 ¶7-8




Thursday, January 5

The Son of man came . . . to give his life as a ransom in exchange for many.​—Mark 10:45.



When the perfect man Adam sinned, he lost the opportunity for everlasting life not only for himself but also for his future children. There was no excuse for what Adam did. His sin was deliberate. But what about his children? They had played no role in Adam’s sin. (Rom. 5:12, 14) Could anything be done to rescue them from the death sentence that their forefather so richly deserved? Yes! Soon after Adam sinned, Jehovah progressively revealed how he would rescue millions of Adam’s offspring from the curse of sin and death. (Gen. 3:15) Because of the ransom, we can have a close friendship with Jehovah even though we are imperfect. Because of the ransom, the works of the Devil will be completely broken up. (1 John 3:8) Because of the ransom, Jehovah’s original purpose for the earth will be fulfilled. The entire planet will become a paradise. w21.04 14 ¶1; 19 ¶17




Friday, January 6

Let each one of you be baptized.​—Acts 2:38.



A large crowd made up of men and women from many countries and speaking a number of languages had gathered. Something remarkable happened that day. A group of ordinary Jews could speak in the visitors’ native languages! As surprising as that was, what those Jews were saying to them and what the apostle Peter said to all was more remarkable. It included the message that they could be saved by exercising faith in Jesus Christ. The crowd was deeply affected by that message. The people were so moved, in fact, that they asked: “What should we do?” In reply, Peter said: “Let each one of you be baptized.” (Acts 2:37, 38) What happened next was exceptional. Some 3,000 individuals got baptized on that day, becoming disciples of Christ. This was the beginning of the great disciple-making work that Jesus commanded his followers to do. That work has extended to the 21st century. w21.06 2 ¶1-2




Saturday, January 7

I planted, Apollos watered, but God kept making it grow, so that neither is the one who plants anything nor is the one who waters, but God who makes it grow.​—1 Cor. 3:6, 7.



We may live in a territory where it is difficult to start Bible studies. People may seem to be indifferent to our message or even opposed to it. What can help us remain positive in such territory? Remember that people’s circumstances can change quickly in this turbulent world, and those who were once not interested may become conscious of their spiritual need. (Matt. 5:3) Some who always in the past refused our literature later accepted a Bible study. We also know that Jehovah is the Master of the harvest. (Matt. 9:38) He wants us to keep planting and watering, but he is the One responsible for the growth. And how encouraging it is to be reminded that even if we are not able to conduct a Bible study at present, Jehovah rewards us based on our efforts, not on our results! w21.07 6 ¶14




Sunday, January 8

Sons are an inheritance from Jehovah.​—Ps. 127:3.



Jehovah has given humans the ability to have children, as well as the responsibility to teach them to love and to serve him. Although the angels are highly blessed by Jehovah, they have not been granted this privilege. With that in mind, those who are raising children should treasure their opportunity to do so. Parents have been given a trust, a sacred duty to raise their children in “the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.” (Eph. 6:4; Deut. 6:5-7) In order to help parents, God’s organization provides many Bible-based tools, such as publications, videos, music, and online resources. Clearly, both our heavenly Father and his Son cherish our young ones. (Luke 18:15-17) When parents rely on Jehovah and do their very best to care for their precious children, Jehovah is pleased. And such parents give their children the prospect of becoming part of Jehovah’s family forever! w21.08 5 ¶9




Monday, January 9

Faith is . . . the evident demonstration of realities that are not seen.​—Heb. 11:1.



Some people think that having faith means believing in something without proof. But according to the Bible, that is not real faith. Notice that faith in invisible realities, such as Jehovah, Jesus, and the heavenly Kingdom, is based on convincing evidence. (Heb. 11:3) One Witness who is a biochemist put it this way: “Our faith is not blind faith that ignores the facts of science.” We might ask, ‘If convincing evidence of a Creator exists, why do many people believe that God had nothing to do with the origin of life?’ Some have simply never examined the evidence for themselves. Robert, who is now one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, says: “Since creation was never mentioned in school, I assumed that it was not true. It was not until I was in my 20’s that I heard the logical and convincing arguments from the Bible in favor of creation.” w21.08 15 ¶4-5




Tuesday, January 10

Taste and see that Jehovah is good.​—Ps. 34:8.



We can learn something about Jehovah’s goodness by reading the Bible as well as by hearing others talk about the blessings they have received. But we will gain a real understanding of how good Jehovah is when we “taste” his goodness for ourselves. To illustrate, suppose we want to engage in some form of the full-time ministry, but in order to reach that goal, we will need to simplify our life. We know Jesus’ promise that if we put Kingdom interests first, Jehovah will provide the things we really need, but we personally have never experienced the fulfillment of that promise. (Matt. 6:33) Nevertheless, with faith in Jesus’ promise, we reduce our expenses, cut down on our secular work, and focus on our ministry. As we do so, we learn through our own experience that Jehovah really does care for our needs. We “taste” Jehovah’s goodness personally. w21.08 26 ¶2




Wednesday, January 11

They will not put up with the wholesome teaching.​—2 Tim. 4:3.



Do we see the same problem today? Yes. Many clergymen are eager to accept as members of their congregations individuals who are prominent, wealthy, and viewed as wise by the world. Such clergy do this even though the morals and lifestyle of those new members often are out of harmony with God’s standards. The same clergymen look with disdain on Jehovah’s zealous, morally clean servants because they are not prominent by this world’s standards. As Paul said, God chose those who are “looked down on.” (1 Cor. 1:26-29) However, to Jehovah, all his faithful servants are precious. How can we avoid being misled by the world’s thinking? (Matt. 11:25, 26) Do not be influenced by its view of God’s people. Recognize that Jehovah uses only humble people to do his will. (Ps. 138:6) And reflect on how much he has accomplished by using those whom the world does not consider to be wise or intellectual. w21.05 8 ¶1; 9 ¶5-6




Thursday, January 12

You sent something to me for my need.​—Phil. 4:16.



The apostle Paul was grateful for the help he received. He was not too proud to accept support from his brothers and sisters. (Phil. 2:19-22) Older ones, you can show your gratitude for the younger ones in your congregation in a number of ways. If they want to help you with transportation, shopping, or other physical needs, gratefully accept their assistance. View such help as an expression of Jehovah’s love. You may be surprised at the bonds of friendship that might develop. Always show interest in the spiritual growth of your young companions, and tell them how happy you are to see young ones reaching out to be of greater service in the congregation. And be willing to spend time sharing your life’s experiences with them. When you do, you will “show yourselves thankful” to Jehovah for the younger ones whom he has drawn to the congregation.​—Col. 3:15; John 6:44; 1 Thess. 5:18. w21.09 11-12 ¶12-13




Friday, January 13

With this compassion a daybreak will visit us from on high.​—Luke 1:78.



Jehovah loves our brothers and sisters. But we may not always find it easy to feel and express love for members of our spiritual family. After all, we come from many different cultures and backgrounds. And we all make mistakes that can frustrate and disappoint others. Still, we can contribute to the love of our spiritual family. How? By imitating our Father in showing love to our brothers and sisters. (Eph. 5:1, 2; 1 John 4:19) A compassionate person looks for ways to provide help and comfort. By the way he treated people, Jesus reflected Jehovah’s concern for them. (John 5:19) When seeing a crowd on one occasion, Jesus “felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” (Matt. 9:36) Jesus’ compassion went beyond warm feelings. He cured the sick and offered refreshment to those who were “toiling and loaded down.”​—Matt. 11:28-30; 14:14. w21.09 22 ¶10-11




Saturday, January 14

[God] was merciful; he would forgive their error and not bring them to ruin.​—Ps. 78:38.



Jehovah loves to be merciful. The apostle Paul was inspired to write that God is “rich in mercy.” In this context, Paul was referring to God’s mercy in offering the hope of heavenly life to his imperfect, anointed servants. (Eph. 2:4-7) But Jehovah’s mercy is even more extensive than that. The psalmist David wrote: “Jehovah is good to all, and his mercy is evident in all his works.” (Ps. 145:9) Because Jehovah loves people, he extends mercy whenever he sees a basis for doing so. More than anyone else, Jesus knows how much Jehovah loves to show mercy. This Father and Son were together in heaven during the course of thousands of years of human history. (Prov. 8:30, 31) On many occasions, Jesus saw how his Father showed mercy to sinful humans. (Ps. 78:37-42) In his teaching, Jesus often highlighted this endearing quality of his Father. w21.10 8-9 ¶4-5




Sunday, January 15

Father, glorify your name.​—John 12:28.



Jehovah himself answered that prayer with a thunderous voice from heaven, promising that he would glorify his name. Throughout his ministry, Jesus glorified his Father’s name. (John 17:26) So it is reasonable to expect that true Christians would be proud to use God’s name and to make it known to others. In the first century C.E., shortly after the Christian congregation was established, Jehovah “turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.” (Acts 15:14) Those first-century Christians were proud to use God’s name and to make it known to others. They used the divine name prominently in their ministry and in their writings. They proved themselves to be a people for God’s name. (Acts 2:14, 21) Similarly today, Jehovah’s Witnesses are a people for Jehovah’s name. w21.10 20-21 ¶8-10




Monday, January 16

Consider Jehovah’s acts of loyal love.​—Ps. 107:43.



God’s loyal love is enduring. This important aspect of loyal love is mentioned 26 times in Psalm 136. In the opening verse, we read: “Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; his loyal love endures forever.” (Ps. 136:1) In verses 2 to 26, we find the refrain “for his loyal love endures forever.” As we read the remaining verses of this psalm, we cannot help but be impressed by the many ways in which Jehovah shows his loyal love without letup. The refrain “for his loyal love endures forever” assures us that God’s love for his people is not fickle. How heartening it is to know that Jehovah does not quickly give up on his servants! Instead, he attaches himself to those who serve him and he sticks with them, especially in times of distress. Knowing that Jehovah sticks with us gives us the joy and the strength we need to cope with our distresses and to keep walking on the path to life.​—Ps. 31:7. w21.11 4 ¶9-10




Tuesday, January 17

Do not let your hearts be troubled. Exercise faith.​—John 14:1.



Do you sometimes feel anxious when you think about the events that lie ahead of us​—the destruction of false religion, the attack of Gog of Magog, and the war of Armageddon? Do you ever ask yourself, ‘When the time comes, will I be able to pass through these fear-inspiring events with my integrity intact?’ If such thoughts have crossed your mind, Jesus’ words, as recorded in today’s text, should prove to be most helpful. Jesus told his disciples: “Do not let your hearts be troubled. Exercise faith.” Strong faith will help us to face the future with confidence. We can strengthen our faith to endure future trials by considering how we deal with tests of faith now. Then we can learn of areas where we need to strengthen our faith. With each test we pass, our faith becomes stronger. This will help us to endure future trials. w21.11 20 ¶1-2




Wednesday, January 18

When I am weak, then I am powerful.​—2 Cor. 12:10.



The apostle Paul encouraged Timothy and by extension all Christians to accomplish their ministry fully. (2 Tim. 4:5) Yet, there are challenges. Think, for example, of our brothers who live in lands where our work is restricted or even banned. Jehovah’s people must deal with a variety of problems that could dishearten them. For instance, many have to work long hours just to provide the basic necessities for their family. They would like to do more in the ministry, but they have little energy at the end of the week. Others are severely limited in what they can do because of chronic illness or advancing age; they may even be confined to their home. Still others are constantly plagued by feelings of worthlessness. Regardless of our circumstances, Jehovah can empower us to cope with personal challenges and still serve him to the extent that our circumstances allow. w21.05 20 ¶1-3




Thursday, January 19

You must not . . . profane the name of your God.​—Lev. 19:12.



Sometimes others may pressure us to get involved in activities that would interfere with our worship. When they do, we have an important decision to make. Consider an interesting principle found at Leviticus 19:19, which says in part: “You must not wear a garment made with two sorts of thread mixed together.” That law helped to distinguish Israel from the surrounding nations. Today, we do not object to garments of mixed materials, such as cotton and polyester or wool and rayon. But we do object to being like people whose beliefs and practices conflict with Bible teachings. Of course, we have natural affection for our relatives, and we show love for our neighbors. Yet, when it comes to important aspects of life, we are willing to be separate as Jehovah’s people. That is vital if we are striving to become holy.​—2 Cor. 6:14-16; 1 Pet. 4:3, 4. w21.12 5 ¶14; 6 ¶16




Friday, January 20

Narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life.​—Matt. 7:14.



The road to life can be found. Jesus said: “If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:31, 32) Commendably, you did not follow the crowd; rather, you searched for the truth. You began an intensive study of God’s Word to learn what he requires of us, and you listened to Jesus’ teachings. You learned that Jehovah expects us to reject the teachings of false religion and to stop celebrating holidays that have pagan origins or practices. You also learned that doing what Jehovah requires and breaking free from practices that do not meet with his approval may be challenging. (Matt. 10:34-36) It may not have been easy for you to make the needed adjustments. However, you persevered because you love your heavenly Father. How pleased he must be with you!​—Prov. 27:11. w21.12 22 ¶3; 23 ¶5




Saturday, January 21

Listen, my son, and accept my sayings.​—Prov. 4:10.



Moses is a good example of someone who accepted correction after he had made a serious mistake. On one occasion, he lost his temper and did not honor Jehovah. Because of this, Moses lost out on the privilege of entering the Promised Land. (Num. 20:1-13) When Moses expressed his disappointment over this decision, Jehovah told him: “Never speak to me again about this matter.” (Deut. 3:23-27) Moses did not become bitter. Rather, he accepted Jehovah’s decision, and Jehovah continued to use him to lead Israel. (Deut. 4:1) Moses is a good example for us to imitate when it comes to accepting counsel. Moses proved that he accepted Jehovah’s counsel by remaining faithful even after he lost a privilege that was precious to him. We benefit when we imitate the example set by such faithful men as Moses. (Prov. 4:11-13) Many of our brothers and sisters have done just that. w22.02 11 ¶9-10




Sunday, January 22

Jesus gave way to tears.​—John 11:35.



In the winter of 32 C.E., Jesus’ good friend Lazarus got sick and died. (John 11:3, 14) The man had two sisters, Mary and Martha, and Jesus loved this family very much. When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she rushed out to meet him. Imagine the surge of emotions as she said: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.” (John 11:21, 32, 33) Jesus was surely moved to tears on seeing how Mary and Martha were affected by the death of their brother. If you have lost a loved one, Jehovah understands how you feel. Jesus is “the exact representation” of his Father. (Heb. 1:3) When Jesus wept, he reflected his Father’s emotions. (John 14:9) If you are enduring the loss of a loved one, you can be sure that Jehovah not only notices your grief but also feels deeply for you. He wants to heal your broken heart.​—Ps. 34:18; 147:3. w22.01 15 ¶5-7




Monday, January 23

Faith follows the thing heard.​—Rom. 10:17.



If you take time to talk to, listen to, and think about Jehovah, you will benefit greatly. First, you will make better decisions. The Bible assures us that “the one walking with the wise will become wise.” (Prov. 13:20) Second, you will become a better teacher. When we are studying the Bible with someone, one of our most important goals is to help our student draw close to Jehovah. The more we communicate with our heavenly Father, the more our own love for him will grow and the better equipped we will be to teach our student to love him. This was true of Jesus. He described his Father in such warm, loving terms that his faithful followers could not help but love Jehovah as well. (John 17:25, 26) Third, your faith will grow stronger. Consider what happens when you ask God for guidance, comfort, or support. Each time Jehovah answers those prayers, your faith in him grows.​—1 John 5:15. w22.01 30 ¶15-17




Tuesday, January 24

Strip off the old personality with its practices.​—Col. 3:9.



Jehovah urges us to get rid of wrong thinking and bad habits because he loves us very much and wants us to enjoy life. (Isa. 48:17, 18) He knows that those who give in to wrong desires hurt themselves and those around them. It pains him to see us hurt ourselves and others. Some of our friends and family may at first ridicule us for trying to make changes to our personality. (1 Pet. 4:3, 4) They may say that we have the right to do whatever we want and that we should not allow others to tell us what to do. But those who reject Jehovah’s standards are not actually being independent. In reality, they are allowing the world dominated by Satan to mold them. (Rom. 12:1, 2) We all face a choice: Either we keep our old personality, which is shaped by sin and Satan’s world, or we allow Jehovah to transform us into the best person we can be at present.​—Isa. 64:8. w22.03 3 ¶6-7




Wednesday, January 25

The word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword . . . and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.​—Heb. 4:12.



We can develop the right attitude about our circumstances by meditating on God’s Word. Consider how the Bible benefited a grieving widow. An elder suggested that she could learn helpful lessons from reading the book of Job. As she did, she was at first quick to criticize Job for his wrong thinking. In her imagination she warned him: “Job! Don’t be so negative!” But then she realized that her attitude had been very similar to that of Job. This helped her to readjust her viewpoint and strengthened her to cope with the pain of losing her husband. Another way that Jehovah strengthens Christians is by means of fellow worshippers. Paul wrote that he was longing to have “an interchange of encouragement” with his spiritual brothers and sisters.​—Rom. 1:11, 12. w21.05 22 ¶10-11; 24 ¶12




Thursday, January 26

Seven days you will celebrate the festival to Jehovah your God in the place that Jehovah chooses.​—Deut. 16:15.



The ancient Israelites were told: “Three times a year, all your males should appear before Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses.” (Deut. 16:16) They had to leave their home and their crops unguarded. But Jehovah promised them: “Nobody will desire your land while you are going up to see the face of Jehovah your God.” (Ex. 34:24) With full faith in Jehovah, those God-fearing Israelites attended the yearly festivals. They could thus reap rich rewards; they broadened their understanding of God’s Law, meditated on his goodness, and enjoyed encouraging association with fellow believers. We receive similar benefits when we make sacrifices to attend Christian meetings. And think of how pleased Jehovah is when we come prepared to offer brief, meaningful comments. w22.03 22 ¶9




Friday, January 27

He is able to come to the aid of those who are being put to the test.​—Heb. 2:18.



Jehovah was training Jesus for his future role as our High Priest. Jesus experienced how difficult it is to obey God when under extreme test. He felt so much pressure that he prayed for help “with strong outcries and tears.” Certainly, having gone through wrenching emotional distress, Jesus himself understands our needs and “is able to come to [our] aid” when we “are being put to the test.” How grateful we are to Jehovah for appointing over us a merciful High Priest who can “sympathize with our weaknesses”! (Heb. 2:17; 4:14-16; 5:7-10) Jehovah allowed Jesus to suffer so severely in order to answer an important question: Can humans demonstrate godly devotion even when severely tested? Satan says no! He claims that humans serve God for selfish reasons and that they are not devoted to Jehovah. (Job 1:9-11; 2:4, 5) Jesus maintained his integrity and proved Satan a liar. w21.04 16-17 ¶7-8




Saturday, January 28

Go, therefore, and make disciples . . . , teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.



Before getting baptized, a Bible student must put into practice what the Bible teaches. When a student applies what he learns, he becomes like the “discreet man” in Jesus’ illustration who dug down deep to build his house on solid rock. (Matt. 7:24, 25; Luke 6:47, 48) Help your student to make lifestyle changes. (Mark 10:17-22) Jesus knew that it would be difficult for a rich man to sell all his belongings. (Mark 10:23) Yet, Jesus told the man to make this big change in his lifestyle. Why? Because Jesus felt love for him. At times, we may hold back from encouraging a student to apply what he is learning because we feel that he is not ready to make a needed change. (Col. 3:9, 10) But the sooner you openly discuss the issue, the sooner the student can begin to change. By having that discussion, you show that you care about him.​—Ps. 141:5; Prov. 27:17. w21.06 3 ¶3, 5




Sunday, January 29

Christ . . . [left] a model for you to follow his steps closely.​—1 Pet. 2:21.



The apostle Peter is specifically commenting on the fine example Jesus set in the endurance of suffering; however, there are many other ways in which we can imitate Jesus. (1 Pet. 2:18-25) Really, Jesus’ entire life course​—everything he said and did—​is an example for us to follow. As imperfect humans, can we really follow Jesus’ example? Yes, we can. Recall that Peter urges us “to follow [Jesus’] steps closely”​—not perfectly. If we follow his footsteps carefully, doing the best we can as imperfect humans, we will be heeding the apostle John’s words: “Go on walking just as that one [Jesus] walked.” (1 John 2:6) Following Jesus’ footsteps will draw us closer to Jehovah. Why can we say that? Jesus set an outstanding example of how to live in a way that pleases God. (John 8:29) So by following Jesus’ footsteps, we will please Jehovah. And we can be sure that our heavenly Father will draw close to those who try hard to be his friends.​—Jas. 4:8. w21.04 3 ¶4-6




Monday, January 30

Jehovah takes pleasure in his people.​—Ps. 149:4.



Jehovah notices our good qualities; he sees our potential and draws us to himself. If we remain faithful to him, he will remain close to us forever! (John 6:44) If we are convinced of Jehovah’s love and support, we will be impelled to serve him wholeheartedly in spite of life’s challenges. On the other hand, if we doubt that God cares for us, our “strength will be meager.” (Prov. 24:10) And when we become discouraged and lose faith in God’s love, we will be vulnerable to Satan’s attacks. (Eph. 6:16) Some faithful Christians in our time have been weakened spiritually by doubts. What should we do when doubts about God’s love find their way into our mind? We must immediately reject them! Ask Jehovah to help you replace those “disquieting thoughts” with ‘the peace of God that will guard your heart and your mental powers.’ (Ps. 139:23; ftn.; Phil. 4:6, 7) And remember, you are not alone. w21.04 20 ¶1; 21 ¶4-6




Tuesday, January 31

God is . . . giving you both the desire and the power to act.​—Phil. 2:13.



How did you become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? First, you heard “the good news”​—maybe from your parents, from a workmate or a schoolmate, or by means of the door-to-door preaching work. (Mark 13:10) Then, someone spent a lot of time and effort conducting a Bible study with you. During that study, you came to love Jehovah and you learned that he loves you. Jehovah drew you to the truth, and now, as a disciple of Jesus Christ, you have the prospect of living forever. (John 6:44) You are no doubt grateful to Jehovah that He motivated someone to teach you the truth and that He accepted you as one of His servants. Now that we know the truth, we have the privilege of helping others join us on the road to life. We may be comfortable preaching from door to door, but we may find it challenging to offer and conduct Bible studies. w21.07 2 ¶1-2




