
July
Saturday, July 1

Afterward, [discipline] yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.​—Heb. 12:11.



Disfellowshipping is part of Jehovah’s arrangement. It is in the best interests of everyone, including the wrongdoer. Any negative comments about the way a disciplinary matter was handled have likely been initiated by someone who did not mention details that would put the wrongdoer in a bad light. We simply do not have all the facts. It is wise, then, to trust that the elders who took judicial action made every effort to follow Scriptural principles and to judge “for Jehovah.” (2 Chron. 19:6) By supporting the elders’ decision to disfellowship your loved one, you may actually help him to return to Jehovah. “Severing family association with our adult son was extremely difficult,” admits Elizabeth. “But after he returned to Jehovah, he admitted that he deserved to be disfellowshipped. In time, he expressed appreciation for the lessons he learned.” w21.09 28-29 ¶11-12




Sunday, July 2

He saw a needy widow drop in two small coins of very little value.​—Luke 21:2.



Think about that widow. No doubt she wished that she could have given more to Jehovah. Yet, she did what she could; she gave Jehovah her very best. And Jesus knew that her contribution was precious in his Father’s eyes. Here, then, is an important lesson for us: Jehovah is pleased when we give him our best​—our wholehearted and whole-souled service. (Matt. 22:37; Col. 3:23) Jehovah is happy when he sees us doing all we can! That principle applies to the amount of time and energy we can devote to our worship, including the ministry and the meetings. How can you apply the lesson from the account about the widow? Try to think of specific individuals who may need to be reassured that their efforts are pleasing to Jehovah. It may be an older sister who perhaps feels guilty or useless because she no longer has the health or energy to do as much as she used to in the ministry. w21.04 6 ¶17, 19-20




Monday, July 3

Happy is the man who keeps on enduring trial, because on becoming approved he will receive the crown of life.​—Jas. 1:12.



Jehovah knows the best time to end this wicked world. His patience has allowed for the gathering of a great crowd, numbering into the millions, who worship and praise him. All of them are glad that Jehovah has endured long enough for them to be born, to learn to love him, and to dedicate themselves to him. Jehovah’s decision to endure will be fully justified when he joyfully rewards the millions of us who have endured to the end! Despite all the heartache and suffering Satan has caused, Jehovah remains “the happy God.” (1 Tim. 1:11) We can likewise remain joyful while we patiently wait for Jehovah to sanctify his name, vindicate his sovereignty, end all wickedness, and bring an end to our present problems. Let us be determined to endure and to take comfort in knowing that our heavenly Father is enduring too. w21.07 13 ¶18-19




Tuesday, July 4

Can anything good come out of Nazareth?​—John 1:46.



Many in the first century did not put faith in Jesus. To them, he was just the son of a humble carpenter. And he was from Nazareth, a city that may have been considered of little importance. Even Nathanael, who became a disciple of Jesus, at first said: “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” He may have had in mind the prophecy found at Micah 5:2, which foretold that the Messiah would be born in Bethlehem, not in Nazareth. The prophet Isaiah foretold that Jesus’ enemies would fail to concern themselves “with the details of [the Messiah’s] generation.” (Isa. 53:8) If those people had taken the time to examine all the facts, they would have learned that Jesus was born in Bethlehem and that he was a descendant of King David. (Luke 2:4-7) So Jesus’ place of birth was in line with the prophecy found at Micah 5:2. What, then, was the problem? People were too quick to make a judgment. They did not have all the facts. Because of this, they were stumbled. w21.05 2-3 ¶4-6




Wednesday, July 5

Should the righteous one . . . reprove me, it would be like oil on my head.​—Ps. 141:5.



The Bible provides good examples of those who were blessed because they accepted counsel. Consider Job. Although he was God-fearing, he was not perfect. Under intense pressure, he expressed some wrong viewpoints. As a result, he received straightforward counsel, both from Elihu and from Jehovah. How did Job react? He said: “I spoke, but without understanding . . . I take back what I said, and I repent in dust and ashes.” (Job 42:3-6, 12-17) He proved his humility by accepting the counsel that Elihu gave him, even though Elihu was much younger than he was. (Job 32:6, 7) Humility will likewise help us apply counsel, even when we feel that we do not deserve it or when the one giving it is younger than we are. Who among us does not need to make progress in cultivating the fruitage of the spirit and in carrying out the Christian ministry? w22.02 11 ¶8; 12 ¶12




Thursday, July 6

By this all will know that you are my disciples​—if you have love among yourselves.​—John 13:35.



All in the congregation have a responsibility to contribute to a loving and peaceful environment where no one feels completely alone. What we do and say can really make a difference! What can you do to help those who are alone in the truth to feel that they are part of the congregation? Take the initiative to offer your friendship. We can start by warmly welcoming new ones to the congregation. (Rom. 15:7) However, we want to offer more than just a friendly greeting. We want to build strong friendships over time. So take a warm and sincere interest in new ones. While respecting their privacy, try to understand what they may be going through. Some may have difficulty expressing their feelings, so be careful not to pressure them to talk. Rather, kindly draw them out with discreet questions and listen patiently to their answers. For example, you could ask how they came to know of the truth. w21.06 11 ¶13-14




Friday, July 7

They will listen to my voice, and they will become one flock, one shepherd.​—John 10:16.



We treasure the privilege of serving Jehovah unitedly as “one flock” under “one shepherd”! The book Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, page 165, states: “Benefiting from that unity, you have the responsibility to help maintain it.” Thus, we need to “train ourselves to see our brothers and sisters as Jehovah sees them.” To Jehovah, we are all precious “little ones.” Is that how you view your brothers and sisters? Jehovah notices and values everything you do to help them and care for them. (Matt. 10:42) We love our fellow worshippers. So we are “determined not to put a stumbling block or an obstacle before a brother.” (Rom. 14:13) We consider our brothers and sisters to be superior to us, and we want to forgive them from our heart. May we not allow ourselves to be stumbled by others. Rather, let us choose to “pursue the things making for peace and the things that build one another up.”​—Rom. 14:19. w21.06 24 ¶16-17




Saturday, July 8

God . . . makes it grow.​—1 Cor. 3:7.



If we diligently study and apply the counsel we receive through God’s Word and his organization, we will gradually develop a Christlike personality. We will also grow in our knowledge of God. Jesus used an illustration to explain how the Kingdom message we preach is like a tiny seed that gradually develops in honesthearted ones. He said: “The seeds sprout and grow tall​—just how, he [the sower] does not know. On its own the ground bears fruit gradually, first the stalk, then the head, finally the full grain in the head.” (Mark 4:27, 28) Jesus was explaining that just as a plant grows little by little, so a person who accepts the Kingdom message grows spiritually little by little. For example, as our sincere Bible students draw closer to Jehovah, we begin to see the many fine changes that they have made. (Eph. 4:22-24) But we must remember that it is Jehovah who makes that tiny seed grow. w21.08 8-9 ¶4-5




Sunday, July 9

Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.​—Eccl. 6:9.



We can find joy if we look for it in the right place. A person who enjoys “what the eyes see” appreciates what he has, such as his present circumstances. In contrast, the person who wanders after his desires keeps wishing for something he simply cannot have. So, what is the lesson for us? To find joy, we should focus on what we have and on what we can realistically hope to obtain. Is it really possible to be satisfied with what you already have? After all, as time passes, we naturally seek out new challenges. Yes, it really is possible. We can enjoy and not merely settle for what our “eyes see.” How can we do that? To find out, consider Jesus’ parable of the talents, found at Matthew 25:14-30 and focus on what it can teach us about how to find joy and even increase our joy in the blessings we presently have. w21.08 21 ¶5-6




Monday, July 10

I reside in the high and holy place, but also with those crushed and lowly in spirit.​—Isa. 57:15.



Jehovah cares deeply for those “crushed and lowly in spirit.” All of us, not just the elders, can help to encourage our dear brothers and sisters. One way we can encourage them is by showing a sincere interest in them. Jehovah wants us to convey to them his love for his precious sheep. (Prov. 19:17) We can also help our brothers and sisters by being humble and modest. We do not want to draw attention to ourselves that could result in stirring up envy in others. Instead, we use our abilities and knowledge to encourage one another. (1 Pet. 4:10, 11) We can learn much about how to treat others by considering how Jesus treated his followers. He was the greatest man who ever lived. Yet, he was “mild-tempered and lowly in heart.” (Matt. 11:28-30) He taught by using simple language and appealing illustrations that touched the hearts of lowly ones.​—Luke 10:21. w21.07 23 ¶11-12




Tuesday, July 11

Ask . . . your elders, and they will inform you.​—Deut. 32:7.



Take the initiative to talk with older ones. True, their eyesight may have dimmed, their pace may have slowed, and their speech may have softened, but they are young at heart, and they have made “a good name” with Jehovah. (Eccl. 7:1) Remember why Jehovah treasures them. Continue to show them honor. Be like Elisha. He insisted on staying close to Elijah on their last day together. Three times Elisha declared: “I will not leave you.” (2 Ki. 2:2, 4, 6) Show genuine interest in older ones by kindly drawing them out. (Prov. 1:5; 20:5; 1 Tim. 5:1, 2) Ask such questions as these: “When you were younger, what convinced you that you had found the truth?” “How have your experiences drawn you closer to Jehovah?” “What have you found to be the secret to remaining happy in Jehovah’s service?” (1 Tim. 6:6-8) Then listen as they tell their story. w21.09 5 ¶14; 7 ¶15




Wednesday, July 12

God is the one who for the sake of his good pleasure energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.​—Phil. 2:13.



When you do your best to obey the command to preach and make disciples, you are demonstrating your love for God. (1 John 5:3) Think of this: Your love for Jehovah has already moved you to preach from house to house. Was that command easy to obey? Probably not. When you approached your very first door in the preaching work, were you nervous? No doubt you were! But you knew that this is the work that Jesus wants you to do, and you obeyed the command. And likely, with time, it has become easier for you to engage in the preaching work. Now what about conducting a Bible study? Does the very thought make you nervous? Perhaps. However, when you ask Jehovah to help you overcome your nervousness and muster up courage to offer a Bible study, Jehovah can help you to strengthen your desire to make disciples. w21.07 3 ¶7




Thursday, July 13

These should be marked on their right hand or on their forehead.​—Rev. 13:16.



Slaves in ancient times were branded with a mark to show who owned them. Similarly, all in our day will be expected to have a symbolic mark on their hand or forehead. Their thoughts and actions will show that they belong to and support the political systems. Will we accept this symbolic mark and give our allegiance to political governments? Those who refuse to receive the mark will face difficulties and danger. The book of Revelation says: “Nobody can buy or sell except a person having the mark.” (Rev. 13:17) But God’s people know what God will do to those who have the mark mentioned at Revelation 14:9, 10. Rather than bear that mark, they will, in effect, write on their hand, “Belonging to Jehovah.” (Isa. 44:5) Now is the time to make sure that our loyalty to Jehovah is strong. If it is, Jehovah will gladly claim us as his own! w21.09 18 ¶15-16




Friday, July 14

As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens his friend.​—Prov. 27:17.



To accomplish our ministry, we can benefit from the assistance of others. The apostle Paul shared his preaching and teaching methods with Timothy, and he encouraged Timothy to use those methods to help others. (1 Cor. 4:17) Like Timothy, we can benefit from experienced ones in our congregation. Also, we should pray to Jehovah for help. Look to Jehovah for guidance every time you share in the ministry. Without the help of his powerful holy spirit, none of us would be able to accomplish anything. (Ps. 127:1; Luke 11:13) When you ask for Jehovah’s help in prayer, be specific. For example, ask him to direct you to anyone who may be rightly disposed and ready to listen. We should also make time for personal study. God’s Word says: “Prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.” (Rom. 12:2) The more convinced we are that we know the truth about God, the greater will be our conviction when we talk to others in the ministry. w21.05 18 ¶14-16




Saturday, July 15

Your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.​—1 Cor. 15:58.



What if in spite of your earnest efforts and prayers in his behalf, a Bible student fails to make progress and the study needs to be discontinued? Or what if you have never directly helped someone to the point of baptism? Should you feel guilty, perhaps thinking that Jehovah has not blessed your ministry? Note how Jehovah measures our success. Jehovah looks at our efforts and endurance. In Jehovah’s eyes, our work for him is successful when we carry it out with diligence and love, regardless of how others respond. Paul wrote: “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones.” (Heb. 6:10) Jehovah remembers our efforts and our love, even if those efforts do not lead to positive results. Thus, you may apply to yourself what Paul said in today’s text. w21.10 25 ¶4-6




Sunday, July 16

All those whom the Father gives me will come to me, and I will never drive away the one who comes to me.​—John 6:37.



Jesus’ kindness and love were reflected in the way he dealt with his disciples. He knew that they had different abilities and circumstances. So they could not all handle the same responsibilities; nor could they be equally productive in the ministry. Yet, he appreciated the whole-souled efforts of each one. Jesus’ understanding attitude is reflected in the parable of the talents. In that illustration, the master assigned each slave work “according to his own ability.” One of the two diligent slaves gained more than the other. But the master commended both with the same words: “Well done, good and faithful slave!” (Matt. 25:14-23) Jesus is kind and loving in the way he deals with us. He knows that our abilities and circumstances vary, and he is pleased when we do our best. We do well to treat others as Jesus did. w21.07 23 ¶12-14




Monday, July 17

I will not lift my hand against my lord.​—1 Sam. 24:10.



King David was not always merciful. For example, when Nabal, a harsh man by nature, spoke disrespectfully and refused to provide David and his men with food, David was enraged and decided to kill the man and all the men in his household. Thanks to quick action on the part of Nabal’s long-suffering wife, Abigail, David avoided incurring bloodguilt. (1 Sam. 25:9-22, 32-35) Note that when David gave in to his rage, he judged Nabal and all his men as deserving of death. And later, David was ready to judge the man in Nathan’s illustration as worthy of death. In this second instance, we might wonder why a normally warmhearted man would pronounce such a harsh judgment. Consider the context. At the time, David had a guilty conscience. A harsh, judgmental spirit is not a sign of good spiritual health. Quite the opposite, in fact. w21.10 12 ¶17-18; 13 ¶20




Tuesday, July 18

You must be holy, because I am holy.​—1 Pet. 1:16.



From the words of today’s text, we learn that we can imitate Jehovah, who is the supreme example of holiness. We must be holy in our conduct. That may seem impossible because we are imperfect. The apostle Peter himself made a number of mistakes; yet, his example shows that we can become holy. When people think of someone who is holy, many imagine a joyless person who wears religious garments and always has a pious look on his face. But that cannot be accurate. Jehovah, who is holy, is described as “the happy God.” (1 Tim. 1:11) Those who worship him are called “happy.” (Ps. 144:15) Jesus condemned those who wore distinctive garments and practiced their righteousness in front of men. (Matt. 6:1; Mark 12:38) As Christians, we shape our view of holiness by what we have learned from the Bible. We are convinced that our loving God would never give us a command that we could not possibly obey. w21.12 2 ¶1, 3




Wednesday, July 19

You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart.​—Mark 12:30.



Of all the things that we have been kindly given by God, perhaps one of the greatest gifts is the ability to worship him. We show Jehovah that we love him by ‘observing his commandments.’ (1 John 5:3) Speaking for his Father, Jesus commanded us to make disciples, baptizing them. (Matt. 28:19) He also commanded us to love one another. (John 13:35) Jehovah will make obedient ones a part of his worldwide family of worshippers. (Ps. 15:1, 2) Show love for others. Love is Jehovah’s foremost quality. (1 John 4:8) Jehovah showed love for us before we ever knew him. (1 John 4:9, 10) We imitate him when we show love for others. (Eph. 5:1) One of the best ways we can show love for people is by helping them learn about Jehovah while there is still time. (Matt. 9:36-38) In doing so, we give them an opportunity to become prospective members of God’s family. w21.08 5-6 ¶13-14




Thursday, July 20

No one has love greater than this.​—John 15:13.



Jesus’ deep love for Jehovah moved him to make sacrifices for his Father and for us. (John 14:31) Jesus proved the depth of his love for people by the way he lived his earthly life. Each day, he was loving and compassionate, even when some opposed him. A key way he showed his love for people was by teaching them about God’s Kingdom. (Luke 4:43, 44) Jesus also proved his self-sacrificing love for God and for men by willingly suffering an agonizing death at the hands of sinners. He thus opened the way for all of us to gain everlasting life. We dedicated ourselves to Jehovah and got baptized because we love our heavenly Father. So, like Jesus, we should show love for Jehovah by how we treat people. The apostle John wrote: “The one who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love God, whom he has not seen.”​—1 John 4:20. w22.03 10 ¶8-9




Friday, July 21

Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, making the best use of your time.​—Eph. 5:15, 16.



Although we enjoy spending time with Jehovah, we face a challenge. We lead busy lives, which can make it difficult for us to schedule time for spiritual activities. Secular work, family responsibilities, and other necessary activities can demand so much of our time that we may feel that we are just too busy to pray, study, or meditate. There is another more subtle threat to our time. If we are not careful, we could allow activities that are not wrong in themselves to rob us of time that we could use to draw closer to Jehovah. For example, consider the matter of recreation. We all benefit from an occasional change of pace. But even wholesome recreation can cut into our time to the point that there is little time left for spiritual activities. We need to keep recreation in its place.​—Prov. 25:27; 1 Tim. 4:8. w22.01 26 ¶2-3




Saturday, July 22

The foreigner who resides with you should become to you like a native among you; and you must love him as yourself.​—Lev. 19:34.



When Jehovah commanded the Israelites to love their fellow man, he did not mean that they should show love only to those of the same race or nationality. They were also told to love the foreigners in their midst. That is the clear message found at Leviticus 19:33, 34. The foreigner was to be treated “like a native,” and the Israelites were to “love him” as themselves. For example, the Israelites were to permit both the foreign residents and the poor to benefit from the gleaning arrangement. (Lev. 19:9, 10) The principle about loving foreigners applies to Christians today. (Luke 10:30-37) How so? There are millions of immigrants, and likely some live near you. It is important for us to treat these men, women, and children with dignity and respect. w21.12 12 ¶16




Sunday, July 23

Those seeking Jehovah will lack nothing good.​—Ps. 34:10.



The more we look to Jehovah for guidance now, the more confident we will be in his ability to deliver us in the future. It takes faith and a willingness to rely on Jehovah to ask our employer for time off so that we can attend an assembly or a convention or to ask for an adjusted work schedule so that we can attend all our meetings and spend more time in the ministry. Suppose our employer refuses our request and we lose our job. Do we have faith that Jehovah will never leave us or abandon us and that he will always supply our basic needs? (Heb. 13:5) Many who are in full-time service can relate experiences that show how Jehovah came to their aid when they needed him most. Jehovah is faithful. With Jehovah on our side, we have no reason to fear the days ahead. Our God will never forsake us as long as we put his interests first in our lives. w22.01 7 ¶16-17




Monday, July 24

You do not judge for man but for Jehovah.​—2 Chron. 19:6.



How might our trust in the elders be tested? Suppose a person who has been disfellowshipped is a close companion. We might worry that the elders did not consider all the facts, or we might wonder whether they truly judged the matter the way Jehovah would. What can help us maintain the proper attitude toward the decision? We do well to remember that disfellowshipping is Jehovah’s arrangement and that it benefits the congregation and may benefit the wrongdoer. If an unrepentant wrongdoer were permitted to remain in the congregation, he could be a corrupting influence. (Gal. 5:9) In addition, he may not recognize the seriousness of his sin, and he may have little incentive to adjust his thinking and actions so that he can regain Jehovah’s favor. (Eccl. 8:11) We can be sure that when deciding if a person should be disfellowshipped, the elders take their responsibility seriously. w22.02 5-6 ¶13-14




Tuesday, July 25

No bruised reed will he crush, and no smoldering wick will he extinguish.​—Matt. 12:20.



Patience and kindness are especially needed when someone initially resists Bible-based counsel. An elder must guard against the tendency to get irritated if his counsel is not immediately accepted or acted on. So in his private prayers, the elder may ask Jehovah to bless the one needing counsel and to help him understand the reason for the counsel and apply it. The brother being counseled may need time to think about what was said. If the elder is patient and kind, the one he is trying to help will not be distracted by the way the counsel is given, but he will be able to focus on the message. Of course, the counsel should always be based on God’s Word. We want our counsel not only to be effective but also to “make the heart rejoice.”​—Prov. 27:9. w22.02 18 ¶17; 19 ¶19




Wednesday, July 26

Expectation postponed makes the heart sick.​—Prov. 13:12.



When we pray for strength to deal with a trial or a weakness, we may feel that the relief we are seeking is taking longer than we had hoped. Why does Jehovah not answer all our prayers right away? He views our sincere prayers as evidence of our faith. (Heb. 11:6) Jehovah is also interested in seeing how determined we are to live in harmony with our prayers and to do his will. (1 John 3:22) So we may need to show patience and work along with our prayers whenever we are trying to overcome a bad habit or a weakness. Jesus implied that some of our prayers might not be answered immediately. He urged: “Keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you; for everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking, it will be opened.”​—Matt. 7:7, 8. w21.08 8 ¶1; 10 ¶9-10




Thursday, July 27

How I do love your law! I ponder over it all day long.​—Ps. 119:97.



To build faith in your Creator, you need to continue studying God’s Word. (Josh. 1:8) Pay attention to its prophecies and to its internal harmony. Doing so can reinforce your faith that a loving, wise Creator made us and that he inspired the Bible. (2 Tim. 3:14; 2 Pet. 1:21) When studying God’s Word, note how helpful its counsel is. For example, the Bible long ago warned that the love of money is harmful and that it produces “many pains.” (1 Tim. 6:9, 10; Prov. 28:20; Matt. 6:24) How helpful, then, is the Bible’s warning against developing a love of money! Can you think of additional Bible principles that have proved to be beneficial? The more we appreciate the Bible’s counsel, the more we will rely on the timeless wisdom provided by our loving Creator. (Jas. 1:5) As a result, our life will be more enjoyable.​—Isa. 48:17, 18. w21.08 17-18 ¶12-13




Friday, July 28

For God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.​—Heb. 6:10.



If you are getting well along in years, be assured that Jehovah remembers the work you have done in the past. You have zealously supported the preaching work. You have endured trials​—even heartbreaking ones—​upheld the Bible’s righteous standards, carried heavy loads of responsibility, and trained others. You have done your best to keep pace with Jehovah’s fast-moving organization. You have supported and encouraged others as they pursued the full-time ministry. Jehovah God loves you very much for being loyal. He promises that “he will not abandon his loyal ones”! (Ps. 37:28) He gives you this assurance: “Until your hair is gray I will keep bearing you.” (Isa. 46:4) So do not conclude that in view of your advancing years, you no longer have an important role in Jehovah’s organization. You most certainly do! w21.09 3 ¶4




Saturday, July 29

Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him.​—Ps. 103:13.



Jehovah shows mercy because of his matchless wisdom. The Bible says that “the wisdom from above” is “full of mercy and good fruits.” (Jas. 3:17) Like a loving parent, Jehovah knows that his mercy benefits his children. (Isa. 49:15) Divine mercy gives them hope despite their imperfections. So Jehovah’s infinite wisdom moves him to extend mercy whenever he sees any basis for doing so. At the same time, Jehovah’s mercy is perfectly balanced. Wisely, he never crosses the line from mercy to permissiveness. Suppose that a servant of God deliberately sets out to follow a course of sin. What then? “Stop keeping company with” him, Paul wrote under inspiration. (1 Cor. 5:11) Unrepentant wrongdoers are disfellowshipped from the congregation. That action is necessary in order to protect our faithful brothers and sisters and to reflect Jehovah’s holy ways. w21.10 9-10 ¶7-8




Sunday, July 30

God loves a cheerful giver.​—2 Cor. 9:7.



We worship Jehovah when we support the Kingdom work with our donations. The Israelites were not to appear before Jehovah empty-handed. (Deut. 16:16) They were to bring a material gift according to their circumstances. Thus they expressed their appreciation for all the arrangements that had been made to benefit them spiritually. How can we express our love for Jehovah and our appreciation for the spiritual provisions we receive? One way is by giving financial support to the local congregation and to the worldwide work as our circumstances allow. The apostle Paul put it this way: “If the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable according to what a person has, not according to what a person does not have.” (2 Cor. 8:4, 12) Jehovah values any heartfelt donation we make, no matter how modest the amount.​—Mark 12:42-44. w22.03 24 ¶13




Monday, July 31

Speak consolingly to those who are depressed, support the weak, be patient toward all.​—1 Thess. 5:14.



Elders cannot remove all the trials that Jehovah’s people face. Even so, Jehovah wants elders to do what they can to encourage and protect his sheep. How can busy elders find the time to provide the needed assistance? Follow the apostle Paul’s example. Paul looked for ways to commend his brothers and build them up. Elders do well to follow his loving example by treating Jehovah’s people with tender affection. (1 Thess. 2:7) Paul assured fellow worshippers that he loved them and that Jehovah loved them. (2 Cor. 2:4; Eph. 2:4, 5) Paul treated those in the congregation as friends, spending time with them. He showed that he trusted them by speaking openly about his own fears and weaknesses. (2 Cor. 7:5; 1 Tim. 1:15) Paul, however, did not focus on his own problems. Rather, he wanted to help his brothers. w22.03 28 ¶9-10




