
June
Thursday, June 1

A poor widow came and dropped in two small coins of very little value.​—Mark 12:42.



Life is very difficult for the widow; she likely struggles to obtain the basic necessities of life. Yet, she goes to one of the chests and discreetly puts in two small coins, which perhaps hardly make a sound as they are dropped into the chest. Jesus knows what she deposited​—two lepta coins, the smallest coins in circulation at the time. That is not even enough money to buy a single sparrow, among the cheapest birds sold for food. Jesus is deeply impressed by this widow. So he calls his disciples, draws their attention to the widow, and says: “This poor widow put in more than all the others.” Then he explains: “They [especially the rich people] all put in out of their surplus, but she, out of her want, put in everything she had, all she had to live on.” (Mark 12:43, 44) When this faithful widow gave her last bit of money that day, she was putting her life in Jehovah’s caring hands.​—Ps. 26:3. w21.04 6 ¶17-18




Friday, June 2

Look! you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching.​—Acts 5:28.



Jesus maintained a positive attitude throughout his ministry on earth, and he wants his followers to remain positive about the ministry as well. (John 4:35, 36) While Jesus was with his disciples, they were enthusiastic about the preaching work. (Luke 10:1, 5-11, 17) With the arrest and death of Jesus, however, the disciples temporarily lost their desire to preach. (John 16:32) After his resurrection, Jesus urged them to focus on preaching. And after his ascension to heaven, they preached with so much zeal that their enemies complained as noted in today’s text. Jesus directed the work done by those first-century Christians, and Jehovah blessed them with growth. At Pentecost 33 C.E., for example, about 3,000 got baptized. (Acts 2:41) And the number of disciples continued to grow dramatically. (Acts 6:7) Still, Jesus foretold that the preaching work would have even greater success in the last days.​—John 14:12; Acts 1:8. w21.05 14 ¶1-2




Saturday, June 3

Happy is the one who finds no cause for stumbling in me.​—Matt. 11:6.



Do you remember the moment when you first realized that you had found the truth? You felt that everyone would want to accept the things you had come to believe. You were convinced that the Bible’s message would give them a meaningful life now and a wonderful hope for the future. (Ps. 119:105) So you enthusiastically shared the truths you had found with all your friends and relatives. But what happened? To your surprise, many rejected what you told them. None of us should be surprised when others reject the message we preach. In Jesus’ day, the majority rejected him, even though he performed miracles, proving that he had God’s backing. For example, Jesus resurrected Lazarus​—a miracle that those who opposed him could not deny. Nevertheless, the Jewish leaders did not accept Jesus as the Messiah. They even wanted to kill both Jesus and Lazarus!​—John 11:47, 48, 53; 12:9-11. w21.05 2 ¶1-2




Sunday, June 4

[Do] not [forsake] our meeting together, . . . but [encourage] one another.​—Heb. 10:25.



Strive to attend meetings regularly. You will benefit from the encouraging program, and you can also get to know your brothers and sisters. Seek out friends in the congregation whom you can learn from, even those whose age or background is different from yours. The Bible reminds us that wisdom is “found among the aged.” (Job 12:12) Older ones can learn much from faithful younger ones too. David was much younger than Jonathan, but that did not prevent them from enjoying a close friendship. (1 Sam. 18:1) David and Jonathan helped each other to serve Jehovah despite serious challenges. (1 Sam. 23:16-18) “Our brothers and sisters can really become our spiritual parents or siblings,” says Irina, a sister who is currently the only Witness in her family. “Jehovah can use them to fill our need.” Your friends want to encourage and support you, yet they need you to let them know how they can do so. w21.06 10-11 ¶9-11




Monday, June 5

My heavenly Father will also deal with you in the same way if each of you does not forgive your brother from your heart.​—Matt. 18:35.



Jesus gave an illustration about a king and his slave. The king canceled a large debt that the slave could never repay. Later, that same slave was unwilling to cancel the much smaller debt of his fellow slave. In the end, the king threw that merciless slave into prison. The slave’s actions harmed not only him but others too. First, he heartlessly harmed his fellow slave by having him “thrown into prison until he could pay back what he owed.” Second, he hurt other slaves who observed what he had done. When his “fellow slaves saw what had happened, they became greatly distressed.” (Matt. 18:30, 31) Similarly, our actions affect others. If someone wrongs us and we refuse to forgive him, what can happen? First, we hurt him by denying him our forgiveness, attention, and affection. Second, we make others in the congregation uncomfortable when they notice that we are not at peace with that person. w21.06 22 ¶11-12




Tuesday, June 6

[He will] bring to ruin those ruining the earth.​—Rev. 11:18.



Satan loves to degrade humans, who were created in God’s image. When God “saw that man’s wickedness was great” in Noah’s day, “Jehovah regretted that he had made men on the earth, and he felt hurt at his heart.” (Gen. 6:5, 6, ftn., 11) Have conditions improved since then? Certainly not! How pleased the Devil must be when he sees the prevalence of sexual immorality in all its forms, including immoral acts between people of the opposite sex and people of the same sex! (Eph. 4:18, 19) Satan is especially happy when he can cause those who practice true worship to fall into sin. Under Satan’s rule, not only is man ‘dominating man to his harm’ but he is also mismanaging the earth and the animal creation that Jehovah entrusted to man’s care. (Eccl. 8:9; Gen. 1:28) The result? Some experts warn that human actions could push one million more species to extinction in the next few years. w21.07 12 ¶13-14




Wednesday, June 7

[Jehovah] will forgive in a large way.​—Isa. 55:7.



Some servants of God have become overwhelmed by guilt because of past mistakes. Their self-condemning heart convinces them that Jehovah could never forgive them​—no matter how repentant they are. If you deal with such feelings, learning about God’s willingness to extend loyal love to his servants will help you to serve Jehovah joyfully with a clean conscience. This is possible because “the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.” (1 John 1:7) When you are discouraged about some imperfection, call to mind that Jehovah is willing, yes, eager to forgive a repentant sinner. Note the connection that the psalmist David made between loyal love and forgiveness. He wrote: “As the heavens are higher than the earth, so great is his loyal love toward those who fear him. As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset, so far off from us he has put our transgressions.”​—Ps. 103:11, 12. w21.11 5-6 ¶12-13




Thursday, June 8

Her children rise up and declare her happy; her husband rises up and praises her.​—Prov. 31:28.



A Christian husband must show honor to his wife. (1 Pet. 3:7) Honor involves giving special attention and respect to others. For example, a husband honors his wife by dignifying her. He does not ask more of her than she can give. And he certainly does not compare her with other women. If he were to do so, what effect might such a comparison have? The non-Witness husband of a sister named Rosa often compares her with other women. His cruel words have done more than undermine Rosa’s self-confidence. She says, “I need constant reassurance that Jehovah values me.” In contrast, a Christian husband assigns honor to his wife. He knows that his doing so affects both his relationship with her and his relationship with Jehovah. A husband who honors his wife praises her, reassures her of his love, and commends her. w21.07 22 ¶7-8




Friday, June 9

I will show a waiting attitude.​—Mic. 7:7.



Do you feel disappointed when a package containing an item that you really need does not arrive when you are expecting it? But if you learn that there are good reasons why, would you not likely be patient and willing to wait? An example that illustrates the need for patience is recorded at Proverbs 13:11. It says: “Wealth quickly gained will dwindle, but the wealth of the one who gathers it little by little will increase.” Do you see the principle? There is wisdom in doing things patiently, one step at a time. Proverbs 4:18 tells us that “the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light that grows brighter and brighter until full daylight.” These words aptly apply to the way in which Jehovah reveals his purpose to his people​—gradually. However, the verse can also be applied to the way in which a Christian makes spiritual progress in his life. Spiritual growth cannot be rushed. It takes time. w21.08 8 ¶1, 3-4




Saturday, June 10

Here I am! Send me!​—Isa. 6:8.



We have a lot of work to do as this system nears its end. (Matt. 24:14; Luke 10:2; 1 Pet. 5:2) We all want to serve Jehovah as fully as we can. Many are expanding their ministry. Some hope to serve as pioneers. Others hope to serve at Bethel or share in the construction of theocratic facilities. And numerous brothers are reaching out to qualify as a ministerial servant or an elder. (1 Tim. 3:1, 8) How pleased Jehovah must be to see this willing spirit among his people! (Ps. 110:3) But are you discouraged because you have not yet reached a certain spiritual goal? If so, share your concerns with Jehovah. (Ps. 37:5-7) In addition, ask mature brothers for suggestions on how you can improve in your service to God, and then try your best to apply their counsel. If you do, you may well receive that privilege or reach that goal. w21.08 20 ¶1; 21 ¶4




Sunday, June 11

Jehovah . . . will not abandon his loyal ones.​—Ps. 37:28.



The widowed prophetess Anna was 84 years old but was “never missing from the temple.” Her faithful “meeting attendance” was richly rewarded when on one occasion she saw the infant Jesus. (Luke 2:36-38) In modern times, many faithful older ones serve as excellent examples for younger ones. We will benefit greatly when we take the time to draw them out and listen as they tell about the joys they have experienced in Jehovah’s organization. Our older brothers and sisters have an important role in Jehovah’s arrangement. They have seen how Jehovah has in many different ways blessed his organization and them personally. They have learned important lessons from mistakes they have made. View them as a “fountain of wisdom,” and draw on their experience. (Prov. 18:4) If you take the time to get to know them, your faith can be strengthened. w21.09 3 ¶4; 4 ¶7-8; 5 ¶11, 13




Monday, June 12

The little one will become a thousand and the small one a mighty nation.​—Isa. 60:22.



As Isaiah expressed it, “the milk of nations” is being made available to Jehovah’s people. (Isa. 60:5, 16) With the various skills and abilities of the precious men and women coming into the truth, the preaching work is being carried out in 240 countries and literature is being produced in over 1,000 languages. In this time of the end, the shaking of the nations is forcing people to make a decision. Will they support God’s Kingdom, or will they place their confidence in the governments of this world? This is the choice that all will face. Although Jehovah’s people obey the laws of the government of the land in which they live, they remain completely neutral with regard to the politics of this world. (Rom. 13:1-7) They know that the Kingdom is the only true solution to mankind’s problems. That Kingdom is no part of this world.​—John 18:36, 37. w21.09 17-18 ¶13-14




Tuesday, June 13

Pour out your hearts before him.​—Ps. 62:8.



When someone you love leaves Jehovah, it is vital that you continue strengthening yourself and other family members. How can you do so? Draw strength from Jehovah by maintaining a routine of reading God’s Word and meditating on it as well as attending Christian meetings. Joanna, whose father and sister left the truth, says: “I feel a calm come over me when I read about such Bible characters as Abigail, Esther, Job, Joseph, and Jesus. Their examples feed my heart and mind with positive thoughts that soothe the pain.” When you experience distressing feelings, do not stop praying to Jehovah. Beg our loving God to help you view the situation from his perspective and to “give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go.” (Ps. 32:6-8) Of course, it may be very painful to tell Jehovah how you really feel. But Jehovah fully understands your pain of heart. He urges you to pour out your heart to him.​—Ex. 34:6; Ps. 62:7. w21.09 28 ¶9-10




Wednesday, June 14

This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.​—Matt. 17:5.



After the Passover of 32 C.E., the apostles Peter, James, and John witnessed an amazing vision. On a lofty mountain, possibly a spur of Mount Hermon, Jesus was transfigured before them. “His face shone as the sun, and his outer garments became brilliant as the light.” (Matt. 17:1-4) The apostles heard God say: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.” The three apostles proved by their life course that they did listen to Jesus. We want to imitate their example. How grateful we are that Jehovah provides us with loving direction through the “head of the congregation,” Jesus Christ! (Eph. 5:23) May we be determined to “listen to him,” as were the apostles Peter, James, and John. By doing so, we will receive many blessings now and unending happiness in the future. w21.12 22 ¶1; 27 ¶19




Thursday, June 15

I will discipline you to the proper degree.​—Jer. 30:11.



A Christian in Corinth was living immorally with his father’s wife. The apostle Paul directed the Corinthians to disfellowship him. That man’s immoral conduct was affecting others in the congregation, some of whom were not even ashamed of his outrageous behavior! (1 Cor. 5:1, 2, 13) Sometime later, Paul learned that the sinner was truly repentant! Paul told the elders: “Kindly forgive and comfort him.” Note Paul’s reason: “So that he may not be overwhelmed by excessive sadness.” Paul felt pity for the repentant man. The apostle did not want to see the man so overwhelmed, so crushed, by what he did that he would give up on seeking forgiveness. (2 Cor. 2:5-8, 11) In imitation of Jehovah, the elders love to show mercy. They show firmness when necessary but mercy when possible if there is a real basis for it. Otherwise, it is not mercy but permissiveness. w21.10 11-12 ¶12-15




Friday, June 16

You must not take vengeance nor hold a grudge.​—Lev. 19:18.



Hurt feelings can be likened to physical wounds. Some are minor; others are serious. For example, when we open an envelope, we might get a slight paper cut on our finger. That can really hurt, but after a day or two, perhaps we do not even recall where the cut was. Similarly, some offenses are minor. For example, a friend may say or do something thoughtless that hurts us, but we are able to forgive him easily. But if we have a deeper wound, a doctor may have to stitch the wound and bind it in bandages. If we were to keep poking or picking at the wound, we would only harm ourselves. Sadly, a person might be doing something similar when he is deeply offended. He may constantly think about the emotional injury he suffered and the hurt the other person caused him. But those who hold a grudge hurt only themselves. How much better it is to obey the counsel found in today’s text. w21.12 12 ¶15




Saturday, June 17

Why do you judge your brother?​—Rom. 14:10.



Suppose an elder is concerned about a fellow believer’s choices in dress or grooming. The elder could ask himself, ‘Is there a Scriptural reason to say something?’ Conscious of the need to be objective, he might ask another elder or mature publisher for his thoughts. Together they might review Paul’s counsel on dress and grooming. (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) Paul outlined certain broad principles, observing that a Christian’s dress should be appropriate, modest, and sensible. But Paul did not make a list of dos and don’ts. He recognized that Christians have a right to express their individual taste within Scriptural limits. So the elders should consider if the person’s choices reflect modesty and good sense. We do well to realize that two mature Christians may make different choices, both of which are acceptable. We should not impose our own standards of right and wrong on fellow believers. w22.02 16 ¶9-10




Sunday, June 18

Deal with one another in loyal love and mercy.​—Zech. 7:9.



We have good reasons to show loyal love to one another. What are some of them? Note how the following inspired proverbs answer that question: “Do not let loyal love and faithfulness leave you. . . . Then you will find favor and good insight in the eyes of God and man.” “A man of loyal love benefits himself.” “Whoever pursues righteousness and loyal love will find life.” (Prov. 3:3, 4; 11:17, ftn.; 21:21) These proverbs mention three reasons why we should show loyal love. First, showing loyal love makes us precious in God’s eyes. Second, by showing loyal love, we benefit ourselves. For instance, we forge lasting friendships with others. Third, pursuing loyal love leads to future blessings, including everlasting life. Indeed, we have good reasons for heeding Jehovah’s reminder: “Deal with one another in loyal love and mercy.” w21.11 8 ¶1-2




Monday, June 19

Give us more faith.​—Luke 17:5.



If your trials, past or present, have exposed a weakness in your faith, do not be discouraged. See this as an opportunity to strengthen your faith. Pray fervently to Jehovah, especially when facing a crisis. Recognize that Jehovah may provide the needed help by means of family or friends. When you allow Jehovah to help you get through your present trials, you will become more confident that he will help you endure any trials you may face in the future. Jesus pointed out areas where his disciples lacked faith, but he never doubted that with Jehovah’s help they would pass future tests successfully. (John 14:1; 16:33) He was confident that strong faith would allow a great crowd to survive the coming great tribulation. (Rev. 7:9, 14) You will be among them if you take advantage of every opportunity now to develop and strengthen your faith!​—Heb. 10:39. w21.11 25 ¶18-19




Tuesday, June 20

The angel of Jehovah camps all around those fearing Him.​—Ps. 34:7.



We do not expect to receive miraculous protection today. But we know that no one who puts his trust in Jehovah will suffer everlasting harm. In the near future, our trust in Jehovah’s ability to protect us will be put to the test. When Gog of Magog, a coalition of nations, attacks God’s people, our lives will appear to be in danger. We will need to be convinced that Jehovah can and will deliver us. To the nations, we will seem like defenseless sheep with no one to protect us. (Ezek. 38:10-12) We will be unarmed, untrained in warfare. The nations will see us as easy targets. They will not see what we see with our eyes of faith​—a host of angels camped all around God’s people, ready to defend us. How could the nations see them? They have no spiritual vision. What a surprise is in store for them when the heavenly armies come to our aid!​—Rev. 19:11, 14, 15. w22.01 6 ¶12-13




Wednesday, June 21

Have love for the whole association of brothers.​—1 Pet. 2:17.



All our brothers and sisters are important to Jehovah, so they should also be important to us. We should be willing to do whatever we can to protect and care for them. If we learn that we have hurt or offended someone, we should not simply brush it off, concluding that the person is too sensitive and needs to get over it. Why might some become offended? Perhaps because of their background, some brothers and sisters have a very low opinion of themselves. Others are new in the truth; they have not yet learned how to deal with people’s imperfections. Whatever the case, we should do what we can to make things right. Additionally, though, a person who is often offended by others needs to recognize that this is an undesirable personality trait that he needs to work on. He needs to do that for his own peace of mind and for the well-being of others. w21.06 21 ¶7




Thursday, June 22

Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, to all who call on him in truth.​—Ps. 145:18.



Jesus sympathizes with your feelings. When we are distraught, how happy we are to be comforted by a sympathetic friend, especially one who has faced trials similar to ours. Jesus is that friend. He knows what it is like to feel weak and in need of help. He understands our makeup, and he will see to it that we receive the support we need “at the right time.” (Heb. 4:15, 16) Just as Jesus accepted help from an angel in the garden of Gethsemane, we should be willing to accept the help Jehovah provides, whether it is in the form of a publication, a video, a talk, or an encouraging visit from an elder or a mature friend. (Luke 22:39-44) Jehovah will give you “the peace of God” and strengthen you. When we pray, we will receive “the peace of God that surpasses all understanding.”​—Phil. 4:6, 7. w22.01 18-19 ¶17-19




Friday, June 23

They would deliver . . . the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles.​—Acts 16:4.



Jehovah always does what is right. The challenge for us, however, might be to trust in his human representatives. We might wonder whether those with a measure of authority in Jehovah’s organization really act according to Jehovah’s direction or their own. The plain truth is that we cannot say that we trust in Jehovah if we do not trust in his earthly representatives​—those whom Jehovah trusts. Today Jehovah leads the earthly part of his organization by means of “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) Like the first-century governing body, this slave oversees God’s people worldwide and gives direction to congregation elders. The elders, in turn, implement the direction in the congregations. We show that we trust in Jehovah’s way of doing things by heeding the direction we receive from the organization and the elders. w22.02 4 ¶7-8




Saturday, June 24

Let us not give up in doing what is fine.​—Gal. 6:9.



What joy and honor we have as Jehovah’s Witnesses! We rejoice when we can help someone who is “rightly disposed for everlasting life” to become a believer. (Acts 13:48) We share the feelings of Jesus, who “became overjoyed in the holy spirit” when his disciples returned from a successful preaching campaign. (Luke 10:1, 17, 21) The apostle Paul urged Timothy: “Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.” Paul added: “By doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.” (1 Tim. 4:16) So lives are at stake. We pay constant attention to ourselves because we are subjects of God’s Kingdom. We always want to act in a way that brings praise to Jehovah and is in harmony with the good news that we preach. (Phil. 1:27) We show that we are ‘paying attention to our teaching’ by preparing well for the ministry and by asking for Jehovah’s blessing before we witness to others. w21.10 24 ¶1-2




Sunday, June 25

Clothe yourselves with the new personality.​—Col. 3:10.



“The new personality” is a way of thinking and acting that reflects Jehovah’s personality. A person clothes himself with the new personality by manifesting the fruitage of God’s spirit, allowing holy spirit to influence his thoughts, feelings, and actions. For example, he loves Jehovah and His people. (Matt. 22:36-39) Such a person maintains his joy even when coping with trials. (Jas. 1:2-4) He is a peacemaker. (Matt. 5:9) He is patient and kind when dealing with others. (Col. 3:13) He loves what is good and does it. (Luke 6:35) He proves by his actions that he has strong faith in his heavenly Father. (Jas. 2:18) He remains mild when provoked and exercises self-control when tempted. (1 Cor. 9:25, 27; Titus 3:2) To put on the new personality, we need to develop all the qualities mentioned at Galatians 5:22, 23 and in other Bible passages. w22.03 8-9 ¶3-4




Monday, June 26

Become imitators of me.​—1 Cor. 11:1.



Elders can imitate the apostle Paul not only by preaching from door to door but also by being ready and willing to give a witness on every occasion. (Eph. 6:14, 15) Like Paul, elders can use the time spent in the ministry to train others, including ministerial servants. (1 Pet. 5:1, 2) But elders should never be so busy caring for assignments that they have no time for the preaching work. (Matt. 28:19, 20) To remain balanced, they may on occasion need to say no to some assignments. After prayerful consideration, they may realize that they could not care for an assignment without neglecting the more important things, such as conducting family worship, having a full share in the preaching work, or training their children in that activity. They can be sure that Jehovah understands their desire to be balanced in all things. w22.03 27 ¶4, 7; 28 ¶8




Tuesday, June 27

Do not become fearful of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul.​—Matt. 10:28.



Do you remember feeling a bit afraid of becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? Perhaps you felt that you would never be able to preach publicly. Or maybe you feared that your family or friends might oppose you. If so, you can sympathize with your Bible student when he feels the same. Jesus acknowledged that such fears are possible. However, he urged his followers not to let fear stop them from serving Jehovah. (Matt. 10:16, 17, 27) Progressively train your Bible student to share his faith. Jesus’ disciples may have felt nervous when he sent them out to preach. But Jesus helped them by telling them where to preach and what their message was to be. (Matt. 10:5-7) How can you imitate Jesus? Help your student to see where he can preach. For example, ask him if he knows someone who could benefit from learning a specific Bible truth. Then help him to prepare what to say by showing him a simple way to share that truth. w21.06 6 ¶15-16




Wednesday, June 28

I will shake all the nations, and the precious things of all the nations will come in.​—Hag. 2:7.



“Within minutes, the shops and old buildings started falling.” “There was panic everywhere . . . A lot of people said it lasted for about two minutes. To me, it seemed like forever.” Those are the comments of some who survived an earthquake that struck Nepal in 2015. We are, however, at this very moment experiencing a different kind of shaking​—one that involves all the nations. The prophet Haggai wrote: “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Yet once more​—in a little while—​and I will shake the heavens and the earth.’” (Hag. 2:6) The shaking that Haggai describes is not like a literal earthquake, which brings only destruction. Instead, it produces good results. Jehovah himself tells us: “I will shake all the nations, and the precious things of all the nations will come in; and I will fill this house with glory.” w21.09 14 ¶1-3




Thursday, June 29

You are the ones who have stuck with me in my trials.​—Luke 22:28.



A solid friendship with a fellow human is based on frequent and heartfelt communication. The same is true of our friendship with Jehovah. When we express our feelings, thoughts, and concerns to him in prayer, we demonstrate that we have confidence in him and that we know he loves us. (Ps. 94:17-19; 1 John 5:14, 15) Associate with loyal friends; they are a gift from Jehovah. (Jas. 1:17) Our heavenly Father shows personal interest in us by providing us with a spiritual family of brothers and sisters who show “love at all times.” (Prov. 17:17) In his letter to the Colossians, the apostle Paul mentioned certain Christians who had supported him, referring to them as “a source of great comfort.” (Col. 4:10, 11) Even Christ Jesus needed and appreciated the support he received from his friends, both angelic and human. (Luke 22:43) Sharing our concerns with a mature friend is not a sign of weakness; it can be a safeguard. w21.04 24-25 ¶14-16




Friday, June 30

[Love] bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.​—1 Cor. 13:7.



What should you do if a fellow believer has acted in a way that is very troubling to you? Make every effort to maintain peace. Turn to Jehovah in earnest prayer. Ask him to bless the person who offended you and to help you see the good qualities in that person​—the very qualities that Jehovah loves about him. (Luke 6:28) If you cannot overlook what your brother has done, consider how you should approach him. It is always best to assume that the brother would never intentionally hurt you. (Matt. 5:23, 24) When you speak to him, give him the benefit of the doubt. What if he does not want to make peace? “Continue putting up with” him. Do not give up on your brother. (Col. 3:13) Most important, never hold on to resentment, for that could harm your friendship with Jehovah. Never allow anything to stumble you. In doing so, you prove that you love Jehovah more than anything else.​—Ps. 119:165. w21.06 23 ¶15




