How to Stay “On Course”
IS THERE any human alive who has not needed guidance? Whether by means of a road map or instructions on the use of some piece of machinery, all of us have required guidance from time to time.
Centuries ago God’s prophet Jeremiah wrote: “I well know, O Jehovah [God], that to earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step. Correct me, O Jehovah.” (Jer. 10:23, 24) Yes, Jeremiah needed guidance. So does modern man.
A Modern-Day Illustration
Guidance also is needed by man’s spaceships. In many of these vehicles, this need is met by a guidance system consisting of a computer, observation transducers, an inertial navigator and steering actuators. In fact, these very things may be used to illustrate mankind’s need for divine guidance.
The spaceship’s “brain” is the computer. Into it a programmer feeds a mathematical trajectory, or reference path. This connects the starting position with the destination. The reference path may also take into account obstacles and forbidden regions to be avoided.
The observational transducers are devices that take readings to indicate velocity and position. For example, one way that position is determined is by a star tracker that makes use of stars and planets to fix the ship’s position in space.
The inertial navigator is a dead reckoning device that senses changes of motion (accelerations) and relates these to velocity and position. It operates in conjunction with the observation transducers. Any veering of the inertial navigator is a result of imperfections in this instrument.
The signals from the observation transducers and the inertial navigator go to the computer. It makes allowances or corrections to compensate for the distortions, biases and imperfections inherent in these signals. Then the computer uses this information to estimate the spaceship’s present position and velocity, compares this with the reference path originally programmed into it to reach its destination, and determines the corrections necessary to put itself back on this course. These corrections are then sent electrically to the steering actuators.
The steering actuators are motors that convert these signals into the appropriate changes in aileron, rudder and elevator, if the ship is still in the earth’s atmosphere. If it is beyond the atmosphere, thrust rockets are fired to put it back on course. After launching, the spaceship strays from its course frequently and is corrected many times. It gets off course and is brought back, it gets off again and is brought back again. Despite the fact that it often strays off course, the ship finally reaches its destination because it is always correcting itself while progressing toward its target.
A “Reference Path” to Life
The features of this guidance system might be used to illustrate the Christian’s course in life. In the Bible, Jehovah God has laid out a program that leads to life, as well as warning of one that results in death. Being a free moral agent, man is his own programmer and chooses what course he will take. Accordingly, Moses told Israel: “See, I do put before you today life and good, and death and bad. If you will listen to the commandments of Jehovah . . . you will be bound to keep alive . . . But if your heart turns away and you do not listen, and you are actually seduced and bow down to other gods and serve them . . . you will positively perish.” (Deut. 30:15-18) It might be said that, when he accepts God’s way, in his mind the Christian programs a “reference path” ‘that has baptism as its starting point and eternal life as its final destination. The Christian must constantly refer to this Biblical “pathway” to check whether he is keeping “on course” or not.
Just as the spacecraft computer has programmed into it the avoidance of obstacles and forbidden regions, so Christians must have in mind dangers to be shunned. The Bible pinpoints many of them, such as “the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life.” The Scriptures warn: “Do not be loving either the world or the things in the world.” They also point out that “bad associations spoil useful habits.” Furthermore, complete abandonment of Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion, is urged in the words: “Get out of her, my people, if you do not want to share with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues.”​—1 John 2:15, 16; 1 Cor. 15:33; Rev. 18:4.
As the spaceship’s observation transducers take sightings on stars and planets to tell where the craft is, so Christians must look to inspired, unchanging texts in the Bible to see whether they are “on course.” And, in examining themselves, godly individuals must be on guard against personal prejudices and biases. To have bias against a race or prejudice against a nationality, to show favoritism to some because they are rich, or to look down on others because they are poor​—such things must be guarded against, just as a spaceship computer has to make corrections for the distortions sometimes present in the signals it receives from the observation transducers.​—Acts 10:34, 35; Jas. 2:1-9.
Sometimes Christians are confronted with issues not covered by specific scriptures. This might be compared with the circumstances of the spaceship when the observational transducers have no star sighting to offer. Reliance must then be placed upon the inertial navigator. It senses changes in motion and makes deductions from these to reckon or calculate position. Such deduced or dead reckoning is imperfect, and again the computer must compensate for these imperfections.
When the Christian is without a direct Biblical command on a matter, he may deduce the correct way to act by considering a Scriptural principle. For example, there are no Bible texts that specifically mention tobacco and forbid one to smoke it. But the Christian understands that smoking is a violation of the commands to be clean from what defiles the flesh and to show love of neighbor, since even the health of nonsmokers is affected detrimentally by tobacco smoke.​—2 Cor. 7:1; Matt. 22:39.
Apply the Correction
Jesus said to religious hypocrites of his day: “You study the scriptures diligently, supposing that in having them you have eternal life; yet, although their testimony points to me, you refuse to come to me for that life.” Why did they refuse? Jesus answered: “You have no love for God in you.” In the synagogues, they read the Scriptures to the people, and with this in mind Jesus said to the people: “Do what they tell you; pay attention to their words. But do not follow their practice; for they say one thing and do another.” Indeed, the religious leaders studied the Scriptures, which revealed the pathway to eternal life, but they did not follow them.​—John 5:39-42; Matt. 23:3, The New English Bible.
True Christians strive to follow that pathway because they do love God. They realize that “this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments.” (1 John 5:3) Not only do they study God’s Word, learn of the pathway to life, compare their conduct with that course outlined in the Bible and see what corrections they need to make. They also actively apply this knowledge to themselves and make the needed corrections. Christians have become “doers of the word, and not hearers only.” They realize that “as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.”​—Jas. 1:22; 2:26.
Compare this with our spaceship illustration. The computer not only becomes aware of the corrections needed, but also sets the steering actuators into motion to make them. Christians need to act similarly in applying God’s Word in life.
To Miss Is to Sin
Remember that after the spaceship is launched it frequently strays from its course. Through its guidance system, however, the craft constantly is correcting itself. The word “sin” in the Bible is translated from Hebrew and Greek words that mean “to miss,” in the sense of missing a mark or not reaching a goal. This may refer to a physical object or to a moral or intellectual goal. And since “all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,” Christians often miss the mark and fall short of perfect compliance with God’s will.​—Rom. 3:23.
Following a righteous pathway will be difficult at times. But do not become discouraged. Rather, we should “go on acquiring power in the Lord,” and should ‘keep testing whether we are in the faith.’ (Eph. 6:10; 2 Cor. 13:5) When Jehovah corrects, we need to listen. The prophet Isaiah wrote: “Your own ears will hear a word behind you saying: ‘This is the way. Walk in it, you people,’ in case you people should go to the right or in case you should go to the left.”​—Isa. 30:21.
By being faithful in little things, we develop a habit of faithfulness that aids when big tests of our faith occur. Through our faithful practices we inscribe God’s laws ever deeper into our hearts. The more that a spiritually enlightened heart guides us, the less often will we miss the mark by sinning. (Eph. 1:18) Eventually, by Jehovah’s mercy and undeserved kindness, we will reach our destination of eternal life in his righteous new order.​—2 Pet. 3:13.
At times, some feel beyond the reach of God’s mercy. Like the spaceship, they stray off course so often. Yet, Jehovah’s mercy and loving-kindness can extend to us, even as it has to so many others. Hence, “let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out.” (Gal. 6:9) Above all, Christians desire to show their love for Jehovah God. It is not possible to “program” ourselves to display such deep regard for the Most High. But we can enhance our appreciation for him and can improve our prospects of everlasting life by keeping our eyes on ourselves and on God’s Word. We can check for the needed corrections and make them. When we fall we can get up, get back “on course” and continue on to eternal life.
[Blurb on page 13]
“The Christian must constantly refer to this Biblical ‘pathway’ to check whether he is keeping ‘on course’ or not.”
[Blurb on page 14]
“When the Christian is without a direct Biblical command on a matter, he may deduce the correct way to act by considering a Scriptural principle.”

