How to Break Free from Superstition
THE smile of gratitude quickly disappeared from the traveling woman’s face as she stared at the food offered her.
“Eat,” urged the hostess, “the food is not spoiled.”
“No, no,” protested the traveler, “this is catfish. If I eat it, I will be accused of murdering my own children!”
Illogical? Persons who are unshackled by slavery to superstition probably would say so. Yet, to many individuals, eating this food is considered a serious offense.
Nevertheless, many persons have broken free from such taboos. They no longer fear the dead, rely on “medicines,” or allow dreams and omens to regulate their lives. They are now happy, contented people. How did they break free from superstition?
TRUTH ABOUT THE DEAD FREES
It is the truth that has made possible this break from superstition, particularly the truth concerning the condition of the dead. As Jesus Christ said: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”—John 8:32.
Well, what is the truth about the dead? Can they communicate with or harm the living? Why did the woman say that eating catfish would be comparable to inflicting death on her children?
Catfish in the streams near this African woman’s village are regarded by many as reincarnated spirits of dead humans. So villagers explain regarding the taboo: “It is our law. We don’t eat it. If a woman eats, she will either be barren or her children will die. If a man eats, he will not have children.” Some even believe that death for the eater will ensue.
A young African named Samuel observed this taboo, and abstained from catfish. But then he began to study the Bible. He noted that the Bible teaches that the dead are unconscious. For instance, in one place the Bible says: “The living are conscious that they will die; but as for the dead, they are conscious of nothing at all.”—Eccl. 9:5.
Samuel also was shown in the Bible that at death man’s “spirit goes out, he goes back to his ground; in that day his thoughts do perish.” (Ps. 146:4) From this Samuel could see that the spirit, or life force, is not an independent intellect that continues after death. Rather, death completely terminates life: As the Bible also observes: “If [God] sets his heart upon anyone, if that one’s spirit and breath he gathers to himself, all flesh will expire together, and earthling man himself will return to the very dust.”—Job 34:14, 15.
Thus, when he learned the Bible truth that the spirit in man is not a personality that survives the death of the body, Samuel could see the error in believing that catfish possess the reincarnated spirits of departed humans. He, therefore, realized how absurd it is to believe that a dead fish could interfere with his procreative powers. So Samuel started eating catfish.
However, because he did not marry for some years, his tribesmen were sure that catfish had spoiled his mating powers. When he finally did marry, they were equally sure that he would have no children, or that any offspring he did have would die. What was the outcome?
Well, Samuel’s first child did not die, nor did his second, nor his third, and the fourth is on the way! But what about Samuel’s sister, who has abstained from catfish all her life? She protested to Samuel about breaking this taboo. But he replied: “If there is any truth in the taboo then why are all my children living, but your children are dead?”
It was true. This sister had suffered the loss of her three children. Superstitious observance of the taboo had not preserved them!
Once freed by Bible truth, Samuel determined never again to be enslaved by superstitions. So when his father died, he refused to put a gift in the coffin for the deceased to carry into the spirit world. Nor did he share in having a ‘meal with the dead.’ Neither did he participate in the feast to ‘cross over,’ which celebrates the supposed joining of the deceased with other spirits. For Samuel’s fearless stand in support of Bible truth, has he been harmed by some vindictive spirit? No, not in the least.
Perhaps you are one who holds to superstitious beliefs in connection with the dead. Do you, for instance, wonder if your little brother is really your dead uncle come back to life? Do you reassure yourself by noticing the shape of the little fellow’s ear, concluding that uncle’s ear was shaped just like that? Or do you superstitiously refrain from naming your children after a living relative because you believe this relative, after his death, will be born again as a baby and only that baby should carry his name?
Allow Bible truth to set you free from such superstitious beliefs! Trust in the Bible, “just as it truthfully is, as the word of God.” (1 Thess. 2:13) The truth is that future life is gained, not by reincarnation, but through the resurrection power invested in Jesus Christ, who declares: “I am the resurrection and the life.”—John 11:25.
Following his own resurrection from the dead Jesus remembered every detail of his previous human life. So did the resurrected Lazarus, who continued to be a disciple of Jesus after coming forth from the grave. (John 11:38-44; 12:1, 9-11) How about you? Can you remember a past existence? If you really lived before, you should be able to do so. Actually, reincarnation is a myth based on fallible human reasoning. God’s Word of truth exposes it as such.
BASIS FOR SUPERSTITIOUS FEARS
This does not mean that people’s superstitious fears are completely without basis. For example, Samuel recalls the experience of a young African boy of nine. One day while walking in the forest he heard his name called. He turned, saw no one, and continued walking. Just then a stone thrown from behind landed in front of him. The boy arrived at home in fear, but his father explained that this was the work of his mother, who had just died.
Thereafter the presence of a dead body in his town always filled the youth’s heart with a sickening dread. However, later in life he reasoned carefully on the Bible passage at Job 7:9, 10: “The cloud certainly comes to its end and goes away; so he that is going down to Sheol [the grave] will not come up. He will not return any more to his house, and his place will not acknowledge him any more.” Now the man realized that it could not have been his mother who had called his name and thrown the stone when he was a youth. She was dead, unconscious, and she could not return to do these things. Who, then, was responsible for them?
The Bible reveals the source of many supernatural phenomena to be wicked invisible spirit creature—and not departed spirits of humans. Satan the Devil is the chief of these wicked angelic creatures, and Jesus called him “the father of the lie.” (John 8:44) Satan and his wicked spirits deliberately have endeavored to deceive people into believing that humans survive death and enter into a spirit world. They have even impersonated the voices of deceased persons in an effort to perpetuate the lie that man does not cease to exist at death.
THROWING OFF THE YOKE OF “MEDICINE”
It is also commonly believed in some places that natural objects, including trees, rocks, rivers, mountains, and particularly images, are possessed of indwelling souls capable of influencing lives for good or for bad. Therefore, for protection against bad and fickle powers, a “medicine” is concocted of objects representative of powerful qualities. A stone, for instance, or bones, claws and beaks are considered useful. Such “medicines” may be stuffed into horns or made up into small packages.
One such “medicine” is known as “Gyeefa,” worn only by grown men. It is suspended from the neck in a skin pouch. Gyeefa has “soldiers” that report to him. These “soldiers” are finger rings worn by growing boys like Peter.
To prevent the “medicine” from harming him, Peter had to observe the “law of the medicine.” This law included a ban on roast cassava. Also, if Peter were on a journey and saw driver ants approaching him or he heard the call of the dudu bird on his right side, then he would be obliged to turn around and return to the starting point of his journey. And finally, no one was to be permitted to “talk over” Peter. Thus if Peter were sitting in a rice kitchen, no one dare go to the kitchen’s top and talk from a position above Peter. One can easily imagine the difficulties that observing such burdensome regulations would entail.
When Peter was twelve he was sent to Lower Buchanan in West Africa for schooling. The fine opportunity for beneficial mental development turned out to be a time of distress and foreboding for Peter. Why so? Because the master of the house lived on the second floor, above Peter. And Peter dare not tell him not to “talk over” him! For most of his time there Peter lived outside the house, and finally the fear of the “medicine” made him leave.
Years later, while studying the Bible with one of Jehovah’s witnesses, Peter was impressed with the fact that God condemned “anyone who employs divination, a practicer of magic or anyone who looks for omens or a sorcerer.” (Deut. 18:10) Peter realized that the “law of the medicine” regarding driver ants and dudu birds was nothing more than paying attention to omens. Too, how could Gyeefa with its odd assortment of lifeless objects protect him, a living man. He was trusting in magic power. And what sort of judgment would come to him from the true God for trusting in Gyeefa, a false idol?
Truth’s power and the fear of Jehovah God led Peter to challenge the “law of the medicine.” He started eating roast cassava. When driver ants came in his direction, he walked right through them and never changed course. That was fifteen years ago, and has harm come to Peter for altogether disregarding the Gyeefa superstitions? Not at all, as he continues to ‘walk in security with Jehovah as his confidence.’—Prov. 3:23-26.
Then there was John, who wore under his outer clothing a “medicine” in the form of a small gown to which sacrifices were made at every new moon. Failure to do so was supposed to bring on sickness or loss of sanity. If John should argue with someone, the mere striking of his chest was supposed to start the “medicine” working against his antagonist. Then one day John read in the Bible: “‘But to whom can you people liken me so that I should be made his equal?’ says the Holy One.”—Isa. 40:25.
John was troubled. Had the “medicine” taken the place of God in his life? Was he really relying on the true God? Was he praying? How, in fact, could he pray to the true God and expect to be heard? The Almighty is a God exacting exclusive devotion and does not share glory with any rival. After learning to ‘trust in Jehovah with his whole heart’ John wrapped up his expensive “medicine,” valued at $100, and threw it into the ocean.—Ex. 20:5; Isa. 42:8; Prov. 3:5.
It was ten years ago that John replaced the expensive gown with the “breastplate of righteousness” of which the Bible speaks. And during all these years the drowned “medicine” has been unable to deprive John of good health and soundness of mind.—Eph. 6:14.
NO LONGER DECEIVED BY DREAMS
But someone may ask: How can a person believe that a deceased relative is really dead when the deceased apparently talks to one in dreams?
For instance, a young woman dreamed frequently of her deceased grandmother. While she was alive the grandmother had been very fond of this granddaughter. Now, the grandmother would appear in dreams and prescribe medicine when her granddaughter was sick. On one occasion she even appeared and apparently changed the diapers of the granddaughter’s baby! Would not this convince one that grandmother was really alive in a spirit world?
Of course, this is what the “father of the lie,” Satan the Devil, desires individuals to believe. He wants to keep people enslaved to superstition and fear, making them believe that the deceased can really communicate with and do things either for or against the living. He and his agents are masters of deception. As the Bible explains: “Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light. It is therefore nothing great if his ministers also keep transforming themselves into ministers of righteousness.”—2 Cor. 11:14, 15.
In time, however, the granddaughter decided to put her faith in the Bible and diligently sought to understand it. Consequently, after turning to Jehovah, she no longer had such dreams of her grandmother. No longer did she think of her grandmother as a household spirit, but merely desired to see her again in the resurrection. Through faith in the truth, this young woman ‘opposed the Devil, and he fled from her.’—Jas. 4:7.
‘OLD WIVES’ TALES’ AND OMENS
In many places people are often enslaved by what amount to ‘old wives’ tales.’ For example, one grannie gave her daughter a piece of stone taken from a place where lightning had struck. “Put it in baby’s bath water,” she advised; “it will make him strong!” Grannie also disclosed that a piece of cork in the water will make baby agile, ‘ready to walk in nine months.’
Daughter dutifully followed this advice with her first four children before learning that the Bible condemned superstition. Therefore, her last six children were bathed without the stone and cork. Could she observe any difference in the development of her children? Not at all. All ten of them walked after nine months and all are healthy and strong. Superstitious persons like to pass on their superstitions to others. Be wise. Learn to distinguish between truth and superstitious ‘old wives’ tales.’ Heed the Bible, which says: “Turn down the false stories which violate what is holy and which old women tell.”—1 Tim. 4:7.
Perhaps you are superstitious only about little things, and still feel that you are acceptable to God as a Christian. You may not fear the dead or carry “medicine,” but if you are on a journey and happen to stub your right toe, do you accept this as an omen of good luck? Or if a branch of a tree breaks off right before your eyes, do you take this as an omen of ill for your family? Once you have established that mentality, any little thing that does not go right will appear to confirm your superstition. However, branches break and troubles come as normal occurrences in life. The Bible explains that “time and unforeseen occurrence befall” everyone.—Eccl. 9:11.
You will be wise to keep reminding yourself that the true God does not communicate with humans through omens. In fact, he condemns “anyone who looks for omens.” (Deut. 18:10) Therefore pay no attention to them! What a wonderful mental relief you will experience!
BREAK FREE BY TURNING TO JEHOVAH
Remember, such little superstitions on your part will not be overlooked by Jehovah, who is “searching the heart, examining the kidneys, even to give to each one according to his ways, according to the fruitage of his dealings.” (Jer. 17:10) Superstition alienates one from the true God, Jehovah. It prevents one from drawing close to Him, because superstition is based on falsehood and ignorance.
A person dares not deceive himself with false reasonings. For “God is light and there is no darkness at all in union with him.” This means that the break from superstitious practices must be complete and final. Otherwise, “If we make the statement: ‘We are having a sharing with him,’ and yet we go on walking in the darkness, we are lying and are not practicing the truth.”—1 John 1:5, 6.
Jehovah’s spirit or active force is needed to activate the mind to reject ignorance and foolish fears, and thus break free from superstition. Make room for God’s spirit to enter your mind by absorbing liberating Bible truth through reading, study and discussion of God’s Word. Call on the name of Jehovah for security and spiritual strength, for “the name of Jehovah is a strong tower. Into it the righteous runs and is given protection.” Make the break for wondrous mental freedom, for “where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.”—Prov. 18:10; 2 Cor. 3:17.

