VOL. XXXVI DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

View From The Watch Tower 355 

War May End in Exhaustion 355 

Proper Mortification of the Body 356 

Improper Mortification of the Flesh 356 

No Second Probation for the Church 357 

Editor's Answers to Interesting Questions 358 

Two Ordinations— One of God, One of 

Man 358 

Decorum in the House of God 360 

Consideration of Rights of Others 361 

Punctuality a Mark of Character 361 

God's Love for Israel 361 

A Little Talk by the Way 362 

The Apostle's Loving Counsel 362 

Looking on the Things of Others 363 

Interesting Letters 364 

"Before Afflicted, I Went Astray" 364 

The Progress of Three Months 364 

Your Good Hopes for 1916 365 

"Watch Tower" Subscriptions 366 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1916-YEAR TEXT-1916 

As our Year Text we have chosen these words, "Strong 
in Faith." (Romans 4:20.) Price, postpaid, 50c per dozen; 
5c each. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

We have the Diaglott only in leather binding, at the reduced 
price of $2. All back orders have been filled. We 
still offer THE WATCH TOWER for a year, as a premium, to 
any one not a TOWER subscriber, who orders the Diaglott; 
this introduces to him THE WATCH TOWER literature. 



NO EXCEPTIONS TO THIS RULE 

All cheques, drafts, money orders, etc., should be made out 
to WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
January follow: (1) 34; (2) 302; (3) 303; (4) 84; (5) 67; (6) 
6; (7) 105; (8) 102; (9) 155; (10) 15; (11) 280; (12) 188; (13) 
332; (14) 113; (15) 153; (16) 10; (17) 19; (18) 144; (19) 130; 
(20) 95; (21) 194; (22) 267; (23) 196; (24) 249; (25) 229; (26) 
283; (27) 4; (28) 145; (29) 28; (30) 8; (31) 207. 



A POPULAR BOOKLET ON HELL 



No other booklet is so much in demand as the one entitled, 
"WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL?" We have these 
now in good supply at 5 cents each. By the dozen, in booklet, 
50 cents; in TOWER form, 40 cents per dozen, 25 for 75 cents, 
$2.00 per hundred, postpaid. 



R5805 : page 355 

VIEW FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

WAR MAY END IN EXHAUSTION 

THE renowned German Socialist paper Vorwaerts 
calls on warring nations to announce 
their aims and makes the following 
stirring appeal: 

"Premier Asquith's exposition of the objects 
of the war last Fall was lacking in 
clearness and full of phrases, but at any 
rate, it was more specific than his assurance 
now that England is determined to continue 
the war to a successful end and to exhaust 
all her resources to attain the common highest goal. Less 
hazy is France's new man, Briand, in stating the object 
of driving the enemy out of the occupied provinces, including 
Alsace-Lorraine; but Briand, too, soon loses himself 
in clouds of rhetoric when he says that France will 
not make peace till justice is reestablished by victory and 
all the guarantees of a lasting peace obtained. 

"One would think that after fifteen months of the 
world's most terrible war, statesmen would be able to 
give a more specific answer to the question, and make it 
clearer to the peoples for what purpose they are shedding 
their blood— what goal has been set, and for what prize 
they are struggling. The defense of the Fatherland, 
freedom, justice, kultur— all that no longer suffices today. 
These are words which each may interpret as he likes, 
and it is really high time to speak more intelligently and 
to the point. 

"It seems almost as though both parties to the war 
feared to betray their plans to each other, for it is not 
only France and England that shroud their war goal and 
peace conditions in fog; the German Government is no 
less reticent; and still more, whenever expressing itself 
as to the purposes of the war, confines itself to generalities 
which may be in place in firing soldiers with courage 
before a charge, but which do not serve to disseminate 
the necessary clarity as to Germany's final intentions, 
either at home or abroad. 

"Stories about peace wishes and peace efforts of the 
German Government are being officially branded as false. 
Von Bulow is in Switzerland for rest and recreation, and 
Solf [the Colonial Secretary] only wants to visit his dear 
friends in Holland and once again eat good white bread. 



It isn't true, either, that the imperial Chancellor, in presence 
of Tom, Dick, or Harry, named the acquisition of 
Belgium to the Meuse line, the annexation of Courland, 
and 30,000,000,000 marks indemnity as peace conditions. 
Well, for the past twelve months we have heard what 
isn't true; can they take it badly of us if we would like 
for once to hear what is true, what the German Government 
really does consider its object in the war game? 

"It cannot be the case forever that battle after battle 
is fought, that great armies are led against one another 
in new theatres of war, without the people learning what 
has been attained, and what still must be achieved in 
order that the peace bells may ring. 

"The others, they tell us, must sue for peace, for we 
are the victors; but unfortunately the others don't consider 
themselves vanquished, and no result is reached. 
The war continues indefinitely because both parties fear 
to place limits to their demands and speak them out for 
fear that the announcement of the object for which they 
are fighting will be interpreted as a sign of weakness. 
It may go so far that this war will end with the complete 
exhaustion of all parties, because no one cared to say 
under what specific conditions it was prepared to end it. 
If this is to be prevented, then all the Governments must 
at least leave the realm of rhetorical generalities, and 
confess their concrete programs, and if, confused by the 
changing fortunes of war, they are not able any longer 
to picture to themselves clearly the objects of the war, 
let them open up the floodgates of public discussion. 
Then we shall soon have clarity and, we hope, peace." 



Too much courage, too much pride, is surely leading 
those in control of the world's affairs— in harmony with 
the Divine prediction— on to exhaustion. We behold the 
ripe manhood, the flower of Europe, going down to the 
Valley of Jehoshaphat— the Valley of Death— the cemetery 
valley of Jerusalem. (Joel 3:2,12.) And while we 
see the wealth of the world being wasted, our hearts 
would be so very, very sick if we did not have the assurance 
of God's Word respecting the grand outcome of 
universal blessing through Messiah's Kingdom, which is 
to follow the great turmoil of Armageddon! Well did 
Jesus predict that men's hearts would be failing them for 
fear and for looking after the things approaching ! Well 
did He say to us as His followers, "When ye see these 
things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up 
your heads; for your deliverance draweth nigh!" (Luke 21:25-28.) 
We rejoice not in the trouble, which surely 
saddens every tender heart. But we do rejoice that, since 
the world will be prepared for the grand change of government 
in no other way than through "a Time of Trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation" (Daniel 12:1; 
Matthew 24:21), Messiah is about to stand forth, 
clothed with Divine power, to take to Himself His great 



power and reign for the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. 



PROPER MORTIFICATION OF THE BODY 

"For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through 
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live."— 
Romans 8:13. 

MANY times have the children of the Lord 

read these words of the Apostle. Many 

times have His true saints pondered over 

their solemn import. Many times, too, 

have those less saintly read them, and instead 

of taking the lesson to themselves, 

have applied it to their worldly neighbors 

and allowed the lesson to lose its force 

upon themselves. But the most saintly of 

God's people need, as the Prophet declared 

of Israel of old, "precept upon precept, line upon line, 

here a little and there a little." (Isaiah 28: 10,13.) Our 

poor earthen vessels are very leaky and fragile, and need 

constant replenishment from the great Fountain of 

Truth and Life. 

So let us again ponder over these gracious words of 
the Lord's mouthpiece and have their lesson impressed 
more deeply upon our minds. St. Paul is here addressing 
the Church of Christ only. He is not addressing the 
world. The Church have entered into a solemn Covenant 
with the Lord to lay down in sacrifice earthly things, the 
earthly nature. The Apostle assures us that if we succeed 
in faithfully laying down our earthly life with all 
its hopes and prospects, we shall live. It is not merely 
that we shall covenant at the beginning of our Christian 
course to do this, but we must carry out to its completion 
this mortification of our body— the deeds of the body. 

The body with its deeds represents all the human 
interests— not merely the weaknesses and infirmities of 
our fallen condition, and our sinful tendencies. Those, 
of course, we are to mortify. We are to deaden these 
at once, as far as is possible. But we are also to sacrifice 
the earthly interests which are not sinful, but which 

R5806 : page 356 

would prevent our attainment of the glorious hope set 
before us, which would in any degree handicap us in the 
Heavenly race. Are we all doing this day by day? As 
we mingle with others and come into contact with the 
world and its influences, as we engage in the affairs of 
life, are we continually mortifying the deeds of the body? 
Are we crucifying the flesh? Are we dying daily to the 
things of earth? Are we living more and more fully 
each day as New Creatures in Christ? 



IMPROPER MORTIFICATION OF THE FLESH 

Day by day we shall find opportunities to mortify the 
deeds of our flesh; and this we must do, if we would live 
and grow as New Creatures. Some very mistaken 
notions are held by many in the world as to the proper 
mortification of the body. Some of our Catholic friends 
make a mistake in their zeal to do what they consider 
mortifying the flesh. For instance, many of them lie 
on a stone floor instead of on a bed; some will lie down 
to be walked upon and to be made a mat for others to 
wipe their feet upon; some will whip themselves until 
they have lacerated their flesh and then wear a hair 
jacket, with all the torture that means. These have certain 
sins in their minds of which they have been guilty, 
and for which they think they should do penance. With 
others this penance is not voluntary, but of compulsion 
by those who are in authority over them. The difficulty 
with these individuals is that their heads are wrong; they 
lack the spirit of a sound mind. They mean right; but 
they have been mistaught, and their consciences are 
perverted and falsely trained. 

The heathen also practise such mortification of body. 
Some of the zealots among them will hold up their hands 
for hours at a time, or sit or lie down upon spikes to 
mortify their flesh. Some imprison themselves for years 
in a cramped position in a box, being fed through an 
aperture. This they do to show that they are very holy, 
and they think thus to appease their god, or to bring 
themselves into a condition where their individuality and 
sensibilities will become lost and that they may in this 
manner be absorbed into the Diety— a condition of 
Nirvana, as it is called. They want to be pleasing to 
their deities; but we know that the true God is not 
pleased with any such sufferings and tortures. He is not 
a God of that kind. What manner of God would it be 
who would delight in seeing His children lying upon 
spikes or doing any other such senseless thing? Such 
is not the God of the Bible. Such a disposition could 
belong only to a demon, and practises of this nature are 
actuated by demons or are the vagaries of a disordered, 
untutored or misdirected brain. 

SELF DISCIPLINE FOR A PURPOSE 

The God of the Bible has, during the Age now closing, 
been calling out of the world a very special class of mankind. 
We have faith in this God because the instructions 
of His Word are reasonable, and because the results 
of following these instructions are in every way most 
satisfactory and gratifying. The wonderful fulfilments of 
its prophecies in the past and in the present are most 
convincing. The manifestations of His providences and 
His guidance in the lives of those who have served Him 
—this God of the Bible— are likewise so marked as to be 



unassailable. He has given to these "exceeding great 
and precious promises," which relate to the life which 
now is and also to that which is to come, and which sustain 
and strengthen the children of God in all their pilgrimage 
through this vale of tears to the Heavenly City, 
"whose Builder and Maker is God." 

We are assured in the Holy Word that if we are 
faithful to our God under present unfavorable conditions 
and environments, if we are loyal to the principles of 
Truth and righteousness and to our Covenant of Sacrifice 
made with Him, we shall have quite a conflict with 
ourselves and with the sins that are entrenched in our 
mortal bodies. He tells us, too, that such loyalty to Him 
will bring persecution and misunderstanding, because of 
the condition of darkness which now envelops the world 
of mankind. Yes, we well know that our faithful endeavor 
to serve the Lord and His Truth will now bring 
opposition from the world, from our own flesh, and from 
the great Adversary and all his hosts of darkness; for 
all these are leagued against us as followers of Christ— 
our Savior, our leader, our Pattern. 

We are to mortify the deeds of the body, but not the 
body itself without a purpose. There must be a reason, 
a Scriptural reason for so doing, a definite and worthy 
object before us in all our work of mortification. We 
might just as well go out and commit suicide at once, 
drink some poisonous acid, and think, "Now I have mortified 
my body," as to inflict torture upon ourselves, 
thinking through it to correct our sins or weaknesses. 
Only a greatly perverted mind and conscience could 
entertain such a wild idea. Whatever mortification is 
practised by the child of God should be actuated by the 
Spirit of God, the mind of God. "If ye through the Spirit 
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." 

There is today a meaning in the word mortification 
as ordinarily used, which is altogether different from the 
sense of the word as used by the Apostle. We sometimes 
say in speaking of a certain experience, "I was greatly 

R5806 : page 357 

mortified"; meaning that the experience produced humiliating 
or embarrassing results. But the deeds of the body 
are not thus dealt with. We are to mortify in the sense 
of putting to death the deeds of the flesh. This is the 
primary meaning of the word. 

We are striving day by day to develop the fruits of 
the Holy Spirit— fortitude, meekness, gentleness, patience, 
self-control, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love. It 
is while endeavoring to put these qualities of character 
into practise, to increase this blessed fruitage in our 
hearts and lives, that the mortification, the killing, of the 
deeds of the body is accomplished; for all the conditions 
about us are unfavorable. If conditions were favorable, 
if every one about us should encourage us in the good 
way and commend us for our course, the mortification of 



our flesh could not so well be brought about. It is in 
struggling against adverse influences, in encountering 
opposition and by conquering its power over us, that we 
gain strength and development as New Creatures in 
Christ. There will be no mortification of the flesh in the 
Millennial Age. But there is now. And it is this mortification 
of the deeds of the body, the crucifying of the flesh 
with all its earthward tendencies, that will, if persevered 
in, bring us the eternal life— the glory, honor, immortality 
—promised to the overcoming saints of the Gospel Dispensation. 
But if we take any other course we shall not 
gain the prize which has been offered to us in this Age. 

NO SECOND PROBATION FOR THE CHURCH 

There is in our text no intimation of a second probation 
for any of those addressed. These words were 
spoken to those who in the present existence are on trial 
for life. The Apostle does not say, If ye live after the 
flesh ye will lose the prize now offered, but you will 
have another trial for life later on. Neither does he say, 
If ye live after the flesh ye shall suffer endless torment. 
But his words speak of a present probation, the issue of 
which will be life or death, an eternity of existence in 
bliss and happiness or an endless cessation of existence. 
Nor is the Apostle here discussing the terms of salvation 
by the exercise of faith in the atoning blood of Christ. 
All this is taken for granted. He is speaking here, not 
of what we believe, but solely of how we are to live. 

Shall we, because of this, spring to the conclusion 
which many take, that it is immaterial what we believe, 
so long as we live well? By no means; and those who 
would so construe these words of the Apostle take but 
a very shallow view of his teachings, one which would 
rob them of all their import. But noticing that his words 
were addressed to those who have already exercised saving 
faith in Christ, and not to the world in any manner, 
we can get a proper understanding of what he meant. 
The heedless Christian who applies this warning to 
everybody, allows it to lose all its force upon himself. 
This is the very reverse of the Apostle's intention. He is 
talking to the saints, to consecrated believers in the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus, those who have been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit of God to a new nature, even 
the Divine. It is for this reason that he says nothing 
here about the Ransom nor about the Millennial Age of 
trial for the world. Those who are addressed here are 
having their trial now, and the decision in their cases 
will be rendered before the world comes into judgment. 

The Apostle's warning, therefore, is not at all applicable 
to the world, but is full of solemn import to the 
Church. These, having presented their bodies a living 
sacrifice with Christ, acceptable through Him, having 
made a sacred covenant with God to live henceforth after 
the Spirit and to seek those things which are Above, are 
not at liberty to annul or ignore that covenant. They can 



never again claim the human nature which they have laid 
down, for to this they have relinquished all claim and 
title. If they make any such endeavor, either by ignoring 
or despising their covenant with God, they forfeit all right 
and claim to the spiritual nature and reward, which can 
be attained only by faithfulness to our Covenant of Sacrifice 
even unto death. 

It is therefore logically manifest, even if the Apostle 
had not so declared, that if we, consecrated believers, turn 
back again to live after the flesh, we shall die; that for 
us to be carnally minded is death, while to be spiritually 
minded is life and peace. Our Master's words in 
Matthew 16:24,25 are to the same effect— "Whosoever 
[of My disciples] will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever 
will lose his life for My sake shall find it." 

R5807 : page 357 

THE WORKS OF THE FLESH 

An important question then is, What is it to live after 
the flesh? Our reply is, to live after the flesh is to live in 
gratification of even the legitimate cravings of the human 
mind and the human body, when such gratification will 
prevent our necessary progress in the narrow way and 
take time which we should use in our development as 
New Creatures or in the laying down of our lives for the 
brethren. And this is a very easy thing to do. Let us 
just cease our efforts to crucify the flesh, to mortify the 
deeds of the body, and listlessly abandon ourselves to the 
natural inclinations of the flesh; and at once we begin 
to gravitate downward, and soon we find resistance more 
and more difficult, and the path more and more slippery. 
Then, unless we make heroic and prayerful efforts to 
regain our lost position, we shall continue to go downward; 
and the end will be death. 

St. Paul defines the works of the flesh thus: "Now 
the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these: 
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, 
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, 
strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, 
revelings and such like." (Galatians 5:19-21.) 
What moral filth and pollution this describes! But such 
is the tendency of fallen human nature. Just cease to 
strive against the old nature, and presently some of these 
noxious weeds will be flourishing and crowding out the 
good that remains. 

"Ah, well," says one, "I have not all those mean qualities." 
Well, we are very glad you have not; very few 
have them all. But, beware, you may not know what 
manner of spirit you are of, naturally. Be sure that your 
old nature is not free from inherited, and perhaps a 
formerly cultivated, tendency in some of these directions. 
The only safe way is to watch and pray against them, to 
fill the mind with the things of the Spirit of God, lest 
ye enter into temptation. 



Consider the blessed fruits of the Spirit— love, joy, 
peace, long-suffering, meekness, gentleness, goodness, 
faith, self-control. "Against such there is no law." To 
live in the cultivation of these fruits and graces is to 
"live in the Spirit," and to "walk in the Spirit." Thus do 
we not only possess our souls in safety, but we constantly 
progress in the development of the character of Christ. 
Indeed, we are only safe while we are growing; there is 
no safety in standing still. If we cease to grow, we 
begin at once to retrograde. 

THE USES OF DISCIPLINE 

We see, therefore, that the Christian life is of necessity 
a warfare, a battle, between our new nature and the 
tendencies of the flesh, supplemented by the attacks from 
the outside, from the world and the Adversary with his 

R5807 : page 358 

hosts. It is a conflict which we dare not relinquish; for 

not only is the prize of our High Calling dependent upon 

it, but also the issues of life and of death are in it. How 

solemn a thing it is, therefore, to live under these circumstances; 

for daily and hourly we are standing before 

the bar of judgment! "If we live after the flesh, we 

shall die; but if we through the Spirit, do mortify [put 

to death, refuse to gratify] the deeds of the body, we 

shall live." All true sons of God will so live; for, says 

the Apostle Paul, "As many as are led by the Spirit of 

God, they are the sons of God."— Romans 8:14. 

If we wilfully refuse the leading of God's Holy 
Spirit, we forfeit the blessed relationship of sons. If we 
listlessly disregard this leading, we greatly endanger that 
relationship; and as surely as we are sons we shall receive 
chastisement for our correction and discipline. But 
while we should be grateful for such a restraining hand, 
for this rod of correction, if we need it, yet we should 
be very careful to require as little of it as possible. "If 
we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged" of 
the Lord. (1 Corinthians 11:31.) However, with the 
most careful and prayerful watching against the uprisings 
of the old will and of the flesh, we will doubtless 
make many mistakes and need some chastening experience 
from the Lord; "for what son is he whom the Father 
chasteneth not?"— Hebrews 12:5-12. 

Let us, then, remember the exhortation, "My son, 
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint 
when thou art rebuked of Him. For whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He 
receiveth." (Hebrews 12:5,6.) In the difficult course 
before us, and in view of all the dangers that beset us, 
the pitfalls laid for our feet, the weakness of our own 
unaided efforts, how blessed is the promise of our Father 
in Heaven to give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him; 
how precious the assurance that if we are filled with the 



Spirit we shall not fulfil the desires of the flesh, but shall 
be enabled to mortify the deeds of the body that we may 
live! How necessary it is to live very near to the 
Fountain of all grace, to pray without ceasing and to 
watch with perseverance! 

If at times we know not whether to turn to the right 
or to the left, know not wherein to walk, let us lift 
our hearts to the Lord, and wait before Him, remembering 
the Divine assurance, "Delight thyself in the Lord; 
and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Commit 
thy way unto the Lord; trust also in Him; and He shall 
bring it to pass." "In all thy ways acknowledge Him, 
and He shall direct thy paths." (Psalm 37:4,5; Proverbs 3:6.) 
Thus His dear voice brings comfort, strength, rest, 
in the midst of all the cares and perplexities of the way. 
"As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on 
them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God!"— Galatians 6:16. 



R5807 : page 358 

EDITOR'S ANSWERS TO INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

TWO ORDINATIONS-ONE OF GOD, ONE OF MAN 

QUESTION.— When, by whom and how were 
you ordained a minister of the Gospel? 

Answer.— Before answering this question, 
I would call attention to the Scriptural 
teaching on the subject of ordination. 
From what we believe to be the Bible 
standpoint, there are two ordinations 
proper. One is of God; one of men. The 
ordination of God is the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit. Without this no one is authorized 
to preach the Gospel. If any are preaching without 
this ordination they are, to our understanding, preaching 
without Divine ordination. They are doing something 
that they are not authorized to do. 

Our Lord told how He was ordained to be a preacher; 
and the Scriptures tell us that we are to walk in His steps 
and to have experiences similar to His own in many respects. 
As ministers of the Cross, we are to copy our 
Lord Jesus Christ as fully as we are able to do. But He 
was perfect, and we are imperfect. Consequently we are 
to have the forgiveness of our sins, while he had no sins. 
He, therefore, constitutes the basis of forgiveness of all 
who come unto the Father through faith in His blood. 
He mentions His own ordination, saying, "The Spirit of 
the Lord is upon Me; because He hath anointed Me to 
preach good tidings to the meek." (Isaiah 61:1.) As 
that ordination came upon Jesus, it still later came upon 
the disciples at Pentecost; and all down the Gospel Age 
it has come upon the followers of Christ, anointing them 
to preach the Gospel.— Luke 4:17-21; 1 John 2:27. 



All who have received the ordination of God have the 
authority to preach according to their opportunities and 
abilities. Some of them may be deaf mutes and cannot 
preach audibly. Others may be limited by sex; sisters 
cannot preach as do the brethren; but they can preach, 
nevertheless, in "showing forth the praises of Him who 
hath called them out of darkness into His marvelous 
light." (1 Peter 2:9.) Moreover, they are fully ordained 
to make known the good tidings, but, according to 
the Apostle Paul's statement, not in a public way. There 
are some men who cannot preach publicly on account of 
lack of talent or opportunity, but all men, by their lives 
and conversation, can proclaim the glory and honor of 
the great and loving God who lifted them out of darkness 
into light, out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and 
placed their feet upon a Rock and established their 
goings.— Psalm 40:2. 

There comes, however, another special ordination of 
those who are called ministers of the Gospel, in which 
class I count myself. This is ordination by the Church, 
and is recognized by all denominations everywhere. By 
some it is considered a mere form, by some it is performed 
with great ceremony, by others with less ceremony. 
But to our understanding, each congregation 
should have those whom it has chosen ordained in a 
Scriptural way— by the stretching forth of hands— by a 
vote. 

The form of the statement in Acts 14:23, with other 
frequent references to elders in connection with all 
churches, justifies the inference that ordination was the 
invariable custom in the early Church. The term "elders," 
as seen in this text, includes evangelists, pastors, teachers, 
and prophets— public exponents. Hence it is important 
that we learn what is meant by the word "ordained." 

At the present time the word ordination is generally 
used in reference to a ceremony of installation; but this 
is not the significance of the Greek word cheirotoneo, 
used in this text. It means "to elect by stretching out the 
hand," still the usual form of voting. This definition is 
given in Professor Young's "Analytical Concordance to 
the Bible." As this may be considered a Presbyterian 
authority, we give also the definition set forth in Strong's 
"Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible," which may be 
considered a Methodist authority. The latter defines the 
root of the word— "A hand-reacher, or voter (by raising 
the hand)." 

R5808 : page 359 

The Scriptural method of ordaining elders in all the 
churches is by congregational election— by stretching 
forth the hand in a vote. To insist upon such an election 
before serving is to follow Scriptural order; it fortifies 
the elder, and, additionally, reminds the congregation of 
its duties and responsibilities as appointees of the elders 
in the Lord's name and Spirit— as expressing God's 



choice, God's will. Additionally, the Scriptural arrangement 

interests the members of the congregation in all the 

words and deeds of the elders, as their servants and representatives. 

It opposes the too prevalent idea that the 

elders own and rule the congregation, and puts an end 

to their thinking of them as "my people"— rather than as 

"the Lord's people, whom I serve." 

Whoever has not been ordained in these two ways is 
not an ordained minister of the Gospel in the Scriptural 
sense. First, the Divine ordination is necessary; second, 
the earthly ordination is necessary. By the grace of God 
I have both of these. 

In the case of those who are doing a public work in 
the name of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
they are ordained as a whole. They are sent forth 
by the officers of the Society; and as a majority of the 
classes everywhere are recognized by the Society, and 
as they in turn recognize the Society, they therefore 
recognize this ordination through the Society. 



Question.— Where did the Society get the authority 
for sending out preachers? 

Answer.— It gets its authority primarily from the 
Lord, who authorizes all His people, who receive the 
Holy Spirit, to go forth. Secondly, the Society is a 
business organization for religious work in the service 
of the Lord, by printing books, pamphlets, charts, etc., 
and by sending out its representatives to preach— by 
word of mouth and by printed page. This is its only business. 
It is acting in the same way as did the Church at 
Antioch, who especially chose Paul and Barnabas to do a 
missionary work, and who voted these to be representatives 
of that Church. -Acts 13:2,3. 

When Paul and Barnabas went forth, they did not 
say, "We preach in our own name." They would have 
had a right to go in the name of the Lord and preach; 
but, in addition, they had the financial backing, we understand, 
of the Antioch congregation, just as today our 
representatives have the backing of the Society. When 
they go to a place, they can say, "Here is a letter which 
shows that we are acting for the Society." So they do 
not go simply in the name of Christ, but they go as representatives 
of this Society, which is known to be doing 
an evangelizing work. 



Question.— As to the name of the Association: Is it 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY? or the 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION? 

Answer.— It is both. They are virtually the same 
thing. The INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION, 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY and 
the PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION are in many respects 



identical. Why have three names? For the same reason 
that there are in the various churches different Societies 
—the Home Missionary Society, the Christian Endeavor 
Society and the Epworth League, etc., etc. Are they not 
all doing the same work and trying to help people to live 
a Christian life, etc.? Yes. Why have different Societies? 
For the reason that each has a different branch 
of the work to which to attend. 

So it is with us. The parent Association is the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, chartered 
under the laws of the State of Pennsylvania. Its purpose 
is to publish the Truth, to send forth missionaries, etc., 
etc. The property that was necessary to transact business, 
etc., was in its name; for no other was necessary in 
the State of Pennsylvania. 

When we moved here to New York, we were informed 
that the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY could 
not hold title to property here. We were told, "You 
can do business in a personal way, but not as a Society. 
So if you want to do any business here, you must be 
chartered as an Association." "Very well, then," we 
said, "we will organize the PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION." 
This is merely another name for the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, for New York business. 

Later on, in Great Britain, we were informed, "Your 
American Charter does not count for anything here." 
Consequently we took out a Charter there for the INTERNATIONAL 
BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION. This reads 
practically the same as the Charter of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

These three different Societies were made necessary 
by the law of different states and countries. For some 
things the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY is 
the preferable name. It is the parent Society and the one 
to which contributions are made. Whoever makes a 
donation is expected, if he will, to make it in the name of 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

The PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION is the only one of 
the three that can do business here in New York, and the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY deals with the 
PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION as though they were two 
independent organizations. Nevertheless they are the 
same— just as with the different Societies of the nominal 
churches, which would have, perhaps, the same treasurer. 

Thus the whole management is by the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, and these auxiliary organizations 
merely help in carrying on its work. We sometimes 
use one name and sometimes another, just as any one 
would have the right to use any names appropriate to his 
work. It is equally appropriate to say that we are the 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION. We are 
Bible students, and are helping Bible students in all parts 
of the world, by the printed page, by financial assistance 
and in other ways. It is also appropriate to use the name 
PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION in connection with persons 
who are engaged in preaching and are acting under guidance 



of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

In other words, the PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION cannot 
transact business except through the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. The WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY has the management, and the 
PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION does the work-absolutely. 

The INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 
has no legal status except in Great Britain; the PEOPLES 
PULPIT ASSOCIATION has none except in New York State. 

We keep the "WATCH TOWER" prominent in letterheads, 
etc., so that the friends would not misunderstand 
us and think that the "WATCH TOWER" has gone out of 
the work. We use one name or another, as would seem 
to be most convenient in the work. For instance, we 
now have on the title page of the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES the name INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION, instead of WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY, as formerly. Here we have a distinctive name, 
different from others. There are Bible Teachers Associations, 
Tract Societies, etc., etc.; but here we have a 
name especially appropriate to put on our publications, 

R5808 : page 360 

because it represents exactly the thought which we desire 
to express. 



Question.— From what School of Theology were you 
graduated? 

Answer.— I am still in the School of Christ and have 
not yet been graduated. We get our theology from the 
BIBLE. Some of our friends have taken their theology 
otherwise, have taken it from human instructors, and 
have afterwards found that they had wasted their time. 
Some things which they were taught were Scriptural, and 
some things were sectarian. We are simply trying to find 
out what the BIBLE teaches. As the Apostle Paul said to 
Timothy, so we desire to do: "Study to show thyself 
approved unto GOD, a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth."— 
2 Timothy 2:15. 

The Apostle did not tell Timothy to go to some 
Theological School, or tell him which would be the proper 
one to attend if he wished to get confused. He merely 
told the young man to rightly divide the WORD OF TRUTH 
—to see which portions refer to Natural Israel and which 
refer to Spiritual Israel; which are earthly promises, belonging 
to the natural man, and which are spiritual promises, 
belonging to the Christian; which belong to the 
present time, and which to the future. 

Some of our number have been graduated from a 
theological seminary. At the time of their graduation 
they thought that their school was the best there was. 
But since they entered into the School of Christ, they 



find that really they would have been much better off if 
they had not gone to the seminary at all; for it took many 
months and years to get out of their heads the errors 
which were there drilled in. 



Question.— How should we understand the Apostle's 
advice to Timothy to "Lay hands suddenly on no man"? 
Does not this imply a formal ordination? 

R5809 : page 360 

Answer.— The Apostle Paul's words to Timothy might 
be variously understood. If we should read in tomorrow 
morning's paper that some one suddenly laid hands on a 
man we would understand that he had been assaulted. 
We are to remember that this is not the way the expression 
would be understood in the Greek, but that the translators 
gave us what they thought the proper meaning. 
The early Church had a ceremony of formally laying 
hands on the heads of their elders, deacons, etc. When 
the Apostles did this, it was the indication of the impartation 
of the Holy Spirit. None but the Apostles 
could bestow this. The Churches may have had some 
custom amongst themselves in the way of appointing 
ministers, however, that in thus doing they might indicate 
that they approved of such persons. 

There would be nothing improper in a similar ceremony, 
if a Pilgrim were sent forth by the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY for a special service of some 
kind. The officers of the Society might step forward, 
lay their hands on the Pilgrim's head and say, "You are 
the representative of the Society." The priests in olden 
time laid their hands upon the head of the animal that 
was to be offered— to show that it represented them. 
So some one might be sent forth by the Society; but a 
ceremonial laying on of hands would be merely an appeal 
to the eye, carrying with it no other authority than the 
words, "You are appointed for such and such service," etc. 

This leaves each little company of the Lord's people 
to use whatever ceremony they choose. Episcopalians and 
Catholics use a great deal of ceremony; other denominations 
use less. We believe that we also have the right to 
use as much or as little ceremony as we choose. The 
meaning of the word ordination is to authorize. True 
ordination is, first, of the Holy Spirit; second, of the association 
sending forth its servant with the Gospel Message. 



R5809 : page 360 

DECORUM IN THE HOUSE OF GOD 
[REPUBLISHED BY REQUEST.] 



"Keep thy foot when thou goest to the House of God, and 
be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools; for 
they consider not that they do evil."— Ecclesiastes 5:1. 

THE WISE MAN was undoubtedly not talking 
about literal feet or literal steps, but giving 
some wise counsel, which his hearers might 
appropriate, just as we do. They understood 
him to mean that they must be circumspect 
in their daily lives. 

"Keep thy foot." Notice where you 
are going. Do not go to the House of God 
as you would go to the market-place or to 
some place of amusement. Go as to the 
place where God will meet with His people. The wise 
man goes on to assume what would be heard in the House 
of God. Be not ready "to give the sacrifice of fools," 
he says. This would seem to refer to laughter, levity, 
foolish talk and jesting. 

This Scripture is one which may very properly be 
taken to heart by all of God's people at the present time. 
Reverence is very becoming. We have lost the fear that 
God will cast us into eternal torment. We know our 
Heavenly Father better than to suppose that He would 
have any such evil intention toward any of His creatures. 
But we should not go to the House of God as we would 
go to the market-place. Many of the Lord's people do 
not appreciate the fact that decorum is necessary in every 
place where God is worshiped. 

It is for us to realize that we have God in the Church 
today in a sense that He never was in the typical temple. 
Wherever there is a meeting of the members of the 
Church, the Lord has declared that He will be there. 
The living stones constituting the Temple of God should 
be as fully reverenced as temples made of literal stones. 

Whether we meet in a parlor or in a church or in an 
opera house, the fact that God's people are there makes 
that building, whatever it may be, a holy place. Therefore 
whoever approaches it should do so with a watchfulness 
of his feet. When he arrives, he should be appreciative 
of the place where he is, and should be ready to 
"hear"— listen— not full of mirth. All conversation 
should be of a kind that would edify— build up— along 
spiritual lines. If we cannot talk along such lines, it 
would be better for us to hear the discourse, join in the 
singing, and then withdraw. 

Whatever conversation be carried on, it should be with 
reverence, not merely for the place, but for the occasion. 
There should be no turning about and saying, "Here 
comes Brother So-and-so, Sister So-and-so. We shall 
hear them sing." Such conduct is very improper. 

We do not know any lesson the Lord's people need to 
learn more than that of reverence. The Lord will not 
call any one devoid of reverence, and He wants that quality 
to grow strong. But when fear is banished, the tendency 



is to less reverence. Special care in this respect is 

to be observed when we go to the House of God, or to any 

place where Divine service is to be held. 

R5809 : page 361 

CONSIDERATION OF RIGHTS OF OTHERS 

Not only should we watch our feet in going to the 
House of God, but we should watch what we take with us. 
We should see that we go there clean; that we take no 
vermin in our clothing; that we have no bad odors about 
us. We should also see that we do not take children who 
are not properly trained. Thus we shall not be in danger 
of annoying others. 

There may be occasions when children may be left 
alone at home. When this is impossible, it would be better 
for the parents to take turns in coming to the meetings. 
No one has a right to take children to the meeting, when 
their presence would be detrimental to the spiritual interests 
of others. We believe, however, that a way could be 
devised whereby the child could be left at home until of 
such an age as not to disturb the Class. The majority of 
parents become so accustomed to the ways of their children 
that they do not realize that others are being annoyed— 
when probably every motion of the child is disturbing 
others. The others have their own trials to tax 
their patience without additional ones from us. 

PUNCTUALITY A MARK OF CHARACTER 

It would seem that some need to watch, not only their 
feet, but also their watches. To come into the meeting 
late is out of harmony with the principles of both justice 
and love. All who attend ought, in justice to others, to 
see that they arrive in time. They ought so to arrange 
their affairs that they can be at the meeting promptly at 
the hour appointed. 

Doubtless the Lord would view our efforts to be punctual 
and not to annoy others as marks of Christian character-development, 
which would have His approval, and 
which would help to prepare us for the Kingdom. He 
who is indifferent to the rights of others manifests that 
he is lacking in the spirit of love, the spirit of Christ. 
And whoever has not the spirit of Christ, well developed, 
will not have a place in the Kingdom. 

Hence these matters— unruly children, tardiness at 
meeting, etc.— will have to do with our fitness for a place 
in the Kingdom. By this we do not mean that we are 
being judged according to our work, or that we have any 
right to judge others according to their work. The Lord 
said, "Judge not." We should show that our endeavors 
to do the Lord's will are equal to the desires of our hearts. 
If we exercise determination in trying to live up to these, 
we shall be glad when we experience our change in the 
Resurrection. 



R5809 : page 361 

GOD'S LOVE FOR ISRAEL 

--DECEMBER 12.-HOSEA 11:1-11.- 

ISRAEL TREATED AS A SON BY GOD-REBELLIOUS, SELF-WILLED, 
UNFAITHFUL-GOD'S MERCIES PURSUED THEM FOR CENTURIES 
-ISRAEL'S CAPTIVITY IN BABYLON 
-RETURN TO GOD'S FAVOR FORETOLD. 

"I drew them with cords of a man, 
with bands of love."— Verse 4. 

HOSEA prophesied in Israel— the ten-tribe 

kingdom— prior to the Babylonian Captivity, 

dying about the time that Samaria 

capitulated. The name Hosea signifies salvation 

and corresponds well with the 

prophecy. The Lord through Hosea made 

plain to Israel that their national destruction 

and captivity was at hand; that it was 

a punishment for sin; but that it also told 

the people of God's sympathy for them, of 

His many loving forbearances, etc., and assured them 

that He would continue to love them to the end, and 

eventually bless them and recover them from the land 

of the enemy. 

Hosea's own experiences in life in some degree pictured 
the Lord's experiences with Israel. Hosea's wife 
was unfaithful to him, as Israel had been unfaithful to 
the Lord. Following the Lord's direction, Hosea took 
back his wife, reclaiming her; and his message to Israel 
was of God's continued love for that people— that although 
they had been unfaithful to the Lord, He would 
nevertheless loyally receive them again when they should 
have learned their lesson and be glad to come back as a 
bird from Egypt and a trembling dove from Babylonia. 

"THE LORD LOVED THEE" 

Love is the keynote of the Bible, notwithstanding the 
fact that it contains threatenings as well as promises, and 
declarations and manifestations of justice as well as of 
mercy. If God's character were devoid of Justice— if 
His Love should override His Justice— it would be a terrible 
calamity for all those dependent upon Him. It 
would testify weakness of character instead of strength. 
It is the fact that God's Wisdom, Justice, Love and 
Power operate in full harmony— in coordination— that 
gives us admiration for Him, confidence in Him, love for 
Him; and all these appreciations are intensified as we 
realize His unchangeableness. 



From the beginning God foreknew His Plan as we 
see it gradually ripening. He foreknew that man, allowed 
to take his course, would fall deeply into sin and 
be overwhelmed in its penalty, death. He foreknew His 
own purpose to provide in due time the Lamb of God as 
a Ransom-Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. He 
foreknew the ultimate blessing of all the families of the 
earth, purposing that the glorified Redeemer should be 
the Deliverer of mankind. He foreknew and arranged 
a thousand years of restitution work, when under 
Messiah's glorious Kingdom all mankind should be 
brought to a full knowledge of God and a full opportunity 
for returning to all that was lost in Eden, all that was 
redeemed at Calvary; and when the ultimately rebellious 
should be destroyed. He foresaw from the beginning the 
glorious result when every knee would be bowing and 
every tongue confessing the glorious work of Messiah's 
Kingdom. This entire Program was to be of the Father 
and through the Son.— 1 Corinthians 8:6. 

It was incidental to this great Plan that God foresaw 
the wisdom of having a saintly company associated with 
Jesus in the great work of His Millennial Kingdom, 
which is to govern and bless thousands of millions. God 
determined to have two saintly companies. One class was 
to be of the earth, earthy, samples of what mankind 
might all eventually attain to through the assistance of 
the Kingdom. The other class of saints, still more highly 
exalted, were to be the Bride of Messiah and His Joint-heir 
in the Kingdom on the spirit plane. God could have 
filled these honorable positions with angels, who would 
have been glad of the opportunity of thus serving. However, 
instead, He chose to gather these companies from 
amongst men— from amongst the sinners themselves. 

CALLING ABRAHAM'S POSTERITY 

Many ways were open before the Lord for the gathering 
of the Elect for the future service. The one which 
He chose and has been carrying out was undoubtedly the 

R5809 : page 362 

wisest, the best. First of all, God called Abraham— a 
sinner like others, but one whose heart was full of 
trust in God and who delighted in the right ways of the 
Lord to the extent of his ability. God's Promise to 
Abraham was that his seed should constitute the Elect, 
and that through that seed all nations would receive a 
Divine blessing. 

The period of nearly four thousand years since God's 
Covenant with Abraham has been devoted to the development 
of Abraham's seed— a natural seed and a Spiritual 
Seed. The two were mentioned to Abraham indirectly 
when the Lord said, "Thy seed shall be as the stars of 
heaven and as the sand of the seashore." (Genesis 22:17.) 
The stars of heaven thus are used to represent 



the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; the sand of the seashore, 
the natural seed. 

For more than eighteen centuries God dealt with the 
natural seed of Abraham. His promises to them and the 
Law Covenant made with them were great blessings, 
inspirations, assistances. For although the Israelites, like 
others, were unable to keep the Law Covenant, being 
imperfect, sinners, nevertheless the endeavor to obey was 
helpful. The various chastisements of Israel, including 
their Babylonian captivity, were lessons intended for their 
good, and eventually made that nation, at the time when 
Jesus came to be the Redeemer, the most holy people in 
all the world— the only people recognized of God. 

"HE CAME UNTO HIS OWN" 

Nevertheless, much of the holiness of Israel in Jesus' 
day was merely a form of godliness, which did not stand 
the test. Only Israelites indeed— pure in heart, in motive 
—were enabled to appreciate the Gift of God and to 
become Jesus' disciples— probably 25,000 in all. Then the 
door of opportunity to become fellow-heirs with the 
Jewish saints was thrown open to the Gentiles; and God's 
Message was given them, inviting them also to joint-heirship 
with Christ. The gathering of this class has 
proceeded for eighteen centuries, while the nation of 
Israel has been rejected from God's favor. Now we are 
entering the great Time of Trouble which is to inaugurate 
Messiah's Kingdom. During this trouble the Church is 
to be glorified in the First Resurrection. Then the 
thousand years of Messiah's Reign with the elect, spiritual 
Bride, drawn from both Jews and Gentiles, will begin. 

Still God's favor will pursue the natural seed of 
Abraham. Their lessons and chastisements will fit and 
prepare them more quickly than others of the world to 
receive the Messianic blessing. The earthly phase of 
Messiah's Kingdom will be Israelitish, in that Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets and saintly ones 
down to John the Baptist are to be made "princes in all 

R5810 : page 362 

the earth" (Psalm 45:16)— the earthly representatives in 
human perfection of the spiritual Kingdom of Messiah. 

Naturally enough, Israel will then in a natural way 
come first into harmony with the Divine arrangement 
and be the first to get the blessing. However, during the 
thousand years of the Kingdom, as the Scriptures declare, 
all nations shall bless themselves in becoming Abraham's 
seed— in coming into relationship with the Kingdom, 
which will have an Israelitish basis. (Jeremiah 4:2; 
Isaiah 65:16; Genesis 12:3.) Eventually, all will be destroyed 
who do not thus become true Israelites. Thus 
Abraham's seed will eventually include all the families of 
the earth— all for whom God has provided life eternal. 
As for Gentiles— strangers from God— none will remain. 



R5810 : page 362 

A LITTLE TALK BY THE WAY 

"Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, 
being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done 
through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each 
esteem other better than themselves. Look not every 
man on his own things, but every man also on the things 
of others. Let this mind be in you, which was 
also in Christ Jesus."— Philippians 2:2-5. 

THE CHURCH at Philippi, as is well known, 
was the first Ecclesia established in Europe. 
It had a very small and humble beginning. 
Philippi was one of the principal cities of 
Macedonia. (Acts 16:9-14,20,21.) In 
seeking an opportunity for service for the 
Lord in this place, the Apostle went on the 
Sabbath day down to a river bank, where a 
few women habitually resorted for prayer; 
and he spoke to them the Word of God. Dr. 
McLaren, commenting upon the small beginning of the 
Church at Philippi, says: "Not blowing of trumpets, not 
beating of drums of any sort; a few women and some 
worn-out travelers talking together by the banks of the 
rushing river. How scornfully the great folk of Philippi 
would have smiled, if they had been told that the chief 
title of their city to be remembered at all would be the 
presence in it of that one insignificant Jew, and his letter 
to the Church founded on that morning ! " 

The general character of the Philippian Church is revealed 
in St. Paul's Epistle, written to them at a later 
period. We find in it nothing like correction or reproof, 
as we note in most of the Epistles written by the Apostle 
to other Churches. His Philippian letter is a particularly 
beautiful and loving one, and indicates a very close bond 
of sympathy between him and this Church. On four different 
occasions that are recorded, this Church rendered 
practical sympathy and service to St. Paul, by financial 
assistance, as well as by words of comfort and cheer. 
Twice he received gifts from them for his support while 
he was at Thessalonica. Again, while he was at Corinth, 
they ministered to him. When he was a prisoner at Rome 
this loving Church did not forget the Apostle. It was 
their messenger, Epaphroditus, who brought to him the 
last touching memorial of their love. 

Epaphroditus, it will be remembered, was the brother 
who was brought "nigh unto death," for the Gospel's sake 
—because of his faithful service in the assistance of the 
Apostle in the work of the Lord when there seemed little 
help coming from other sources. Upon his recovery from 
this severe illness, the Apostle Paul sent by him to the 



Church at Philippi this beautiful letter known to us as the 
Epistle to the Philippians. See Philippians 2:25-28; 4:14-19; 
2 Corinthians 11:9. 

THE APOSTLE'S LOVING COUNSEL 

The other Churches may possibly have ministered to 
the Apostle also; and we know that this was true in the 
case of certain individuals, among whom were Aquila and 
Priscilla. But we have no record of any Church that 
ministered to St. Paul as did the Church at Philippi. Apparently 
other Churches missed a great opportunity. We 
may be sure that while the Apostle urged the Churches to 
contribute to the relief of the poor saints at Jerusalem, 
etc., he made no request for personal assistance, however 
much he may have been in need, or however much he 
might have appreciated any small manifestation of their 
love for him and the cause of the Lord whom he served. 

The lesson respecting love and humility which we find 
in the passage of Scripture under consideration does not 
intimate that these graces were lacking among the Philippians; 

R5810 : page 363 

but it indicates that the Apostle recognized the 

great importance of these fruits of the Spirit, and the 

need for their continual cultivation, in order to a continued 

growth in the likeness of Christ. The opening 

words of the chapter are an exhortation to brotherly love 

and affection among themselves. He says, "If there be 

any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any 

bowels and mercies." The bowels were formerly considered 

the seat of the tender emotions, pity, compassion 

of heart. It would seem that the Apostle would put the 

Church at Philippi to the test, would let them answer as 

to whether these graces appertain to all who are New 

Creatures in Christ— as if he would say, "If you have 

found these blessed fruits to be a part of the character-likeness 

of Christ, let these be more and more developed 

in you all." 

Then, as though they had assented to this proposition, 
had conceded that there is comfort, love, fellowship, sympathy, 
consolation, in Christ toward one another, he adds: 
You can fill my joy to the full by being thus minded 
toward each other, by having love one toward another, by 
having one mind, or purpose, or will, as a Church— the 
Lord's will. How grand an expression this is! His joy 
would be full; not by knowing of their mere professions, 
but by knowing that they loved, sympathized with, and 
consoled one another, that they had the proper fellowship 
as members of the Body of Christ. These things filled his 
joy more full than anything else that he could know concerning 
them. And he knew that these conditions would 
be most pleasing in the sight of their Lord and Master. 
The Apostle John emphasizes the same thought saying, 
"He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how 



can he love God whom he hath not seen?"— 1 John 4:20. 
LOOKING ON THE THINGS OF OTHERS 

To this end— that such a spirit of perfect unity and 
fellowship might obtain amongst the disciples at Philippi 
—the Apostle exhorts that each one cultivate the grace 
of humility; that in every matter each shall take heed that 
"nothing be done through strife or vainglory," that self-laudation 
and strivings for preeminence be thoroughly 
put away as the greatest enemies to the Spirit of the Lord 
and to the attainment of His blessing. He urged that each 
should have that lowliness of mind which could see the 
good qualities and talents of the fellow members of the 
Body; and that they should appreciate these qualities as, 
in some respects at least, superior to their own. 

Lowliness of mind does not necessarily signify an 
ignorance of any talents or graces which we may ourselves 
possess; but so long as the Church is in the present imperfect, 
or tabernacle, condition, we may never expect to 
find all the abilities, all the talents, all the graces of the 
Holy Spirit in their highest development, in any one 
person. So, then, each may, if he be lowly of mind, see in 
others of the brethren certain desirable qualities or graces 
superior to his own; and these he should delight to 
recognize and to esteem their possessors accordingly. 

For each to look merely on his own things, his own interest 
or welfare or comfort, or his own talents, and to 
ignore or forget the interests and comfort or talents of 
others, would be a manifestation of selfishness and a 
dearth of the Spirit of Christ, which is a spirit of love, 
consideration and generosity. In proportion as we are 
filled with the Holy Spirit of love, we shall find ourselves 
interested in the welfare and happiness of others. This 
was the mind, the disposition, which was in our dear Redeemer 
when He walked the earth, a disposition which 
He so wonderfully manifested; and we are sure that He 
has not since changed. And if we would be like Him we 
must develop in our characters these traits. If we are to 
be ultimately of the Bride class in glory, we must become 
copies of "God's dear Son." 

The Apostle Paul not only holds up the Lord Jesus 
before us as the great Example of proper humility, self-abnegation 
and love, of a forgetfulness of self in the 
interests of others, but he also holds up before our vision 
the result, the reward, of our Lord. He reminds us of 
the high exaltation of the Master by the Father, that we 
also may be encouraged, and may realize that, if we are 
faithful in following the footsteps of our Redeemer, in 
sacrificing the advantages of the present, in crucifying 
self, in laboring as far as we are able in the advancement 
of the Cause of God and His Truth, in developing the 
fruits of the Holy Spirit, we may expect also to be 
glorified with Him, to share His name and His Throne of 
glory and His great work throughout the eternal future, 
as His Body, His Bride, His joint-heir. 



A CLOSING WORD OF EXHORTATION 

In verses 12-17, following our text, the Apostle pays a 
beautiful tribute to the Church at Philippi, and expresses 
his great love for them. How he reveals his confidence 
in their loyalty! And how glad he was to pour out his 

R5811 : page 363 

own life on their behalf (see margin v. 17) that they 

might attain unto the fulness of the likeness of Christ! 

He lovingly exhorts, "Do all things without murmurings 

and disputings." In following the Master in the narrow 

way, we are not to murmur as we go, finding fault with 

its difficulties and its narrowness; nor are we to dispute 

respecting it, nor to seek to have any other way than 

that which Divine providence marks out before us. On 

the contrary, we are to realize and believe that the Lord 

knows exactly what experiences are necessary to our development 

in the School of Christ; that He is supervising 

our experiences for our highest good and His glory; that 

He is not forgetful of His promises to those who are His, 

but will, as He has promised, cause "all things [that come 

to us in the line of faithfulness] to work together for 

good" to us. And even our blunders or stumblings, if 

properly received, will be overruled for our blessing. 

We are glad to see this disposition of trust and loyalty 
in so many of the Lord's dear saints. Thus following the 
Master, dearly beloved, we shall "be sons of God without 
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, 
among whom we shine as lights in the world, holding 
forth the Word of life." Thus shall those who are over 
you in the Lord "rejoice in the Day of Christ [when our 
'change' shall come] that we have not run in vain, neither 
labored in vain." 



THE SECRET OF HIS PRESENCE 

"In the secret of His presence 

How my soul delights to hide; 
Oh, how precious are the lessons 

Which I learn at Jesus' side. 
Earthly cares can only vex me, 

Trials never lay me low, 
And when Satan comes to tempt me, 

To the secret place I go. 

"Would you like to know the sweetness 

Of this secret of the Lord? 
Go and hide beneath His shadow, 

This shall then be your reward. 
And whene'er you leave the silence 

Of that happy meeting place, 



You must mind and bear the image 
Of the Master in your face." 



R5811 : page 364 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
"BEFORE AFFLICTED, I WENT ASTRAY" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am happy this day to be able to address you as a brother 
by the grace of God. I am trying to write you, dear Brother, 
under much difficulty; but I want to let you know what a great 
blessing you have been to me. First of all, dear Pastor, if you 
will kindly excuse me for taking up a few minutes of your 
time, I would like to tell you a little about myself. 

Six years ago I met with an accident in the coal mine, 
receiving a fractured spine, which left me with extreme 
paralysis; and for six years I have never been one moment 
free from pain. I lie on a water-bed, and almost everything 
has to be done for me. I am terribly crippled, even to my 
fingers, in which I have no grip. I hold my pen by means of 
an elastic band around my fingers and the pen-holder. I have 
a wife and a child eight years old; and by the guidance of 
our Heavenly Father we keep our home going, on a little compensation 
from the colliery. 

Well, dear Brother, I have lived through a lot of pain, but 
I feel handsomely rewarded by being spared to see the Divine 
Plan of our loving Father. Soon after my accident I got converted, 
as I then understood conversion; and as the Methodists 
were very kind to me, I became a member of their Society. 
I have striven hard to live a life pleasing to God; and for 
five years I have studied religion, being a lover of books and 
my Bible, which was my greatest comfort; not because I 
understood much of it, but because in it I found sweet, comforting 
promises of a better life to come. 

As I read after great religious leaders and endeavored 
to take a deep interest in the nominal Church, I soon discovered 
that there was a terrible confusion being made of 
God's Word. Everybody seemed to believe anything and 
nothing at the same time; and the only difference I could see 
between most of those around me who professed Christianity 
and those who did not, was that the former lived for the lust 
of the flesh under a cloak, while the latter did not care who 
saw how they lived. 

I thought at that time that the Churches were the representatives 
of Christianity on earth, and that ministers must 
be right because they had been to college; and besides, didn't 
they often tell me when I asked for explanations that I was 
not learned, and so could not expect to understand God's 
mysteries in the Bible? 

But after the war broke out, and I saw how the nominal 
Church completely threw over the chief principles of Jesus 
to support their earthly gods, I began to doubt whether there 



was really anything in religion after all. After having learned 
of the meek and lowly Jesus, and then to hear men from the 
church which bore His name, crying out from its pulpit for 
revenge and the blood of their fellows, I felt at a loss what 
to think. In the end I became very skeptical in my thoughts 
and began to feel that all my hopes were shattered; and I 
knew so little of the Gospel and felt so helpless for the want 
of a teacher! But where was I to find one? So I thought to 
throw up all and believe nothing. 

At this point, dear Brother, your STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
were introduced to me by an old friend who used to 
call with a book on health, once a month. He was a Seventh 
Day Adventist, who had been to see the PHOTO-DRAMA and 
had read some of the STUDIES. As he told me of this grand 
light which had come upon him, I was astonished. Eventually 
he made me a present of the first volume. I thought I 
was going to find gold galore. But it was not until my friend 
had given me the second book, and I had partly read it, that 
my mind opened as it were all at once and I prayed God to 
lead me and teach me in His Holy Word. 

I cannot tell you, dear Brother, how I seemed to fill with 
joy and gladness as the Word of God was unraveled before 
my mind. Sometimes as I read I had to put down the book 
a few minutes to pray the Father to keep me calm in my joy. 
I did not then know who had written the books; but I loved 
him and thanked my God as I read and feasted upon the good 
things the Father had permitted him to set before me. 

After I had read the second book, I longed to have the rest 
of them; and as my friend had no more to part with and had 
no means with which to buy them, he advised me to write the 
good people at our London Office and state my case. I did 
not like to do that; for I could not believe, all at once, that 
there were people so kind in London as all that. But when 
my friend came again, he persuaded me to try them. Eventually, 
half-heartedly, I did so; and to my great joy and comfort, 
three days afterwards I received the other four volumes, 
and I should like them to know what joy their gift has brought 
to my painful life. 

I am the only I.B.S. in this town; but the dear brothers 
and sisters from several towns round about have visited my 
home and have not forgotten to bring food of both kinds 
with them. I also receive THE WATCH TOWER from Brooklyn. 
It comes as a message of love to me. As I read it, dear 
Brother, I feel that you are in my room and all the brethren. 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love!" 

After the Heavenly Father accepted me as a son, I soon 
met with opposition; and eventually I felt obliged politely, 
but in a right spirit, to withdraw from the "Nominal." Some 
of my dearest friends said that Pastor Russell had turned my 
brain. To that I quite agreed, only I said that God had turned 
my brain through Pastor Russell, and had turned it in the 
right way, too. 

I wish to thank you, dear Brother, and all the dear brethren 
through whom I receive THE WATCH TOWER— gratis. I would 
be glad to receive THE TOWERS so as not to be a burden to 
the brethren. But our Heavenly Father has willed it that He 



Himself shall provide for my every need. So be it. I go 
over our beautiful Vow each day, and I pray the Father to 
keep and guide you and our dear brethren. Will you please 
pray for me that I may go on by His grace to make my calling 
and election "sure?" 

I hope, dear Brother, that I have not taken up too much of 
your valuable time by asking you to read this letter, which 
after all only partly expresses the joy and gratitude that is 
within me. If I am not asking too much I should love to 
have a line of comfort by your own hand. I close thanking 
God for preserving me long enough to become 

Your Brother in the Lord, A. W. JENNINGS. 



R5812: page 364 

THE PROGRESS OF THREE MONTHS 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I am writing to ask your advice on a few questions. I 
was brought up a Catholic and attended church till I was 
married, thirteen years ago. My husband was a Methodist, 
although he never attended church until two years ago, when 
an evangelist came here. He then joined the Methodist 
church. He often asked me to go, but I did not care to. He 
took our three little girls to church. I prayed God night 
after night to direct me so that I could see which was really 
the right church. 

A year ago I found a tract under the door of our home 
which I believe was an answer to my prayer. The tract was, 
"End of the World in 1914-Not the View of Pastor Russell," 
and oh, how happy I was after reading it! I also read it to 
my husband and he thought it grand. I then took his Bible 
to find out if those things were so. 

My mother had then been dead about a year. I often 
wondered why God had taken her away from us and oh, that 
little tract did set my mind free and at rest! My husband 
thought it so grand he had to tell the Methodist minister 
and his friends about it. 

A little later the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION came to our 
community and we attended it. I commenced attending the 
meetings for Bible study and my husband did not object. 
About a month later his minister handed him two books 
about you for me to read. I had gotten just enough of the 
Truth to know that these books were lies they were telling 
about you. One item was that Pastor Russell did not believe 
in Jesus Christ! 

The minister came for the books and I told him we do 
not deny Jesus Christ; that "To us there is one God and one 
Lord Jesus Christ"— two separate Persons; that it was he 
who was denying Jesus Christ, by the little book he had given 
my daughter. He asked me to explain and I showed him 
where it said, "Jesus is the God-man; He was truly man and 
also truly God;" they deny Him by calling Him God. 

I told him God was from everlasting to everlasting and 



had no beginning; that Jesus was "the First-born of every 
creature," that He said, "My Father is greater than I." The 
minister replied, "That is a mystery to me and we ought to 
leave anything we don't understand to God." But I replied 
that God directs us to "Search the Scriptures" and find out 
if the things told us are true. 

Five months ago my husband moved us to a farm four 
miles from the city, telling me if I attended any more of 
those meetings against his wishes I would be sorry; but I 
would not stop attending. He refused me the horse; recently 
I took the horse and he ran away with me, breaking my foot. 
I am now recovering and long to go again to the meetings. 
What would you advise me to do? My husband wants me to 
go to church with him. 

Your Sister in the Truth, . 

[LETTERS CONTINUED ON PAGE 367.] 



R5812: page 367 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
[CONTINUED FROM PAGE 364] 
THE BLESSING OF A FAMILY ALTAR 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I desire to write you how much I appreciate your work of 
love for us and tell you of the blessing we are receiving from 
our family altar. 

As soon as breakfast is over we read the Vow, the Morning 
Resolve, the prayer meeting topic and comment, then the 
text for the day with comment. Then either Brother White 
or myself leads in prayer, followed by all joining in "the 
Lord's Prayer;" then we sing the Bethel hymn. 

We have two daughters, of thirteen and eight years, respectively. 
We do not insist on their being present at the 
early service, though they almost always are present, and are 
as quiet as if they were in regular church service. 

It is of the special service that I have with the children 
alone that I wish to tell you: Just before schooltime I have 
them take their turn to have their hair combed. One sits on 
a low stool before me, and while I comb her hair she reads a 
Bible story while the other listens, and then the other one 
does the same. Then we three kneel and I put them into the 
Hands of the Lord, asking His blessing upon them and their 
teachers for the day. Then I kiss them good bye and send 
them to school. 

This is proving a great blessing to us all and I am surprised 
at the amount of reading they accomplish. The older 
girl has read the PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO through twice. I 
think she will be ready for the first volume of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES soon. She also voluntarily goes several 
squares from home every week to read to a dear old Sister 



who is nearly blind. She generally reads your sermons from 
the newspapers and never forgets to go, always asking me, 
"Mama, what shall I read to Sister H.?" 

The other daughter reads more simple stories and talks 
about the pictures. We certainly have blessed times together. 
I am not telling this boastfully, but it has come to my mind 
several times to write it to you, thinking it might be of 
comfort to you as well as to us. 

I often wonder if parents realize the blessing they miss in 
not instructing their children in the Scriptures and I have 
found this a most helpful way. On Sunday mornings we go 
over the Sunday School lesson with them. I certainly wish 
to thank you, and praise the dear Lord that He is using you 
to help us understand His Word. 

Yours in His love and service, 

MRS. F. D. WHITE.-Ohio. 



CONDITIONS NOW VERY DIFFERENT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in our dear Redeemer's name. Knowing your 
time to be filled with the Lord's work, I hesitate to infringe 
upon it; but I would appreciate it very much if you would 
make it plainer as to what you see to be the Lord's will in 
regard to the Lord's poor. Some time ago there was an 
article in THE WATCH TOWER regarding friends availing 
themselves of public institutions. Would that mean that you 
considered it the Lord's will for an Ecclesia to permit an 
aged sister to go to the poor-farm [where she has no fellowship] 
when by just a little self-denial some, if not all, 
could put by a little each week to care for her? 

In the early Church they brought what they had, and no 
one went without. I would like if you would either answer 
my letter personally or put an answer in the TOWER. 

The STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES have been a great blessing 
to me, and I know that God will continue to bless and 
strengthen you. 

Your sister in Him, . 

EDITOR'S REPLY 

Conditions have greatly changed since the times of our 
Lord and the Apostles. The teachings of Jesus have greatly 
broadened the world's sympathies. Now it is considered a 
disgrace for any community to fail to make provisions for 
its poor, its aged, its imbecile, its sick. The provision made 
for these through public taxation is much better than the 
provision that was made in the early Church, and much better 
than the majority of people have at the present time. Visit 
your own County Homes for the poor, etc. See how clean 
they are, how reasonably comfortable, and how, in a majority 
of cases, the inmates are better off than they were at 
their own homes. Applying the Golden Rule to himself on 
this subject, the Editor would be quite willing to go to 



such public institutions as he knows of, if the Lord's providence 
so arranged. He would prefer so to do rather than be 
burdensome to others. 

The child of God, on the alert to serve His King, would 
probably find many more opportunities for service in a public 
institution than if he were shut up in a private home. Who 
knows but that there are hungry hearts needing the bread 
of life, and that the Lord's providence might guide some of 
us to the feeding of these, and thus furnish opportunities for 
their blessing through association with them? 



A WORD TO THE WISE 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you ! About two years 
ago this past summer, there appeared an article in THE WATCH 
TOWER, the title of which was something like this: "Proper 
Decorum in the Church of God."* It seemed to me at that 
time to be just what was needed. Since then large numbers 
have been added to all the classes and a reprinting of this 
same article might prove very helpful. 

My reason for thinking so is this: At a Sunday afternoon 
service of a large class of Associated Bible Students which I 
attended recently, the confusion before the service was so 
great that the leader, in order to make himself heard in announcing 
the first hymn, had to resort to the undignified means 
of pounding the Hymnal with his fist. 

After the service, a newly interested lady was overheard to 
remark— "Yes; I enjoyed the sermon very much; but the 
people here have not the reverence for God that they have in 
the churches. There, they enter quietly, and wait on the Lord 
until the service begins, and thus prepare themselves for the 
blessing of the hour." One cannot help but deeply regret that 
thoughtlessness on the part of the friends is permitted to cast 
a reflection on the cause they love to serve. 

It always has seemed difficult for the dear friends to realize 
that the same reverence and dignity should characterize their 
words and actions in a Hall as in a Church building. 

In writing this, dear Brother, I am voicing the sentiments 
which I have heard expressed by others; and I trust it will 

R5813 : page 367 

not seem like a complaint, but instead, a service in behalf of 
the cause we all love so well. With warmest love in the Lord, 
Yours in His service, 



TIME ENOUGH FOR PROTEST 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In reading and rereading the first article of Sept. 1st 
TOWER; i.e. "Christian Duty and the War," we have been 



greatly helped and encouraged. We especially wish to speak 
of the last part of the article and the advice given therein. 
We gladly accept and appreciate this advice. You seem to have 
said just what was in our hearts and minds. 

We are desirous, however, of asking a further question. 
Would you think it proper and wise to place before the government 
at this time, before they become involved in the war, 
our determination in case they do? "Be it known unto thee, 
O King, we will not serve thy (War) gods." Would not a 
perfectly frank and honest position on our part require such 
action? As for instance, the sending of a resolution to this 
effect signed by all who wished, to President Wilson and the 
public press. 

Greatly thanking you for your continued labors of love and 
praying the Master's richest blessing upon you and the glorious 
work you are doing, we remain, 

Yours faithfully in the Anointed, . 

We advise that no protest be made until there is some 
demand; and then only a quiet, modest, declaration of our 
consciences on the subject. EDITOR. 



"LIFT UP YOUR HEADS AND REJOICE!" 

Question.— Should the Lord's people be grieved, or should 
they rejoice, over this present great international war? 

Answer.— Our Master said, "When ye see these things begin 
to come to pass, then lift up your heads and rejoice!" We 
cannot think that the Lord meant that we should rejoice in the 
sufferings of those engaged in this war, nor in the sufferings of 
the wives and children, the bereaved ones, nor in the loss of 
those whose homes are destroyed, nor in the sorrows of millions 
here who are without homes in consequence of the war. 
We cannot think that he meant this! He says that we are to 
sympathize with those who are in trouble, to rejoice with those 
who rejoice and to weep with those who weep. The reason why 
we rejoice is that we know what the outcome of this trouble 
upon the nations will be, as foreshown in the Scriptures. We 
rejoice not in the sorrows, the difficulties, not in the war, and 
what is to follow in its wake, but in the fact that all these 
things prefigure the end of the reign of Sin and Death and 
the inauguration of Messiah's glorious Empire! 



*The article will be found elsewhere in the columns of this issue. 



page 365 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1916 

[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 



hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan has proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of Truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

--TO THE- 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the STUDIES and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in 
the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and breadths, 
the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of His people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand, at best, in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance judge 
or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the 
sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some idea 
of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this, my 
highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating SCRIPTURE STUDIES in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
in various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 



brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as Lecturers to preach the Divine Plan of Salvation, and 
in general to be expended as the officers of the Society may 
deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for WATCH TOWER sent to the Lord's poor or others, as the 
Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y. 
or, London Tabernacle, Lancaster Gate W., England; or, 
Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 

page 366 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT. 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
THE WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves, or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us 
such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from their 
donations. Give full name and address, and write very 
plainly, please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions: 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS 

Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of THE WATCH TOWER 
continued. The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to 
send their applications in May. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration look on your TOWER 
wrapper. Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE 

We are convinced that THE WATCH TOWER lists do not 



contain the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its 
teachings. The total is small enough surely, and we are not 
content that the name of any should be missing. We believe 
that all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, 
reminding them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, 
the flesh and the Devil continually tend to crowd out of mind 
and heart. 

We have at times required that all desiring THE WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their 
subscriptions either on credit or free, as their circumstances 
may necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future 
time request that the debt be canceled, and we will cheerfully 
comply. We desire that as nearly as possible THE WATCH 
TOWER lists shall represent all deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and 
to come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
cooperation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
coworkers with us in this ministry. 

CREATION DRAMA SCENARIO 

This is a condensed statement of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages— profusely illustrated— much information in little space. 
The ninety-six short, pithy lectures of the CREATION DRAMA 
can be supplied in print as follows: 

IN ENGLISH: 

*De Luxe, gold edges, embossed, 400 illustrations 

$1.00 postpaid 

Cloth, burnished edges, embossed, 400 illustrations 

50 " 

*Paper in three booklets, complete; per set 25 " 

A Newspaper edition in 4 Parts FREE 

IN SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, ARMENIAN 
AND GERMAN:+ 

Cloth bound, complete 25 postpaid 

Paper " " 15 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

IN FINNISH (glossed paper, embossed like English 
Ed.): 

De Luxe, gold edge 1.00 " 

Cloth, red edge 50 " 

Paper, 3 Parts; per set 25 " 

Newspaper edition, 4 Parts, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

IN SWEDISH: Newspaper ed. only, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half 
from above prices if shipment is ordered charges collect. 

CHOICE MOTTO CARDS-1915-1916 

We have, as usual, very choice sorts. These cards are 



made in Europe, hence subject to heavy expenses for freight 
and duty, especially since the war began. Nevertheless, we 
can supply them in the United States and Canada at less than 
retail European prices, because we supply them at about cost 
price— that is to say, about one-half the usual American prices. 
Besides this, we prepay postage or express charges. Our 
object is to encourage the embellishment of the homes of the 
Lord's people with faith-stimulating and courage-inspiring 
texts tastefully prepared. To facilitate the handling of these 
motto cards we assort them in packets, carefully packed, at 
the following prepaid rates: 

Packet Ma— Ten mottoes, small and medium, postpaid 50c. 

Number Mb— Eight medium-sized cards, $1. 

Number Mc— Two large, and two medium cards, $1. 
Where $5 worth of these are sent to one address the saving 
in packing and expressage would be 50c, making the price 
$4.50. Order by number only. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

Those who use this book as we recommend are surely 
being blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the MANNA comment should be read. This book contains 
the same texts and comments as all former editions. 
Every alternate leaf is blank -ruled for use as an autograph 
and birthday record. Its value increases as additional autographs 
of friends are secured. It is printed on fine bond paper. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all 
WATCH TOWER subscribers: 

Purple cloth, gold embossed, gilt edges $0.35 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 35 

Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 35 

Leatherette, gold edges, Swedish and Norwegian 65 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English and Norwegian... 1.10 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Bible Students Manual (Berean Helps), karatol, 50c; full 

leather $1.00 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) 35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 06 

Poems of Dawn, leather, 50c; karatol, 35c; cloth 25 

CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft., $1; 8 ft 1.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 1.50 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 1.50 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER; Spring Back (holds 

1 year) 50 

CROSS AND CROWN PINS (Gold, with Red Enamel): 
5/8"-No. 1 Ladies' Style, No. 2 Gents', each.... 1.15 
l/2"-No. 3 Gents' Style, No. 4 Ladies', each.... 1.00 

5/8"— Celluloid, per dozen, 25c; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per hundred, 25c; per M 2.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper), 25c per 100; (silk) each 05 

"Dove" Poem and Vow Bookmarks (celluloid), 5c; per 



dozen 50 

Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle 
Shadows, Our Lord's Return), also Berean Question 
Booklets on each volume of SCRIPTURE STUDIES and on 

The Tabernacle, each 5c; per dozen 50 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

Judge Rutherford's Defense of Pastor Russell (illus.), 

10c; 25 for 2.00 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



*On the De Luxe and Paper Editions of the English SCENARIO we 
now offer to all, Class Secretaries or otherwise, two copies for the price 
of one, and ten sets of the paper edition (30 Parts) for $1 postpaid. Get 
them into the hands of the public. 

+The German SCENARIOS are temporarily out of stock. They are now 
being printed here and will be ready for delivery about Jan. 1. 



page 368 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 369 
