Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower of practical value to you? Then why not test your memory with the following questions:
▫ If any immoral thought enters our mind uninvited, what should we do?
We should change the subject mentally, go for a walk, do some reading, or perform some household chore. Prayer is also a powerful aid in such a situation. (Psalm 62:8)​—4/15, page 17.
▫ Why should young people be careful as to the kind of music they listen to?
Music has the power to move, to enthrall, and to influence. Since many popular pieces of music have a surprising number of sexual innuendos and veiled references to immorality, it is easy to see that great care must be exercised in choosing records, tapes, and discs.​—4/15, pages 20-1.
▫ What is meant by the expression “the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ”? (1 Thessalonians 5:23)
This refers to the invisible royal presence of the Lord Jesus Christ as King, from 1914, and following his enthronement in heaven. (Psalm 110:1, 2)​—5/1, page 11.
▫ What purpose was served by Jehovah’s cleansing his spiritual temple? (Malachi 3:1-4)
Jehovah wanted his temple to be in a clean condition so that when large numbers of worshipers with earthly hopes were brought there, they would find a place where his universal sovereignty is respected, where his divine name is sanctified, and where his righteous laws are obeyed.​—5/1, page 16.
▫ What are the “belongings” that Christ Jesus gives to his appointed slave? (Matthew 24:45-47)
These “belongings” refer to all the spiritual assets on earth that have become Christ’s property in connection with his authority as heavenly King. This would include the commission to make disciples of Christ from people of all the nations. (Matthew 28:19, 20)​—5/1, page 17.
▫ How do Christian elders show ‘willingness’ in shepherding, according to Peter’s urging at 1 Peter 5:2?
A Christian elder who cares for the sheep will perform his shepherding willingly, of his own free will, under the direction of the Fine Shepherd, Jesus Christ. Serving willingly also means that a Christian shepherd submits to the authority of Jehovah and manifests respect for the theocratic arrangement.​—5/15, page 20.
▫ What did Jesus mean when he said that anyone following him had to “disown himself”? (Matthew 16:24)
To ‘disown yourself’ means that you relinquish ownership of yourself to Jehovah. (1 Corinthians 6:19, 20) It means that you live, not to please self, but God. (Romans 14:8)​—6/1, page 9.
▫ What does it take to make a person happy?
Enjoying a fine relationship with Jehovah and keeping busy in his service brings true happiness into a person’s life.​—6/1, page 22.
▫ Why did Jehovah allow Abraham to speak to him so freely about His purpose to destroy Sodom? (Genesis 18:22-32)
One reason was that Abraham was God’s friend. (James 2:23) Further, Jehovah was aware of Abraham’s distressed feelings. God knew that Abraham’s nephew Lot lived in Sodom and that Abraham was very concerned about Lot’s safety. For these reasons Jehovah was willing to answer Abraham’s questions regarding His purpose to destroy Sodom.​—6/15, page 16.
▫ Did the Protestant Reformation of the 16th century mark a return to true Christianity?
No, it did not! Rather than bring a return to genuine Christianity, the Reformation brought forth a host of national or territorial churches that have curried favor with political states and actively supported them in their wars.​—7/1, pages 10-11.
▫ What are the “treasures in heaven” that Jesus spoke about at Matthew 6:20?
These are treasures that never fade, including a good name with Jehovah and a record of faithful Christian service. These are among the things that Jehovah never forgets. (Hebrews 6:10)​—7/1, page 32.
▫ What qualities does Peter mention as vital elements to our faith? (2 Peter 1:5-7)
Peter said that virtue, knowledge, self-control, endurance, godly devotion, brotherly affection, and love should be supplied to our faith.​—7/15, page 13.
▫ What warning for God’s servants is contained in the account of David’s sin with Bath-sheba? (2 Samuel 11:2-4)
Though free to enjoy pleasure within his own marriage, David let illicit sexual desire grow. Noting how attractive Uriah’s wife was, he gave free rein to thought​—and deed—​of finding illicit thrills with her. The same can happen to any one of God’s servants if he does not shun this form of greed. (James 1:14, 15)​—8/1, page 14.

