From Our Readers
Lead Poisoning  Many thanks for the articles on lead poisoning. (November 22, 1992) Your mention of high blood pressure, kidney disease, stomach pains, and vomiting​—problems I have suffered for years—​caused me to have myself checked for possible lead poisoning. The results confirmed an inordinate lead accumulation. I hope the treatment I am now receiving will be successful.
T. W., Germany
It is evident that you do thorough research for your articles. I work in a research institute in the Department of Organic Coatings. In our country, lead-based paints were used for many years because of their resistance to weathering. Now their use is severely limited, but as you wrote, the danger of lead poisoning remains. This article helped me to show my colleagues that Awake! not only answers religious questions but also helps people to solve their problems even if they are not believers. Thank you.
A. A., Czech Republic
Iron Lung  I just had to express my deep appreciation for the experience of Laurel Nisbet entitled “Not Even an Iron Lung Could Stop Her Preaching.” (January 22, 1993) What a sterling example of courage, faith, endurance, and zeal! I have lupus, but my problems pale into insignificance when I think of what suffering Sister Nisbet endured and how long.
R. L. H., United States
Since I am paralyzed and cannot walk, I have complained that I cannot go out preaching much. Now I realize that if this woman, who lived in an iron lung for 37 years, was able to preach and make disciples, then I too can be satisfied with what I am able to do.
M. L., Italy
We appreciate such comments. Of course, Sister Nisbet’s faithful example in no way minimizes the struggle many have with other serious health problems that are somewhat less debilitating in nature but are still the cause of considerable suffering.​—ED.
Bread  Thank you for the article “Our Daily Bread.” (December 8, 1992) I tried your bread recipe, and I was delighted at how easy it was to make bread and how delicious it tasted.
M. M., United States
I have quite a number of cookbooks on the shelf, but none of the recipes in those books brought results as good as your recipe. Many thanks!
S. H., Germany
Nazi Persecution  I was very encouraged by the article “The Nazis Couldn’t Stop Us!” written by Erwin Klose. (November 22, 1992) Unlike other experiences about the Nazis that have appeared up till now, Erwin Klose’s story was told with a sense of humor. At times I couldn’t stop laughing! I was encouraged by his cheerful and positive way of looking at things.
T. K., Japan
Russian Conventions  I really want to thank you for the article “Russia’s First International Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” (December 22, 1992) Although I am a longtime servant of Jehovah God, I must admit that my appreciation for God’s provisions cannot compare with that of those Christians in Russia! The expression on that sister’s face when she received her first personal copy of the Bible made me realize how much I have​—and take for granted. The article helped me to see areas in which I need to make adjustments.
B. T. A.,  United States

