Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Life is a gift from God. Recognizing this, Jehovah’s witnesses endeavor to use their lives in harmony with the will of God. They appreciate that they are in debt to God; so they apply themselves to pay what they owe to God. They devote themselves to his service and to aiding others to learn of God’s loving provision for everlasting life in a righteous new system of things. To that end, they urge everyone to read the Bible. During the month of June they will be calling at the homes of as many persons as possible to offer them a fine, modern-English Bible, the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, for just $1.
DOES LIFE HAVE PURPOSE?
Did you know that it has been said that over ten thousand persons throughout the world commit suicide every day? This sobering fact might well lead you to ask, Does life have purpose? And, if so, why have so many failed to find it? Certainly it is not God’s purpose that a man should die by his own hand. No, the divine purpose for mankind is far different. How this will of His is being made known is the subject of the encouraging and faith-strengthening book Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Divine Purpose. This is the documented account of a people who have found a purpose in life and who have never lost sight of that purpose in spite of worldwide opposition. Send for your copy today. It is only $1.
“HAPPY ARE THE DEAD WHO DIE IN UNION WITH THE LORD”
Few servants of Jehovah in modern times have had the precious privilege of devoting as many years to Jehovah’s service as did Richard H. Barber. He was personally well known to many of the older readers of this journal, and his life story, “Serving Jehovah Brings Happy Contentment,” appeared in its July 15, 1965, issue. In 1894, at the age of twenty-five years, he came in touch with the truth of God’s Word, accepted it at once and continued faithful until his death April 28, 1967, at the age of ninety-eight years and a few weeks, having devoted seventy-three years to Jehovah’s service.
For a number of years Brother Barber served as a pioneer minister (colporteur) and as a traveling representative (pilgrim, zone servant) of the Watch Tower Society, and for some twenty years he served at the Society’s headquarters. As a fiery fighter for God’s truth he preached in nearly all the states of the United States, as well as all over Canada and, to a limited extent, in England and Scotland.
Brother Barber still kept on preaching publicly when well in his nineties and had to be assisted to the platform, and as late as last December was still preaching by writing and mailing out Bible literature, no longer being able to go from house to house. We are confident that, as one of the “remnant” who survived to the second presence of the Lord, he, ‘while resting from his labors, has the things that he did go right with him’ as a partaker of the first resurrection. We rejoice at his happy meeting with his Lord and the rest of Christ’s body members who have entered into their reward.​—Rev. 14:13; 1 Cor. 15:51, 52.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
July 9: Faith Required to Please God. Page 361. Songs to Be Used: 17, 91.
July 16: Firm in Faith Despite Opposition. Page 366. Songs to Be Used: 39, 78.

