Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y M AUGUST 15, 1918 


No. 16 


INFILLING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT PROPORTIONATE TO SPIRITUAL CAPACITY 

"Be filled with the Spirit." — Romans 8:9; Ephesians 5:18. 
There is a necessity for this infilling, refilling, continuous 
filling of the Spirit of God. By nature we have the disposition
 common to the fallen race to which we belong. This 
hereditary disposition is more or less influenced bjr environment
, training, etc.; and the new mind haa difficulty in getting 
fully in tune with the Infinite. Additionally, our memories 
are poor, and our natural tendencies are in the direction 
opposite to our spirit of consecration, the Spirit of the Lord. 
It is therefore necessary for the child of God to go frequently 
to the throne of heavenly grace in order to he filled more and 
more with the Spirit of the heavenly Father, the Spirit of our 
Lord Jesus. 


"// any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of 7&8." 

In the use of the word spirit, it is very necessary that we 
have in mind the wide range of meanings which this word possesses
. For instance, God is a spirit, and the angels are 
spirits; that is,, they are spirit beings. This signifies that 
whatever kind of organism they have, it is so different from 
the human organism that mankind cannot see them. Angels 
might he present with us and yet be invisible, unless a special 
miracle wa« performed by which they might take on a body 
of flesh. 

Another thought connected with the word spirit is much 
in line with our general usage of the tern* — that which is 
ethereal. For instance, we speak of the mind, the spirit, the 
disposition of a person. Indeed, in our Common Version of 
the Bible these words are used synonymously. "If any man 
have not the Spirit [mind, disposition] of Christ, he is none 
of his." (Romans 8:9; Philippians 2:5; I Corinthians 2:16) 
We also use the word spirit to mean the life principle, the 
energizing power which all living creatures possess. The 
power i3 something which cannot be touched or handled. Still 
another use of the word spirit is in connection with liquors. 
In this sense it has the thought of that which will lightly 
pass away as a gas, that which will become invisible, which 
will evaporate. 

In our text, however, the word spirit is used in its own 
peculiar way — to signify the new mind, new will, new purpose, 
begotten in the consecrated children of God through his 
exceeding great and precious promises, written in his Word. 
Originally man was in the image and likeness of God. 
Then he had a spirit, or disposibiop, very much in accord with 
that of his Creator. But after sin had operated for a short 
time, selfishness and depravity were developed; and in time 
these evil propensities vitiated his spirit, or disposition. 
Thereafter instead of having a spirit of holiness, man had a 
spirit of unholiness, of sin; and all of Adam's posterity have 
been born with these evil tendencies marked in their brains. 
Naturally we are inclined to do the wrong thing rather than 
the right, because of our having inherited these weaknesses 
and blemishes from father Adam. 

THE BEGETTING OP THE HOLT SPIRIT 

God has purposed that during the Gospel age and through 
the Gospel message, those desirous of being in harmony with 
him may get back his spirit. Very few care to do this, however
 ; and the iew who do are said to be holy. This class give 
up their own spirit, mind, disposition, will, and adopt instead 
the divine standards, the divine will. What these divine 
standards are they must learn from the Scriptures. 

From the time of his consecration and his acceptance by 
the Father through the Advocate ( 1 John 2:1), the Christian 
is said to be begotten of the holy Spirit. That is to say, a 
new mind, a new disposition, a new personality, had its start, 
its beginning, when God accepted him. Just what this spark 
of the new nature is, we mny uot surely know. But we recognize
 the experiences which result from its possession. This 
begetting of the Spirit of God starts a new life. The start of 
this new life is not, however, the end of the matter. He is to 
strive to be "filled with the Spirit/' 

(239-243) [6306] 


INCREASE OF SPIRITUAL CAPACITY 

In the case of the Master, it is written that the Father 
gave not the Spirit by measure unto him. (John 3:34) This 
statement implies that God gives the Spirit by measure to 
all of the members of the church. The reason for this difference
 is that our Lord had a perfect organism. Because 
he had left the heavenly glory, because his life principle had 
been transferred from the heavenly plane to the earthly, ho 
was therefore without any taint of Adamic imperfection of 
being. Being thus perfect, he could receive readily and could 
comprehend without limitation. He could absorb fully and 
completely of the Spirit of God ; for he was born in the 
image of God. 

With the church it is different. In our case we receive only 
by measure — not that God has limited us to a measure, but 
that we are not able to absorb, to receive, a full measure. 
Some may receive more and others less, according to the 
natural condition of our body, the condition in which we were 
born, our environment, etc. In proportion as our life is given 
up to the Lord and in proportion as we make straight paths 
for our feet, we will choose a pathway in life that will be 
most helpful to us and will most assist us in overcoming the 
weaknesses of our flesh. Thus we shall become the better 
enabled, and the more quickly, to be filled with the Holy 
Spirit and to receive a larger measure of it as time goes by. 

The Lord's people are privileged to be filled with his 
Spirit and to enlarge their capacity for greater infilling. 
Our knowledge enlarges, our appreciation enlarges, and our 
needs enlarge. Thus we grow in grace and are enabled to 
receive more and more of the Spirit of God. For this reason 
a Christian who has had years of opportunity for development 
ought to be more able to absorb readily, ought to have a 
much larger spiritual capacity, than when he first entered 
the Lord's family. He should be filled with the Spirit of God 
and of Christ. This should give him more and more of the 
spirit of a sound mind, should make him more God-like. 

This Spirit of the Lord, manifested in the lives of his 
people, is a spirit of meekness. Whoever possesses this spirit 
will not be proud nor boastful ; for he will see that God is 
not pleased with the proud. Therefore he will humble himself
, in order to be lowly in mind and in heart, as was the 
Master. If he makes a mistake in judgment, he will be the 
first to recognize and correct the error. Gentleness also is 
an element of the holy Spirit. Some people are naturally 


•U-1-.usr 15, 1<>18 


THE WATCH TOWER 


gentle; others are noisy and rude. Tho.se, nowever, who have 
the Spirit of the Lord will more and more have a tendency 
toward gentleness. Such will have kindness and sympathy 
for others. They will not wish to harm anybody, but rather 
to do good to all with whom they come in contact. Thus they 
will demonstrate that they have the fruits of the holy Spiri^ 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness
, love — increasingly developing within themselves day by 
day; for whoever becomes infilled with the spirit of the truth, 
the spirit of holiness — and only those — will manifest these 
evidences in their daily lives. 

ANOINTING VS. BEGETTING OF THE SPIRIT 
The expressions, "anointing of the holy Spirit/' and "begetting
 of the holy Spirit," apparently refer to the same experience
 from its twofold aspect. In one sense of the word, the 
impartation of God's holy Spirit to any one is the begetting 
of a new life, the start of a new nature. From the other 
viewpoint the impartation is the start of royalty, distinguishing
 those who are designed for membership in the divine 
royal family, according to the divine purposes. The begetting 
of the holy Spirit is to a new nature — the spiritual. The 
anointing is to an exalted office — membership in the body of 
Christ. 

Under the divine arrangement for Israel the ceremony of 
anointing with the holy anointing oil was confined to the 
priests and the kings. The antitype of this ceremony, we 
may understand, is fulfilled in Christ and his church, who are 
anointed to be both kings and priests unto God, a royal priesthood
. (Revelation 1:5, 6) From the divine viewpoint there 
is but one great kingly priest, the Christ, Head and body. In 
the Jewish type Aaron represented the Head of this great 
antitypical priest. The type shows that the holy anointing 
oil was poured upon the head of the typical high priest and 
ran down to the hem of his garment. (Leviticus 8:12; 
Psalm 133:2) The sons of Aaron did not receive an individual
 anointing; for they belonged to Aaron, who was 
anointed. And so it is in the antitype. Only when we come 
into the Christ company are we members of the Anointed One. 
The phrase, "the anointed," is the English equivalent of 
the Hebrew Messiah and of the Greek term Ghristos. In other 
words, the Messiah, the Christ, is the Anointed One — the longpromised
 seed of Abraham who is to bless all the families of 
the earth. Whoever, therefore, becomes a member of Christ 
becomes a member of the Anointed One, the Messiah; for 
these terms express the same thought. Hence, when the 
Apostle Paul declares that the church are members of the 
body of Christ, he means that they are members of the Lord's 
Anointed, members of the Messiah. — 1 Corinthians 12:12-23. 
We have already called attention to the fact that the holy 
anointing oil was poured upon the head of Israel's high priest 
and ran down over the skirts of his garment. In the antitype, 
the heavenly Father anointed the great Head of the Christ at 
Jordan. (John 1:32-34; Acta 2:33; 10:38) As in the type 
the oil ran down from the high priest's head to his body, so 
in the antitype. All the members of the body of Christ 
receive their anointing through the great Head of the church — 
Christ Jesus. Hence the Apostle John says, "The anointing 
which ye have received of him abideth in you" — the entire 
church. (1 John 2:27) From the moment that any one 
becomes a member of the body of Christ, he comes under this 
anointing — under its provision and its influence. When he 
turned his back upon sin, accepted our Lord as his Savior 
and offered himself in full consecration, then our Lord accepted
 him and presented him to the heavenly Father, who in 
turn received -him and begat him with the holy Spirit. He 
thus became a member of the church which is the body of 
Christ, and so came under the anointing influence of the Spirit 
of God. 

ILLUMINATING INFLUENCE OF THE HOLT SPIEIT 
Throughout the Gospel ago our Lord becomes surety for all 
who are accepted of God and begotten of the holy Spirit. To 
these our Lord imputes the merit of his righteousness and 
accounts them as members of his body, members of the 
Anointed company. This acceptance will continue until every 
member of the Christ shall have been received. The heavenly 
Father purposes to receive this entire company — ;all for whom 
our Lord acts as Advocate. 

The anointing of the holy Spirit has the effect of enlightening
 the eyes of understanding of those who receive it. The 
thought of unction, oiling, is also connected with the phrase. 
The holy Spirit smooths out, modifies, mollifies the disposition 
of all who receive this "unction from on high." This work 
begins in their minds and their hearts, and gradually shows 
itself in their conduct, as they manifest the fact that they 
have been anointed with the holy Spirit of God. 

In the case of the Christian the begetting is a power which 


he receives from the heavenly Father and which is the start 
oi a new life. As no human child is conscious of the moment 
of its begetting, so no spiritual child of God can know the 
exact time of his begetting. In either case the best evidence 
is the indication that life exists. As in the case of natural 
birth the first manifestation of life is the quickening, so it is 
with the Christian. Those who are begotten of the holy 
Spirit are quickened, energized, made lively or active. From 
the moment of begetting they make a measure of development
, growth in grace and in knowledge of the Lord, until 
they reach the place where they wish to do something to 
show their love, their devotion. Then, and not until then, 
will others 'take note of them that they have been with Jesu^ 
and have learned of him — will perceive that the same mind U 
in them that was in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

The work of Christ and the church during the Gospel ago 
is outlined in Isaiah 61:1-3. This outline has no reference, 
however, to the work of the Millennial age. The entire Christ 
is anointed to preach the Gospel. As the Apostle declares, 
preaching is the method by which God is selecting those who 
respond to the preaching. (Romans 10:13-15; 1 Corinthians 
1:21) God is always pleased with those who endeavor to du 
right; but during the Gospel age he has been inviting a 
special class to give him their hearts. The first of this class 
was our Lord Jesus, whom the Father anointed with the holy 
Spirit at Jordan. In due time, at Pentecost, the same holy 
Spirit that had anointed our Lord came in anointing power 
upon his followers assembled in the upper room in Jerusalem. 
The antitypical holy anointing oil, poured out upon the antitypical
 priest at Jordan, had begun to reach the body of 
Christ. 

Throughout this Gospel age the message has been proclaimed
, promising joy, peace and comfort to those who have 
ears to hear. Not many have responded; not many have 
received the blessing. Not many have seen the privilege ot 
sacrificing now with our Lord in order to share in his glory 
later on. This message of the kingdom is not one of damnation
, but of comfort. Therefore the broken -hearted of the 
present time are the most ready to respond,' The self-satisfied 
and prosperous, those who have all that they desire, are not 
at all likely to hear the message of God ; for the world hold** 
too many attractions for them. Yet in due time they will 
find that the things which look so bright and beautiful to 
them turn, sooner or later, into ashes, as it were — prove 
merely to be disappointments. 

THE ANOINTING INDICATIVE OF OFFICE 

In studying the typical priesthood, we note that Aaron 
and his successors in office were anointed with the holy 
anointing oil as indicative of the divine blessing and authority
. The kings of Israel also were anointed to their office. 
Even in the case of our Lord it was necessary for the Father 
to manifest the antitypical anointing in some way. At the 
age of thirty years Jesus presented himself to God at Jordan 
to be the promised "priest after the order of Melchizedek." 
(Psalm 110:4; Hebrews 5:1-10) He had received the divine 
invitation to become a priest, and had accepted it. Had he 
not been thus invited by God, he might have gone through the 
form of baptism at Jordan without any further results. That 
is to say, if God had not invited our Lord to consecrate himself
 to the divine service, his baptism would have been merely 
an empty form; it would not have been followed by a begetting
 of the holy Spirit to a new nature — the divine. But since 
he had been "called of God, as was Aaron," this course was 
followed by the proper results. He was begotten to the divine 
nature. He became a new creature. 

After our Lord had presented himself to be a servant of 
truth, of righteousness, and had offered himself to be the 
antitypical priest, the Father indicated his acceptance of the 
sacrifice by imparting the holy Spirit to our Lord; and the 
fact that our Lord received the holy Spirit demonstrated that 
he was the one who was to be the "priest after the order of 
Melchizedek." John the Baptist bore witness to our Lord's 
special anointing of the Father. After his baptism at Jordan, 
the Scriptures speak of Jesus as the Anointed, the one who 
had received a special anointing from on high, an anointing to 
the office of priest— ordained, if you please. 

Just what our Lord received from on high we can only 
conjecture. That he actually received some power from God 
is evident from the record of the Scriptures. When he went 
up out of the baptismal water, "the heavens were opened unto 
him" as they had not been at any previous time or to any 
previous person. (Matthew 3:16) This opening of the 
heavens we do not understand to have been a rift in the sky. 
The thought is that the higher, #piritua) things were thenceforth
 opened up to his understanding, 


[6307] 


(245-246) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


THE PUEPOSE OF THE ANOINTING 

This anointing of the holy Spirit which our Lord Jesus 
there received was the divine evidence that he was to be this 
priest after the Melchizedek Order, and it was followed by the 
illumination of his mind by the heavenly Father, This illumination
 had the effect of so enlightening his perceptions that 
thereafter he could understand the purpose and object of his 
experiences. Thus he was enabled to appreciate the things 
which were taking place, and to carry out his consecration to 
sacrifice his own flesh. This work he finished at Calvary, as 
he declared with his dying breath. On the third day after his 
death on the cross, the Father raised him from the dead to be 
a priest in the full sense of the word, a priest with a spirit 
body. "The Lord is that Spirit.'* (2 Corinthians 3:17) "He 
was put to death in flesh, but quickened in spirit/' 

As we study tjie records of our Lord's experiences after his 
anointing with the holy Spirit at Jordan, we receive a proper 
conception of the subject of anointing. We recall the statement
 of the Apostle Paul, that God gave Jesus to be the Head 
over the church which is his body, and that the spirit-begotten 
followers of Christ are the members of that body which is the 
church. (Ephesians 1:22, 23; 1 Corinthians 12:27) This the 
Apostle terms "a great mystery" — that the Messiah was not 
to be merely an individual, but a company over which Jesus 
would be the Head. Then he points out the fact that our 
Lord Jesus is the Anointed Head of the anointed company. 

In Psalra 133:2, the Prophet David also points out that 
this anointing of the holy Spirit would not be merely upon the 
High Priest, the Head of the Christ, but also upon the members
 of the body — that the holy anointing oil ran down from 
the typical high priest's head over his entire body. This signifies
 that all the members of the body of Christ would have 
the same divine authorization — ordination by the same holy 
Spirit— as had the great Head. As the Head of the anointed 
company was anointed to preach the glad tidings of great 
joy which Bhall be to all peoples, so all the members of that 
Christ company are anointed to preach the Cos-pel. As the 
Head of the church was to do a work of sacrifice, so all the 
members of the body are to do a work of sacrifice and to 
lay down their lives in the service of God. As the Head was 
divinely appointed to do a great work, «o all the members of 
the body of Christ are to be his joint-heirs in the blessing of 
aJl the families of the earth. — Romans 8:17; 2 Timothy 2:11, 
12; Galatians 3:8, 16, 29. 

THE EFFECTS OF THE ILLUMINATION 

These thoughts give us a clear appreciation of the church 
of Christ and of her opportunities through Christ Jesus her 
Head. The Scriptures point out the fact that of themselves 
the individual members of the body can do nothing, but that 
only as they abide in Christ can they partake of the divine 
promises. If we abide in him and surrender our lives to him, 
if we seek to know and do the will of God, then we shall 
become joint-heirs with our Lord in all those things to which 
he is to become heir. Only one class is to possess the Messianic
 kingdom — the Christ of God, the anointed company; 
and only by walking in the footsteps of our Redeemer may 
any one become a member of that class. Only one priesthood 
is to bless the world during the incoming age; and only by 
becoming a member of the Christ can any one become a 
member of that royal priesthood. 

Whoever receives the anointing of the holy Spirit will 
thereby become illuminated. The effect will be the same as it 
was with our Lord Jesus. In his discussion of this subject the 
Apostle points out that those who received this illumination 
were afterward put through a great fight of afflictions. (Hebrews
 10:32, 33) Without the illumination of the holy Spirit 
the members of the body of Christ would not understand the 
meaning of their peculiar experiences. All mankind learn 
something from their experiences, except those who are hopelessly
 dull. But only the church of Christ are properly 
qualified to get the full blessing out of all the trials and 
sufferings of the present time. 

This increase of knowledge on the part of the church is 
due to the illumination of mind which results from spiritbegetting
. We learn from experience that all things arc 
working together for good to us because we love God and are 
called according to his purpose. We come to realize that only 
by much chiseling and polishing can we be fitted and prepared
 for a place in the Messianic kingdom. We gradually 
perceive that the dross in our nature must be separated from 
the gold, and that the gold must he refined. We come to 
know that only by threshing and winnowing will the wheat be 
prepared to be part of the loaf which is to be broken for the 
world of mankind. We realize that if we remain faithful unto 
death we shall ultimately shine forth as the sun in the kingdom
 of our heavenly Father. — Matt, 13:43; Mai. 4:2. 


God has a great work for the church to do in the future, as 
well as the comparatively small work of the present time. In 
order to be qualified for that future work we must have a 
new nature. When St. Paul declares that the church is God's 
workmanship, he means that the body of Christ is a new 
creation. (Ephesians 2:10; 2 Corinthians 5:17) God created 
man in the divine image and likeness; but man has fallen 
from his original perfection. Since man's creation the heavenly 
Father has rested, so far as humanity is concerned, leaving 
the entire work of man's restoration for Messiah to accomplish
 during the Millennial age. 

A NSW OEEATION 

Meantime God is bringing forth a new creation, different 
not only from men, but from angels, cherubim and seraphim. 
This new creation is to be on the divine plane of existence. 
The begetting of the holy Spirit is with a view to transforming
 some members of the fallen Adamic race into new creatures 
in Christ. Whoever does not receive this begetting of the 
holy Spirit cannot become a member of the new creation. The 
■begetting which we receive from father Adam is the begetting 
of the flesh. The begetting which we receive from the 
heavenly Father is the begett.ng of the holy Spirit. 

Unless we receive a new life we cannot become new 
creatures in Christ. This new life is represented by the 
begetting of the holy Spirit. At the moment that we receive 
this begetting of the holy Spirit, we are also given life-rights 
as new creatures and are received into the family of God. As 
new creatures in Christ we must continue to grow and develop, 
in order that we may be born in the resurrection. Our Lord 
Jesus was the first born to this new nature, this new being. 
The church are also to be the first born from the dead. 

In order for any one to be born on the spirit plane of 
existence in the resurrection, it is necessary that he should 
be developed as a new creature. This would not necessarily 
mean that he would attain the same perfection of works that 
our Lord had; for this would not be possible, since we have 
not the same perfection of mind, of brain power. But it 
means the same perfection of will. Only as we keep our wills 
submitted to the heavenly Father's will shall we grow as new 
creatures. To whatever extent we permit self-will to come >n. 
to that extent we are not submissive. As new creatures we 
must be fully submissive to the will of God in Chmt. Thus 
shall we be copies of God's dear Son; and only in thus becoming
 copies of our Lord and Head shall we have a share in the 
first resurrection. The begetting will receive its verification 
in this resurrection, when all who have been spirit-begotten 
will be born on the spirit plane. But the anointing will not 
reach its verification until after the resurrection; for those 
who attain unto the first resurrection will be the perfect 
Anointed Ones, ready to begin their future work. 
THE CHRISTIAN'S CBOWN OF LIFE 

The life which the spirit-begotten will receive in the resurrection
 will be of a different kind from that which we have 
now. The animating principle with which we now have to do 
is the same which we have had since our birth. W T e have not 
yet surrendered this life except in our minds. In our consecration
 we surrendered both our wills and our life as human 
beings. We have surrendered the right to control our human 
life, even unto death. The new life will differ from the old in 
that it will operate through a different organism. We are 
trusting that according to the Lord's promise we shall attain 
inherency of life — "the crown of life, that fadeth not away." 

Now the spirit- begotten new creatures in Christ are 'n 
the embryotic condition. They are not yet born of the Spirit. 
They are actually new creatures, however, in the sense that 
the new nature is begun in them; but they are not new 
creatures in the sense of completion of being. In our Lord's 
case, although he had devoted his life at baptism, nevertheless 
he was three and one- half years in giving it over. But not 
until he had fully laid it down could he receive the new 
nature in its completeness. Up to that time he did not 
possess his new life except in the sense that when he had 
surrendered his earthly life at Jordan, he there received the 
new life by faith. When on Calvary he surrendered his 
earthly life, the new life was awarded him ; and when he arose 
from the dead, he received it in its fulness. 

We are now new creatures who have not yet received the 
new body. Although God has given us the earnest of the new 
nature (Ephesians 1:13, 14), yet an earnest is not a completion
 of the matter. As long as we have this treasure of 
the new nature in an earthen vessel, that vessel must invariably
 be taken into consideration. When we shall have fully 
surrendered the things of an earthly nature, then will be the 
time of our "change/* when our Lord will give us the glorious 
spirit body promised to the faithful overcomer: "Be thou 
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.'" 


[6308] 


RIGHT MUST WIN 


"God's glory is a wondrous thing, 
Most strange in all its ways, 
And, of all things on earth, least like 
What men agree to praise. 

"Thrice blest is he to whom is given 
The instinct that can tell 
That God is on the field when he 
Ts most invisible. 


"And blest is he who can divine 
Where right doth really lie, 
And dares to take the side that seems 
Wrong to man's blindfold eye. 

"And right is right, since God is God; 
And right the day must win; 
To doubt would be disloyalty, 
To falter would be sin." 


THE DIVINE SANCTUARY AS SEEN IN EZEKIEL'S VISION 

STUDY I 

TABIiKNACLE SHADOWS — TEMPE.E SYMBOLISMS NEW IMPORTANCE — THEIE SCOPE — ALL IN CHRIST 


The actual Hebrew Tabernacle and its ritual were merely 
types of realities to come. The Temple of Ezekiel, seen in a 
vision, and perhaps never intended to be actually constructed, 
was a symbol both of things to come and of things that have 
been. 

The Tabernacle was of the first or Mosaic Law Covenant, 
and had nothing of real merit in its services, "having a [mere] 
shadow [an unsubstantial representation] of [actual and substantial
] things to come, and not the very image [exact likeness
 or substantial reality] of the [actual] things." The par* 
ticipants in the Tabernacle ritual believed themselves cleansed 
from sin, not perceiving that "the law can never with those 
sacrifices [of bullocks, goats, rams, lambs, etc., for sin, trespasses
, etc.] which they offered year by year continually, make 
the comers thereunto perfect [justified before God]," 

There was no more actuality about the sin-cleansing 
efficacy of the Tabernacle rites than in the shadow-figuree upon 
a motion-picture screen. Both are pictures for the instruction 
of those for whom they are intended; the former being "types 
and examples for our admonition" (1 Corinthians 10:11) The 
Tabernacle rites "served unto [the purpose of] the example 
[type] and shadow [obscure representation] of heavenly things 
[the real things] ." (Hebrews 8:5) They were but an 
evanescent "shadow of [genuine] things to come; but the body 
[the real solid substantial or essence] is of Christ (ColosHians
 2:17)"; for "the things which are seen are temporal 
[evanescent, transitory], but the things which aTe not seen 
[the things connected with the divine Word] are eternal [like 
'the word which abideth forever']." 

SFIBITTTAI, EDUCATION PBOVIDED FOB 

Anything intended for purposes of instruction must be 
made with the utmost accuracy, in order not to mislead but 
to edify* It is not surprising that, in preparing the shadows 
and types for the spiritual education of the very sons of God 
himself, to be educated to become the actual priests and kings 
of the eternal and all-embracing kingdom of God, "Moses was 
admonished of God when he was about to make the [typical] 
Tabernacle [so filled with absolutely essential lessons for the 
coming royal priesthood]; for, See, saith he [God], that thou 
make all things [exactly] according to the pattern showed 
thee In the mount [Mount Sinai, where the typical law waa 
given]." "According to all that I shew thee," said God to 
Moses, "after the pattern [of the Tabernacle, and the pattern] 
of all the instruments thereof [each thing in nearly every 
detail being typical, educational], even so shall ye make it" 
(Exodus 25:9) ; "after their pattern, which thou wast caused 
to see in the mount." — Exodus 25:40, margin; Hebrews 8:5. 

In the carrying on of this educational ritual, -every act 
had to be done exactly right; indeed, it was in a sense an 
impossibility for anything to be done wrong; for any error 
in performing a rite was prevented by the death of the careless
 or ignorant priest, as in the instance: "And Nad-ab and 
Abihu [priests] the sons of Aaron [the high priest], offered 
strange fire [fire not taken from off the brazen altar] before 
the Lord, which he commanded not [God authorized the use of 
the altar fire alone]. And there went out fire [like lightning] 
from the Lord [out of the Most Holy], and devoured them 
[killed them] ; and they died before the Lord." — Leviticus 
10:1, 2. 

To the father and the brothers, horror-stricken,. but bound 
by divine command neither to manifest grief at the death even 
of son and brother, near and dear (Leviticus 21:10), nor to 
interrupt the holy ritual (Leviticus 21:12) prepared for the 
education of the tentatively divine sons of God, the solemn 
warning came from Moses, God's representative; "Uncover not 
your heads [murmur not], nor rend your clothes [manifestations
 of grief] ; lest ye die. And ye shall not go out from the 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation [the Tabernacle 
structure] le»t ye die." — Leviticus 10:6, 7. 


TABERNACLE AND TEMPLE TEACHINGS 

The Tabernacle was peculiarly the type for the instruction
 of the little flock. The lessons taught by it, as presented 
in "Tabernacle Shadows," were almost exclusively concerning 
the consecration of the priesthood and the sacrifices of the 
day of atonement, with brief treatments of the ashes of the 
red heifer and of the sacrifices subsequent to the day of atonement
. Most of it in anti-type concerns the work of the antitypical
 day of atonement, the Gospel age, the consecration of 
the little flock, and the tentative justification of the believers, 
the household of faith of the Gospel age. Not much attention 
is given to the great company or to the work of the Millennial
 age. 

The Temple of Ezekiel deals symbolically in very small 
measure with the overcomers prior to the Gospel age; to a 
larger degree with the Gospel-age overcoming of the little 
flock; in quite distinct detail with the great company; and to 
a considerable amount with the Millennial age work, including 
that of the little flock, the great company, the ancient worthies
, the Jews and other people of the world. It supplements 
the 'Tabernacle Shadows/' particularly in respect to the obscure
 treatment of the great company in the 'Tabernacle 
Shadows" and the meagre attention devoted to the great age 
about to be inaugurated in power and glory. 

Throughout the Temple chapters of Ezekiel and in the etudy 
of the plan and ritual of the Temple, the condition and the 
work of the various classes are shown; first as living actualities
 as the classes struggle through their warfare with sin and 
imperfection; and finally as memories when the overcoming 
has been accomplished and the days of struggle may be lived 
over again in the minds of the blessed ones on the various 
planes of being, who shall not have "received the grace of God 
in vain." 

"TABBBHACLB SHADOWS" A FBOFITABLE STUDY 

The importance of the Hebrew Tabernacle is difficult to 
overestimate. It was the dwelling place of Jehovah among his 
people: "At the door [type of Christ, the Word of God, 'I am 
the door'] of the Tabernacle [type of Christ, Head and body] 
of the congregation [type of all people ultimately in covenant 
relationship with God] before the Lord; where I [Jehovah] 
will meet you, to speak unto thee. And there I will meet with 
the children of Israel [all in covenant relationship], and the 
Tabernacle [Christ, Head and body] shall be sanctified [set 
apart, consecrated] with my glory [Christ, Head and body, the 
glory of God]." "And there will I meet with thee [Moses the 
mediator, type of the Christ the Mediator], and I will commune
 with thee from above the mercy seat [divine justice], 
from between the two cherubim [divine love and power] which 
are upon the ark [Christ, Head and body] of the testimony 
[covenant, the word of God], of all things which I will give 
thee in commandment [the new commandment, the spirit of 
the law] unto the children of Israel [all who shall ultimately 
be in covenant relationship to God]." — Exodus 29:42, 43; 
25:22. 

The wonderful divine lessons to the consecrated Christian
 lie in the fact that "Christ [Head and body] being coma 
an high priest of good things [divine blessings through the 
Word] to come [in the two-phase kingdom of God], by a 
greater and more perfect Tabernacle [the Christ, Head and 
body], not made with hands [but the divinely 'begotten new 
creatures], that is to say, not of this building [not the earthly 
tabernacle], entered in once [once for all] into the holy place 
[the Most Holy, type of the divine condition], having obtained 
eternal redemption [deliverance by purchase] for us." — Heb. 
9:11, 12. 

Of what immeasurable importance it is for the consecrated 
Christian to understand the Tabernacle! For there, by God's 
grace, he is to live forever: "Lord, who shall abide in thy 
Tabernacle [the divine condition]? who shall dwell in thy holy 

[630$] (247-248) 


(248 249) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, $. Y. 


hill [in the royalty of divinity J ? He that walketh uprightly 
and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his 
heart." {Psalm 15:1, 2) Speaking prophetically of the great 
Christ, Head and body, David says: "I [the Christ] will abide 
in thy Tabernacle forever; I will make my refuge [margin] in 
the covert [secret place, the divine condition, the Most Holy] 
of thy wings [provided for in the divine Word]." (Psalm 
61:4) How much the child erf God should want to know about 
his future eternal home! Especially now that the great tribulation
 spoken by the Lord is right upon the royal priesthood
, how comforting to realize that "in the time of trouble he 
shall hide me [the Christ] in his pavilion [his beautiful 
abode] : in the secret [the holy, the divinely begotten condition
] of his Tabernacle [the new creature in Christ, the new 
mind, the word of God] shall he hide me/' (Psalm 27:5) The 
church has joyed greatly and grown strong in the study of 
"Tabernacle Shadows." 

EZEKIEI/S TEMPLE ALSO PROFITABLE 

Of scarcely less profit to the new creation is the study of 
the divine sanctuary shown by the Prophet Ezekiel. Twice 
does the prophet emphasize the extraordinary privilege of understanding
 the significance of his wonderful vision, and urges 
not merely the giving of the keen attention of the spiritual 
eye and ear, but the setting of the heart upon the deep things 
of God therein revealed to the sons of Jehovah : "Behold with 
thine eyes [of the new mind], and hear with thine [spiritual] 
ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew thee; for 
to the intent that I might shew them unto thee [this is the 
purpose of bringing the new creature to the knowledge of these 
things} art thou brought hither [to the present time and 
opportunity, for the Ezekiel Temple contains lessons indispensable
 now to the sons of God)." — Ezekiel 40:4. 

It is important to the new creation's welfare now, as a 
preparation for future service of the Lord, to give attention 
to even the minutiae of the Temple: "Set thine heart [margin
], and behold with thine eyes [of divine understanding], 
and hear with thine [spiritual] ears [unstopped], all that I 
shall say itnto thee concerning all the ordinances [ritual] of 
the house [the house of sons] of the Lord, and all the laws 
['out of Zion shall go forth the law/ (Isaiah 2:3)] thereof; 
and set well thine heart [margin] upon the entering in [the 
porch and the Holy, the begettal and the divinely begotten 
condition] of the house [the divine condition of the Christ, 
Head and body, both in this life and in the divine life to 
come], with every going forth [gates, Christ, the Word of 
God] of the sanctuary [the entire structure, the divine kingdom
 in all phases and planes]." — Ezekiel 44:5. 

It would scarcely be possible for our Father to tell his 
children in stronger language the importance of the message 
of the Temple of Ezekiel's vision. The Temple teaches more 
plainly than hitherto some lessons about the condition and the 
work of the royal priesthood, the great company, and the 
ancient worthies, 

A MARVELOUS FAMILY SECRET 

The Apostle Paul maikes very clear that "ye [the little 
flock] are the Temple [eternal abiding place, where God will 
meet with men] of God, and that the Spirit [power, influence, 
word] of God dwelleth in you [the Word of God abides in the 
consecrated Christians]. The Temple [Christ, Head and body] 
of God is holy [set apart from everything else to the divine 
service of Jehovah], which Temple ve [the little flock] are." 
(1 Corinthians 3:16, 17) "Your body [the body of Christ] 
is the Temple of the holy Spirit [through the Word ; God often 
identifies himself with his Word], which is in you [the Word 
of God U in our mind, hoaTt and character], which ye have of 
God [the divine Word comes from God exclusively]." (1 
Corinthians 6:19) The Temple which Christ spoke of, "Destroy
 thi3 temple [the body of Christ] and in three [onethousand
-year] days I will' raise it up [resurrect it to the 
divine plane]," was first his literal, perfect body of flesh and 
also his mystical body, the Church. "For he spake of the 


Temple [divine sanctuary] of his body [the body members]." — 
John 2:19, 21, 

In gaining knowledge about the Temple of God the church 
is learning about herself, her present experiences and her 
coming work and glory. The Temple building was the structure
 of which Christ spoke; yet it was but the central feature 
of a system of courts, rooms, walls, pillars, and porches on 
different planes, which collectively composed the divine sanctuary
, The various parts of the sanctuary symbolize the persons
, conditions and offices of the classes in the kingdom of 
God. In due time all beings in heaven and in earth will together 
become the sanctuary of the holy Spirit, when God pours out 
his Spirit upon all flesh, as foretold by the prophet Joel. 

This is one of the family^ secrets of the sons of God; for 
our beloved Father has made it manifest to his sons, "Having 
made known unto us [the house of sons] the mystery [secretj 
of his will [the divine purpose, plan], according to his good 
[how goodness characterizes our God!] pleasure ['thou hast 
pleasure in uprightness' (1 Chronicles 29:17) ; 'all things for 
thy pleasure are [exist] and were created'] which he hath 
purposed in himself : that in the dispensation [the better 
order of things soon to come] of the fullness of times [in the 
Millennium] he might gather together [many need gathering 
in] in one [one great world-wide and universe-wide church 
or family] all things [all intelligent beings] in Christ [a being 
is in Christ who has in him the words of Christ. All are to 
learn the truth], both which are in heaven [the fallen angels, 
now out of Christ, are to have the opportunity to return] and 
which, are on earth [few on earth have the truth about the 
Word of God; practically all, living and dead, need to be 
gathered into Christ]; even in him." (Kphesians 1:9, 10) 
The divine sanctuary of Ezekiel's vision depicts all the classes 
in heaven and on earth which are to learn the pure Word of 
God and be gathered into Christ. 

UNIVERSAL HARMONY WITH GOD 

In a sense God and Christ identify themselves with the 
Word issuing from the Father and uttered by the Son. The oneness
 between Father and Son is a oneness of mind, word, character
. Human beings now learn the Word of God relating to the 
divine mind and character, and become one with God and 
Christ, in answer to the Savior's prayer: "Holy Father, keep 
through thine own name [through sonship] those [the little 
flock 1 whom; thou hast given me, that they may be one [in 
mind, and character] even as we are. ['I and my Father are 
one.'] Neither pray I for these [the twelve apostles of 
Jesus] alone, but for them also [the whole church] which 
shall believe on me through their word f ultimately al I 
classes]; that they all [the 144,000] may be one; as 'thou, 
Father [through the divine Word], art in me, and I in thee, 
that they also may be one in us." — John 17 :11, 21, 22. 

"Be like-minded," counsels Paul, "having the same love, 
being of one accord [purpose] of one mind." {Philippians %:2) 
That happy age of a universe wholly in the mind, Word of 
God, is pictured by the prophet Jeremiah: 'They shall [need 
to] teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his 
brother, saying, Know the Lord [learn to know the Word of 
the Lordl : for they shall all [all on earth and all in heaven] 
know me [have the mind of God, each appropriately to his 
plane of being] from the least of them unto the greatest of 
them." (Jeremiah 31:34) Then will the divine sanctuary be 
finished. Then the Word of God will be true that is written: 
"And I saw no [earthly] temple ['built with hands] there [in 
the two-phase kingdom of God]: for the Lord God Almighty 
and the Lamb [through the Word of God in all and all in it] 
are the Temple [the Divine Sanctuary] of it." (Revelation 
21:22) God and Christ themselves will be the Divine Sanctuary
; for they identify themselves with their Word ; and it 
will be the indwelling Word of God. appropriate to each 
being in his function and plane, that will constitute the 
various 'beings as members of those classes and as parts of 
the sanctuary wherein it will give Jehovah pleasure forever 
to abide. 


THE CROSS MUST PRECEDE THE CROWN 


My dear Brother: 

In the name of our Redeemer and King I greet you. 
Grace be multiplied to you and all of like precious faith. 

With eagerness I look for the mail, since every letter brings 
gladness to my heart. You understand I can write but one 
letter per week, hence little opportunity to answer all the 
dear ones who so kindly write me. As opportunity offers, 
please assure them of my deep appreciation of their words of 
loving kindness. I learn that the dear consecrated ones are 


standing steadfast in the Lord, joyfully "bearing the reproaches
 that reproached ' him." Dearly beloved they are, 
from whom T have much consolation. 

In our Father's due time we shall be gathered to the great 
General Assembly. When I find myself asking, "Is my work in 
the harvest done?" at once my mind turns to the encouraging 
words of Volume 3, pages 230 and 231, and especially to 
Hebrews 10:36, 37. With much spiritual profit we can now 
read Volume 3, Chapters 6 and 7. Sobiptube Studies. I am 


[6310] 


Ai'fiusT 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(249 2r.O) 


patiently and joyfully waiting on tlie Lord, having in mind 
the encouraging words of Hebrews 3:6. Thank God for his 
exceeding great ami precious promises ! 

The Kingdom of God which we seek is not in the things 
pleasing to the flesh (Romans 14:17) but is of the Spirit, in 
peace and joyful hope. How glad we are to forget the things 
behind and look to tne great prize where our joy and pleasures 
will be eternal! How could we better learn the lessons necessary
 for the royal priesthood than by experience! Such 
thoughts cause my heart to leap with joy. 

My dear wife arrived Friday and spent an hour with me. 
The messages of love from the family and others I greatly 
appreciate. Presents are not receivable, except at Christmas 
time, when the privilege is graciously granted without limitation
. I express my deep gratitude for those sent, just the 
same. 

J hope you are all pursuing the Berean Studies faithfully, 
and growing in the fruits and graces of the Spirit. Be diligent 
in this, beloved, and be steadfast to the end. 1 am happy in 
the Lord in my present situation, and I am confident all the 
dear saints in joyful anticipation are waiting for his loving 
smile and the blessings of his glorious reign. But the cross 
must precede the crown. Saw our brethren Sunday, who send 
love. 

With much love to you, the family, and all of like 
precious faith, I remain 

Your brother by his grace, 

Joseph K. Ritthkkforp, Atlanta, Ga, 


FRUITS OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE 

i Paragraphs 15-23 of this article, as it originally appeared in issue of August 15, 1U18, were reprinted from article entitled
, "The Teacher and the Lesson,'* published in issue of February 1, 1910, which please see. J 

Septembeb 22. — Matthew 25:20-23; 5:3-10. 
parable of the founds covebs the 11nt1re gospel auk — our lord's return — beckoning with jus servants faithfulnessrewarded
 with rulers hip — unfaithfulness leads into outer darkness of the wobx.p fruits of character essenTIAL
 TO JOINT-HEIRSIIIP WITH CHRIST IN HIS MESSIANIC KINGDOM. 


"All things are yours; . . . and ye are Christ's 

The parable of the pounds is an illustration of the fact 
that at his second advent our Lord, before appearing to the 
world in power and great glory in a time of unparalleled 
trouble, will be present among his consecrated people, many 
of whom will know of his parousia, or presence. He will do 
among them a judging work, and decide their rewards in proportion
 to their faithfulness. 

It is well to keep in memory the difference between the 
paraible of the pounds and that of the talents. (Luke 19:11- 
27) Both pounds and talents represented money; but a talent 
is sixty times as valuable as a pound. In the parable of the 
pounds each servant received one pound; in the parable of the 
talents the number received varied. In some respects all of 
God's people have one comttnon footing and one common privilege
 of service, as represented by the pound. In another 
respect their opportunities, privileges and advantages vary, as 
represented by the talents. 

The parable of the talents is another parable of the kingdom
 of heaven. Our Lord Jesus himself went into the 'far 
country," even heaven itself. (Hebrews 9:24) But before 
he departed, he delivered to his servants certain blessings, 
privileges, opportunities, "to every man according to his 
several ability," The beginning of this parable was in the 
days of the apostles, when Jesus ascended on high and at 
Pentecost shed forth in the Father's name the holy Spirit, 
communicating a blessing upon each one of his followers, a-s 
represented in the opportunities and privileges given to each. 

All down the Gospel age these servants have been making 
more or less use of their privileges, and more or less wisely 
exercising themselves to serve the Master. Some traded with 
their talents — used them in preaching, teaching, etc. Others 
hid theirs in the earth, perhaps under cares and responsibilities
. ''After a long time the Lord of those servants cometh 
and reckometh with them." This long time is the Gospel age, 
in the end of which our Lord was to return to hear the 
report of his servants and to reward them. This is the 
parousia of Messiah, and his testing, sifting work in his 
church. 

THE EEOKONING HOUB NOW PBESEHT 

We should distinctly note that this testing and proving is 
not of the world; for our Lord has never recognized as his 
servants any except the fully consecrated. Many Christian 
people believe that we are now in the time when the servants 
of the Lord are rendering up their accounts, and when he is 
commending some and reproving others. But all of this testing
 and rewarding of the servants of Christ is evidently prior 
to any outward manifestation of the king in his glory; for 
the worthy ones are to share with the Master in hia glorious 
apokalupsis. (1 Peter 4:13) Therefore this testing must 
demonstrate who are the worthy ones. 

In the parable the servant who had received five talents and 
had used them wisely, energetically, faithfully, loyally, had 
doubled them, and was invited to share in the Master's joy and 
glory. His reward would be a position as ruler over many. 
In other words, the service of the present life is but an insignificant
 one in comparison to the glorious ministry which 
awaits the Lord's faithful people in the future, when they 
shall sit with Messiah in his throne and, as kings and priests, 
shall bless, instruct, uplift and control all the families of the 
earth. 


; and Christ is God's." — 1 Corinthians 3:21, 23. 

The servant who had been given two talents and who was 
equally faithful received his Master's approval in equally kind 
and benevolent terms. He also was a good and faithful servant
 over a few things; ho also would be set as a ruler over 
many things; he also might enter into the joy of his Lord. 
But the servant who had failed to use his talent was branded 
as wicked and slothful. He knew in advance that the talent 
was given him for use, because he had professed to be a faithful
 servant. His failure to use the talent proved him to be 
disloyal, unfaithful. Therefore it was taken away from him. 
It is not for us to presume to say that the Lord will have 
no blessing whatever for that unfaithful servant. All the 
time he was a servant, he respected the talent as his Master'^ 
property; he did not lose it. But he did not use it properly. 
Seemingly he represents a class very similar to that called the 
"foolish virgins" in another parable. This class will not only 
fail to get into the glories of the kingdom but will surely 
get into the time of trouble and its outer darkness, disappointment
 and chagrin, with which the Scriptures declare the Gospel
 age will end and the Millennium be ushered in. The Lord 
grant that this lesson may help some of his consecrated servants
 to be more faithful, more careful, in the use of their 
consecrated talents, in order that they may glorify the Lord 
and may hear his "Well done!" in the end! 

OTO LOBD'S MESSAGE DUTBBENT FBOM OTHERS 

Fear of the Master has been one great difficulty with many 
of us in the past. We should have gotten better acquainted 
with him. We should have learned more respecting his true 
character and his real purposes. If now the eyes of our understanding
 are opening, if now we are seeing the beauty of 
our talents and privileges of service as never before, let us 
quickly dig the talent out of the earth, wash it free from all 
soil and use it carefully, zealously, vigorously, for the praise 
of our King, redeeming the time, knowing that the days are 
unfavorable. 

Of our Lord we read: "Never man spake like this man!" 
(John 7:46) He was "the man Christ Jesus"; but he was 
not a fallen man, not a sinner. H13 life was not derived from 
Adam, but was transferred from a heavenly to an earthly 
condition. Hence as a man he was "holy, harmless, undented 
and separate from sinners.*' (Hebrews 7:26) More than this, 
at the time of his consecration unto death he 'entered into a 
covenant of sacrifice with Jehovah, and thereupon he received 
the anointing of the holy Spirit, "the power of the highest." 
What need have we for wonder, then, when we read that "he 
taught as one having authority," as one who knew and understood
 the things which he presented! 

The beatitudes illustrate the difference between the teachings
 of Jesus and those from all other quarters. He had a 
new view of what to present. His is a message different from 
all others. While other teachers instructed the people to hold 
up their heads, to remember noble ancestors, etc., and thereby 
be blessed, the Master encouraged his disciples to realize that 
the poor in spirit, the humble-minded, would receive the greater 
blessings. While other teachers held forth the rich, the great, 
the learned, the mighty, the influential among men as the 
patterns to be copied, if happiness would be attained, in the 
beatitudes our Lord sets forth the very reverse. His prescriptions
 for happiness have indeed been followed by a few; and 


[6311] 


(251-252) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


these alone appreciate their merit and are finding the promised 
blessings, both for the present life and for that which is to 
come. 

The contrast between the ten commandments of the Mosaic 
law and the eight beatitudes declared by our Lord illustrates 
in considerable degree the difference between the law dispensation
 and the dispensation of grace. The law instructed the 
house of servants what they should do and what they should 
not do, "Moses was faithful as a servant over all his house." 
(Hebrews 3:5, 6) He delivered to the house of servants, 
typical Israel, the divine law, by the keeping of which they 
might be blessed and used in the divine service. 

But the Gospel message is a still higher one. It does not 
ignore the law given by Moses to the house of servants, but 
recognizes that law as just, holy and good. It perceives that 
Israel did not obtain that which they sought — everlasting life 
— 'because unable, through the weakness of heredity, to keep the 
spirit of God's perfect law. The new dispensation which Jehovah
 God inaugurated through Jesus provides a full ransom 
sacrifice for all sinners, and purposes ultimately to -bless and 
assist whosoever will of all mankind out of the weaknesses 
of heredity. The law feature will be maintained, but graee 
and mercy will render the necessary assistance to the keeping
 of that law. 

MEEKNESS A OHAEA0TEEISTI0 OF CHRISTIANS 

Before that new era of world blessing is introduced, however
, the divine arrangement purposes to gather a special 
class, all of whom must have the character likeness of God's 


dear son, our Lord Jesus Christ. These are to be his jointheirs
, in every sense of the word — in the sufferings, selfdenials
, persecutions and sacrifices of the present life, as well 
as in the glory, the honor and the immortality of the future 
existence. 

Our Lord emphasized the thought that undeserved persecution
 is an evidence of fidelity to himself and his doctrines. 
As many had spoken evil of him, so many would speak evil 
of those who would seek to follow closely in his footsteps. As 
he had been reproached and reviled, so his followers would 
be treated. All this the Master would have them receive as 
evidence or proof of their faithfulness in God and of the divine
 acceptance of them. These trials would demonstrate that 
God found them worthy of shaping and polishing for his service
, whereas others without such persecutions would have 
every Teason to doubt that they were in preparation for the 
kingdom. Those who are enduring such trials should rejoice 
and be very glad. They should realize that in the kingdom 
there will be different grades of honor and dignity; and that 
the more they suffer for righteousness' sake, the higher and 
greater will be their reward. 

The prismatic sum of all the graces of the holy Spirit is 
love; and those who possess them are lovely and lovable. By 
and by, if faithful to the end of the way, they shall be made 
perfect in holiness and shall be with and like him who is 
altogether lovely, the chief among ten thousand. Our call 
is to attain these blessed conditions in the kingdom, as heirs 
of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 


WHAT IT MEANS TO BE A CHRISTIAN 

September 29. — 1 John 3:1-24. 

importance op cobbeci doctrine as related to character building how to begin the christian life — what is meant 

by growth 1$ gbace — our lord's instructions to his followers — the chbistian a steward — his duties and obligations
 — the royal law of love incumbent — «0d first in all his conduct of life. 
"My Utile children, let us not love in word, neither with the tongue; but in deed and in truth" — Verse 18. 


We are aware that in our day the confused and confusing 
doctrines handed down from the dark ages have become so 
obnoxious to reasoning people that many are inclined to say: 
Away with doctrines! It matters not what a man believes; 
it matters everything what he does. We sympathize with 
those who hold this sentiment, although we cannot agree with 
it; for we hold that doctrine is all important to both faith 
and works. If this were not so, our Lord would not have 
given his doctrines so important a place in his teachings and 
in his parables. No one can build a proper life unless he 
have some foundation, some doctrine, some faith. A man with 
no faith, no hope, is sure to be correspondingly lacking in 
character. We believe that the important thing i3 that we 
should have a proper foundation, a proper faith, a proper 
doctrine upon which to build character and good works. — 1 
Corinthians 3:10-15. 

A Christian is one who intelligently believes that by nature 
he is a sinner, that by divine grace Jesus Christ the righteous 
died for the sin of the world, and that through faith in the 
atoning blood and obedience to the Redeemer's teachings he 
has become a new creature in Christ. (2 Corinthians 5:17) 
To such, "old things have passed away; and behold, all things 
have become new." Such new creatures are separate and 
distinct from all other members of the race. Instead of earthly 
aims, hopes and ambitions theirs are all heavenly. 

It is not sufficient, however, that these should make the 
proper start of faith in Christ and full consecration to do the 
will of God and not their own will. It is incumbent upon 
them that, having been begotten of the holy Spirit, they shall 
grow in grace, in knowledge and in love. (2 Peter 3:18) This 
is styled "putting on Christ"; that is to say, adding the graces 
of character which God will accept and reward with association 
with our Lord Jesus Christ in his kingdom. For these consecrated
 believers Cod has made provision of spiritual food 
in the Bible, "meat in due season" for the household of faith. 
(Matthew 24:45} These are represented as at first "babes in 
Christ," requiring "the milk of the Word." But if they are 
faithful they will gradually attain "the full Btature of a man 
in Christ Jesus," "strong in the Lord and in the power of his 
might." 

THE OVERCOMEBS, THE ELECT OF GOD 

Such spirit-begotten Christians must needs "fight a good 
fight," not with others, but with themselves, overcoming the 
weaknesses and besetments of their own" fallen flesh, the allurements
 of their environment, and the wiles of the adversary of 
God. Such as are faithful in these respects arc Scripturally 
styled "overcomeTS," "the very elect." The promise to them 
is that they shall have part in the chief, the best, resurrection, 
and thereafter be no longer human beings, but spirit beings 


of the highest order, "partakers of the divine nature." 
(2 Peter 1:4) In death these are "sown in dishonor," "in 
weakness," human beings; but in their resurrection they are 
raised "in glory," "in power," spirit beings. — 1 Cor. 15:43. 

Our Lord's promise to these overcomers reads: "To him 
that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, 
even as I overcame and am set down with my Father in his 
throne": "I will give him power over the nations"; etc. Again, 
he saysr: "Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first 
resurrection; on such the second death hath no power, but 
they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign 
with him a thousand years." 

All of our Lord's teachings are applicable to this special 
class; namely, those who become his disciples, his pupils, his 
followers. He did not assume to be a teacher of the world, 
but merely of those who leave the world, sacrificing all to 
become his disciples. To these he said: <r 5Te are not of the 
world, even as I am not of the world" ; and, "If the world hate 
you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love his own; but because 
ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you." The great Teacher 
did not include the church nominal as his disciples, but rather 
counted them in with the world. In evidence of this conclusion
 we note the fact that the world which persecuted our 
Lord was the Jewish nation, professedly God's consecrated 
people; and that those who have persecuted the followers of 
Jesus have likewise been nominally people of God, but actually 
of the world, 

DITTIES AND PSTVU^EOES OP CHRISTIANS 

These are the Christians addressed by the Master when 
he said: "Love your enemies." Christians are to love their 
enemies in the same sense in which God loves the world; that 
is, sympathetically. They are not to love their enemies in 
the sense of affectionate love and tenderness, such as they 
bestow upon their own families, friends and lovable persons. 
As defined by our Lord Jesus, their love for their enemies 
should be such as would lead them to feed even their bitterest 
enemy if he were hungry or to clothe him if he were naked. 
They should not pray against their enemies, but for them in 
the sense of wishing for them that enlightenment and true 
wisdom which would turn them from being enemies and evildoers
 and make of them followers of Jesus or, at least, welldoers
. 

Christians are not to lay up for* themselves treasures on 
earth; for they have renounced the world and all hopes of a 
future life on this globe. Their walk in the footsteps of Jesus 
signifies that as he cast aside all earthly ambitions, hopes 
find aims, so would they, taking instead the heavenly am- 


[6312] 


August 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(253-254) 


bit ion a , hop os and aims. In other words they live for the 
future. This will not hinder them from the ordinary pursuits
 of life to the extent that these may be necessary in providing
 "things honest in the sight of all men" for tneir families
, etc. But with these Christians any overplus above life's 
necessities represents so much of opportunity for serving the 
Lord and his cause; and in so doing, they are laying up treasure
 in heaven. 

This does not signify, however, that they must live "from 
hand to mouth/' nor that they must riotously distribute their 
possessions to others. On the contrary they are to seek in all 
things to have the mind of the Lord to do God's will. The 
mind of God is a sound mind. Therefore these Christians 
who are seeking to do the divine will tire said to have ''the 
spirit of a sound mind." This mind dictates that they live 
wisely and economically. 

STEWARDSHIP AND CITIZENSHIP 
To these Christians, everything that comes to them or 
that they possess by nature is considered a thing of God; for 
in becoming followers of Christ they made a full consecration
 of their wills, their all, to God. Hence from that moment
 onward these Christians are merely stewards of their 
time, their talents, their influence, their property, their all. 
According to the way they use their stewardship, investing 
their talents to the Master's praise, will be his commendation 
of them, as represented in the parable. Whether many talents 
are possessed or few, the commendation is to those who have 
been faithful in the use of their talents, not for self-aggrandizement
 or show or for worldly accumulations of treasure, but 
in the service of God, showing forth his praises in the assisting
 of others and of themselves to the knowing and the 
doing of the will of him who called them out of darkness into 
his marvelous lightChristians
 are to "lend, hoping for nothing in return," 
and not, as do the worldly, merely willing to do good to those 
who would do as much or more in return. Thus they are to 
illustrate the fact that they are children of the Highest, that 
they have been begotten of God, that they have his holy 
disposition, and that more and more it is shining out in their 
words and in all the conduct of life as they grow in the character
 likeness of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

In their daily warfare with the world, the flesh and the 
devil, Christians have for their u?e the most powerful weapon 
known in the world — the "Sword of the Spirit, which is the 
Word of God." (Ephesians 6:17; Hebrews 4:12) This does 
not intimate, however, that they are not to put bars and bolts 
upon their doors to prevent robbery. Nor does it signify 
that they may not call for police protection; for this is something
 they pay for in taxation and are therefore entitled to 


according to the laws o»f the world. They are ever to be lawabiding
 and io "do good to all men according as they have 
opportunity, especially to the household of faith." 

While it is our business as Christians to render obedience 
to the laws, customs, usages, of this world, in so far as these 
do not infringe upon the explicit instructions of the Word of 
Cod, yet this does not mean that we are to become partisans 
in political strifes and contentions amongst men. Let the 
world manage its own affairs in whatever way it thinks best. 
Let us accept whatever it provides; let us be thankful for 
whatever may come, realizing that God will care for us under 
all circumstances, that in any event our highest interests are 
conserved. 

GOD FIRST WITH THE CHEISTIAK 

The Christian is to "owe no man anything." This does 
not ncce-sariiy mean that he must not under any circumstances
 borrow; but that if he borrows, he shall be prompt 
to meet the obligation. There is, however, the standing advice
 of the Word of God that the children of the great King 
should be lenders rather than borrowers. "Do good and lend." 
Indeed, we believe that it would be to the advantage of the 
Lord's people to put in practice this sentiment in the most 
absolute sense, and never to borrow anything, never owe anything
, always pay for what he needs at the time of purchase 
or else wait until under the Lord's providence he can pay for 
it in advance. 

There is one thing, however, which the Apostle Paul implies
 that we are continually owing to our fellow creatures, 
not only to the members of our own family and to our own 
neighborhood, but to all men; and that is love. (Romans 
13:8-10) Under the divine law we owe them this, and it is a 
part of our Christian duty to discharge this debt daily. We 
are to be ready to do good to all men at the expense of our 
own time and convenience; but we are to be ready to lay 
down life itself for the brethren of Christ. Moreover, we are 
to seek opportunities for laying down life day after day, in 
the sense of giving of our time to the communication of the 
truth or in helping in any manner the Lord's brethren to put 
on the whole armor of God. 

It will be remembered, however, that the law of love is 
divided into two parts; love to God, and love to our neighbor. 
The loving of our neighbor would therefore be only a part 
of the fulfilling of the law of love. After loving our neighbor, 
and even laying down our life for him, we would need to see 
to it that we do not neglect to love the Lord our God with 
all our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind and with 
all our strength, so that every human interest would be 
gladly sacrificed in response to our conviction of the divine 
will. 


WHAT OUR DYING LORD COMMENDED TO THE FATHER 

"Father, into thy Juinds I commend my spirit"— -Luke 23:46. 


We recognize this statement as among the last words of 
our Master while on the cross. There is a special force in 
this expression which perhaps can be seen from only one viewpoint
. We contrast it with King Solomon's declaration that 
at death: "The dust shall return unto the earth as it was, 
and the spirit shall return unto God, who gave it." (Ecelesiastes
 12:7) The wise man's statement refers to the death 
of humanity in general, and implies that 'both the body and 
the life-principle which energizes it are the gift of God, and 
that they have been forfeited. All mankind are dying. Whether 
their death occuts when they are a week old, a month old or 
at a hundred years, it is merely the letting go of the current 
of life, the spirit of life. Mankind have no right to life; for 
our first parents lost this right by disobedience in Eden. God 
permits each child of Adam to use as long as possible the 
spark of life which he has inherited from his parents. Therefore
 it is proper for mankind to preserve their lives a3 long 
as they ean by means of physical care of whatever kind. 
SPIBIT OF LIFE DEFINED 
The privilege of liei% the spirit of life, goes back to God 
at death. It does not belong bo us; we cannot hold it for 
ourselves. It is absolutely in the divjne keeping. It is not 
a thing; it is a privilege. If one man should say to another, 
"I will give you the right to cultivate this field for a year," 
we would understand that when the year has terminated, the 
field will return to the owner. So it is with the privilege of 
living. Xo human being can truthfully say that he has a 
right to life. Everything like ownership was forfeited in Eden 
■by the first man's disobedience; and at the death of each individual
, the spirit of life goes back to God who gave it. 

In the case of our Lord Jesus, however, it was different. 
He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 


(Hebrews 7:26) He permitted his life to be taken from him 
by wicked men, although he could have retained it if he had so 
desired. He was merely laying it down, permitting it to be 
taken from him; and so when on the cross he said, "Into thy 
hands I commend my spirit," it was still his spirit, unforfeited
 by sin; and he commended it to the Father's care. 

It should be noted that our Lord, at this time, was the 
possessor of two un forfeited sets of life-rig] its — one as a new 
creature and the other as a human being, both of which were 
committed to the Father's care. On the third day the Father 
returned both these sets of life-rights to our Lord — one to 
be his own personal inherent possession, everlastingly, the other 
{the human right) as a surplus left on deposit with the Father. 

This trustful commitment to the Father's care implied our 
Lord's faith in God's promise to raise him from the dead. 
Our Lord Jesus still has that right to human life. Although 
as a human being he gave up his life, nevertheless, he still 
retains the right to his life as a man. The new creature did 
not die. As a new creature our Lord slept, but as a human 
being he died. Because of his obedience to the will of God 
even unto death, he was raised on the third day a spirit being
. It is this right to human life that he will eventually 
give to Father Adam and all the human family who will be 
willing to receive it on the divine terms. 

We see, then, that there is a special meaning in our Lord's 
dying statement, "Into thy hands 'I commend my spirit." The 
phrase, "into thy hands," seems to convey the thought of entrusting
 to the Father's care; for the hand figuratively represents
 power. While both hand and arm represent power, 
yet the hand more particularly bears the thought of skill, 
care, divine power, supervision and interest. Thus our dying 
Lord placed in the Father's care his life and all of its rights, 


T6313] 


(254-255) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BrookIyn, N + , Y. 


as a deposit, that in due time he might apply it in harmony 
with the divine plan for human salvation. 

Our Lord had left the heavenly courts in order to accomplish
 a ransoming work for Adam and his posterity. His 
change of nature from a spirit to a human being was made 
with a view to enabling him to be the ransom price for mankind
 — a perfect man for a perfect man — Greek, antilutron, a 
corresponding price. (1 Corinthians 15:21, 22; 1 Timothy 
2:5, 6) At the age of thirty years, he presented himself at 
Jordan to become the ransom price for all humanity; and 
he continued to give that price in laying down his life, which 
in the Father's due time would constitute the ransom price 
for Adam and all of his posterity. This work of laying down 
his life, of surrendering it, of sacrificing it, of permitting it 
to be taken from him, he ended when on the cross he cried, 
"It is finished!" 

Nothing more could 'be laid down than was laid down 
there at Calvary — a ransom, a corresponding price for Adam. 
But it was not paid over in settlement of Adam's account; 
for had it been so done, Adam and all of his posterity would 
then and there have been turned over to the Lord Jesus, On 
the contrary, the price was merely laid in the hands of divine 
Justice as a deposit, to the credit of our Lord Jesus, in order 
that later he might apply it in harmony with God's plan. 
While still on earth our Lord could make no use whatever of 
the ransom price. He must ascend on high, there to appear 
in the presence of God before even his disciples could be 
brought into fellowship with the Father. 

THE MEANING OF PENTECOST 

Ten days after our Lord's ascension, the holy Spirit was 


poured out upon the disciples, who according to his instruction
 had met in the upper room. This outpouring was the 
evidence that they had been accepted of the Father through 
the merit of the Lord's sacrifice. He had used as an imputation
 the ransom merit which he had deposited in the Father's 
hands when on the cross he had cried, "Into thy hands I 
commend my spirit" — my life and all of its rights. 

Our Lord did not give that merit to his disciples, but merely
 imputed it to them. It was not for them to possess, but 
for the world of mankind, "a ransom for ali,, to be testified in 
due time/' All who become footstep followers of our Lord 
renounce at consecration their share in the restitution blessings
 that are coming to mankind at our Lord's second advent, 
in order that they may have a share with their Redeemer in 
a still greaiter blessing — glory, honor, and immortality — the 
divine nature. 

When all of the church class shall have been glorified with 
their Lord, then it will be the due time for our Redeemer to 
transfer to divine justice the merit of his death, which he 
placed in the Father's hands as a deposit when he died on 
Calvary. When this ransom price shall have been formally 
delivered over to Justice in the end of this Gospel age, then 
it will no longer be a deposit at our Lord's command, but will 
have been exchanged for Adam and his posterity, the world 
exf mankind, ali of whom will he immediately transferred by 
the Father to- the Son, that the work* of the Millennial Kingdom
 may begin. The ransom price is designed to bring to 
Adam and his race the earthly life and the earthly life-rights 
and honors which were lost in Eden through disobedience. 


KEEPING THE LAW VS. 

The Scriptures say that "the law hath dominion over a 
man so long as he liveth." {Romans 7:1) As regards our 
Lord, we are not to understand this statement to mean that 
God's law did not have dominion over him befdre he became 
a man ; but rather that when manhood was reached, he had a 
full responsibility. Jesus was born under the Jewish law, 
and hence was subject to its requirements. During childhood 
the measure of responsibility to the law would be proportionate
 to the amount of intelligence of the child; and so of our 
Lord as a youth we read that "he grew in wisdom and in 
stature, and in favor with God and man." — Luke 2:52. 

Our Lord Jesus was perfect — "holy, harmless and undefiled
" — from childhood; and he kept God's Law as a child, 
though not with the same degree of intelligence that marked 
his mature years. With more wisdom came more responsibility
 and a deeper appreciation of that law. One is responsible
 according to his knowledge and intelligence. — Hebrews
 7:26; John 8:46. 

An incident is related, that his mother and Joseph were 
grieved, when Jesus was twelve years oi age, because he had 
remained behind in Jerusalem; and when they found him he 
had been inquiring of the doctors of the law in the Temple 
respecting certain features of the law. His motther asked 
him why he had taken such a course as to cause them so 
much anxiety. He answered that he thought that they would 
know he had reached the age when boys were expected to have 
certain responsibilities: they knew also that he had a great 
commission, and should not have thought it strange that he 
wa3 attending to it while they were in Jerusalem. Having 
learned from the proper source that he would not be eligible 
to the privilege of sacrifice until thirty years of age, he was 
content to go back to his home and be subject to Joseph and 
Mary. 

JESUS' DEATH KEOESSAET TO FULFIL TYPES 

We do not understand that the keeping of the law on the 
part of our Lord would have necessitated hia death. No law 
could require the death of any one except a transgressor of 
that law. The Mosaic law could demand the death of all others
 of the Jewish nation, for all others had violated it; but 
it had no claim against Jesus, for he had kept its every requirement
. This term, "the law," may be viewed from two 


FULFILLING THE LAW 

different standpoints, however; the one view represented in the 
ten commandments and the other in the typical features of 
the law — the various offerings, sacrifices, etc.; yet it was all 
one law. The fulfilling of the requirements of the few commandmerits
 did not necessitate the death of Jesus; for he 
fulfilled them by obeying them — the proper way to fulfil any 
law. But as for the typical features, these required a sacrifice
 in order to their fulfilment; and whoever would be 
that sacrifice must fulfil, in antitype, these features of the 
Law. 

So then, to fulfil the types of the law, it was necessary 
that Jesus should die. After his consecration, he said to the 
two disciples who walked with him on the way to Emmaus, 
"Wist ye not that those things must he fulfilled?" Then he 
expounded unto them the Scriptures — all concerning himself. 
He said, "O foolish, and slow of heart to believe all that the 
prophets have spoken? Ought not Christ to have suffered 
these things, and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:24-27) 
He could never have entered into his glory, could never have 
been the Messiah, unless he had taken these very steps and 
had had these very experiences. The Mediator of the New 
Covenant must sacrifice hia life before he could mediate that 
covenant; he must of necessity be the antitype of the Jewish 
sacrifices. 

Many use the expressions, keeping the law and fulfilling 
the law, synonymously. But these two expressions may be 
very well differentiated as we have just shown — the keeping 
of the moral code of the ten commandments, and the fulfilling 
of the types of the law. When Jesus consecrated himself at 
Jordan, he fulfilled the type of the slaying of the bullock. 
When he finished that consecration on the cross, and later 
rose and ascended into heaven and presented his blood, the 
merit of hia sacrifice, before Jehovah God,, he fulfilled the 
type of the taking of the blood of the bullock into the Holy 
of Holies and sprinkling it upon the Mercy Seat. In the type 
all this was done by the high priest. Jesus himself made the 
offering of himself, his human nature, to God. The mind, the 
will, of Jesus became the priestly antitype, and offered up 
his flesh. The Father recognized that priest by anointing 
him with the holy Spirit at Jordan. The work of sacrifice 
then proceeded to its actual culmination. 


LET US BE EXAMPLES OF SUBMISSION 


TO THE LOBD'S DEAR PEOPLE: 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you all, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ 

We know how anxiously your dear hearts are longing to 
get some message from our imprisoned brethren through the 
columns of the Tower, and we had hoped to he able to print 
letters from them in its columns, but by the advice of counsel 
we are refraining from doing this, and urge you one and all 
to possess your souls in patience. We believe that the Lord's 
dear sheep need the regular visit? of the Tower for their encouragement
 and spiritual upbuilding, and we desire to print 
therein only that which will serve this end, and at the same 
time keep well within the requirements of the Espionage Act 
and the Overman Bill, and thus avoiding the slightest suggestion
 of opposition to the Government in its hour of stress. 
Many things written and said with innocent intent, which 
would be entirely proper in normal times, would be detrimental
 to the Government's interests now; and we do not 
wish to hinder the Government in the prosecution of any of 
its plans in connection with the groat war. These plans of 


[6314] 


ArcvsT 15. 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(252-259) 


necessity place restriction upon our work. These restrictions 
may seem severe to those who have never been accustomed to 
such limitations \ but let us remember that they apply, not 
only to the I. 1$. S. A., but to- everybody else and every other 
organization. Let us try to be examples of submission without
 murmuring. No doubt the Lord is permitting these experiences
 as tests to us all. We are sure you cannot appreciate
 difficulties which confront the Executive Committee; 
and we remind you of our lack of experience, and hence the 


greater need of care on our part and of your sympathy and 
prayers. 

We appreciate very much your loving messages and assurances
 of co-operation, and assure you in return that we are 
willing to comply with the law of the land, to the end that you 
may have the continued, regular visits of The Watch Toweb. 
With much Christian love, we remain, 

Your brethren and servants in the Lord, 

Executive Committer 


The Watch Tower Editorial Committee; 
This journal is published under the supervision of an 
Editorial Committee, at least three of whom have read and 
approved as truth, each and every article appearing in these 


columns. The names of the Editorial Committee now serving 
are: w. e. spill, w. e. page, r, h. barber, j. f. stephenson. 

F. T. HORTH,* 

* [First appearance of this paragraph in this form. I 

