VOL. XXIII. JULY 1, 1902. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Not Merely a Rewording, but a 
New Creed 195 

"Calamities— Why God Permits 

Them" 196 

"Love— Making a Difference" 197 

"Give Us This Day Our Daily Bread" 200 

God First— In the Decalogue 202 

Interesting Questions Answered 206 

In My Flesh Shall I See God 206 

Various Readings of Old MSS 206 

Changed from Glory to Glory 206 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Every letter you send through the mail may be a more 
or less potent messenger of the truth, even on its outside, 
by the use of these envelopes. They catch the attention 
not only of those to whom they are addressed, but postmen 
and others have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to 
read their message of peace;— the gospel in a condensed 



form. Price 25c per hundred post paid. 

METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 

HOW ABOUT YOUR BIBLE? 

We have now filled all orders for the new Bibles,— so far 
as our records show. If you have paid for one of them and 
have not received it make inquiry for it at your express office, 
and if still not found write us full particulars of the order;— the 
date, the amount and whether the money was sent by registered 
mail, or by express or money order. Give name of your express 
office. 

We have many inquiries as to the possibilities of getting 
more of these Bibles. We answer, that we still have some and 
those who desire them are welcome to them so long as they last. 
In French seal, $2. in Persian Levant, silk sewed and leather 
lined, $3.— carriage prepaid. 



R3032 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
NOT MERELY A REWORDING, BUT A NEW CREED. 



AS MANY PRESBYTERIAN MINISTERS 
will, undoubtedly, claim that their new 
creed is precisely the old one except that 
it is worded in more modern language,— that they 
never did believe in "non-elect infants" and never 
professed to so believe, etc., etc., it is well that we 
now record the utterances of some of these brethren 
who having so long felt uneasy about professing 
untruths and vowing to teach them to others, are 
now overjoyed by the relief of the new confession. 
We give extracts below from Rev. Donehoo's first 
sermon after the adoption of the new creed (evidently 
the gentleman's own report) from the 
"Pittsburg Post," May 26. 



REJOICES OVER THE CREED REVISION. 

The pastor of the West End Presbyterian Church yesterday 
morning delivered a sermon on the following 
text: II Thess. 1:8. "We are bound to thank God always 
for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that your 
faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every one 
of you all toward each other aboundeth.' 

"The time was when it was regarded as the very essence 
of orthodoxy to believe that religious discovery 
had reached its utmost limit with the deliverances of the 
Westminster divines, and that further investigation into 
the realms of truth exposed the audacious investigator to 
the charge of disloyalty to the standards, and made a 
man unworthy of the confidence or even fellowship of his 
more orthodox brethren. This is not ancient history, but 
sober facts occurring within a score of years and closing 
on last Thursday with the practically unanimous 
adoption of the committee report on creed revision in 
our General Assembly in New York city. The highest 
court of our church, composed of men who argued and 
voted against such a thing, gulped down revision with 
a relish which seemed to indicate that it was not such 
an unpleasant dose, after all. 

"It is in no spirit of triumph over a prostrate foe that 
I allude to these things, but simply because I cannot repress 
my joy that the mists have cleared away, and that 
a brighter day has dawned upon the church. It is to me 
an especial cause for rejoicing that I can stand up in 
the pulpit and offer salvation without any mental reservation, 
and without any stipulation that the one to 
whom the offer is extended must first of all be one of 
that select number who had been chosen from all eternity 
to be the object of God's sovereign compassion simply for 
'His mere good pleasure.'... 

"I am glad besides that the ambiguous declaration 
about 'elect infants dying in infancy' being saved— (as 
though it was possible for any other than infants to die 
in infancy)— while a very painful silence is allowed to 
hang around the fate of other babes that breathe and 
gasp, and die ere they had made acquaintance with joy 
or sorrow, sin or goodness— is now to be explained as 
teaching, what a formidable party in the Westminster 
Assembly opposed with such persistence that they forced 
the Assembly to place this ambiguous statement in the 
Confession (that they believed in the damnation of unelect 
infants) that God's election embraces all that die 
in infancy in His purposes of grace. I am glad of that. 

"Henceforth may we not hope that men will preach 
God, not as He would be if they could have had their way 
about it, and not acting as they would have done if they 
had been in His place, but, as He has revealed Himself in 
His Word and providence, a God of infinite mercy and love, 
who is not willing that any should perish, but who would 



have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of 
the truth?" 

Rev. L. P. Crawford, of Pasadena, Cal., says in 
the California press:— 

"When I was ordained there were three things that I 
would not subscribe to. To these three points I said 
'No.' The first was this, in Chapter III: 

'"By the decree of God, for the manifestation of His 
glory, some men and angels are predestined unto everlasting 
life, and others foreordained to everlasting 
death!' 

"I said: 'I can't go it— I'll have to be made over.' 

R3032 : page 196 

"Dr. Adams asked me: 'Is there anything else, young 
man?' 

'"Yes, sir, there is,' I said. If where it speaks of 
elect infants, it is to be implied that there are infants 
that are not elect, then I don't believe it.' 

'"Anything else, young brother?' asked Dr. Adams, 
and I remember it as well as if it was yesterday. 

"'Yes,' I said. 'If it is meant that I am to be held 
responsible for Adam's sins, in the sense that I can be 
punishable for them, then I don't believe it.' 

'"Well, my dear brother,' said Dr. Adams, 'There are 
a good many of us in the same fix;' and they licensed me. 

"Now, these three points that I refused to subscribe 
to are the principal ones taken up in the revision." 

We are glad that the General Assembly has 
given these brave men their liberty at last; tho we 
confess we would have admired them still more if 
they had been courageous enough to have promptly 
and vigorously obeyed the voices of their consciences; 
—if they had refused to lend one mite of 

R3033 : page 196 

their time or influence to God-dishonoring and 
conscience-searing confessions for the sake of human 
endorsement. We cannot suppose either that 
God was pleased to have Drs. Adams and Crawford 
privately and secretly confess their disbelief 
to each other while practicing deceit toward the 
other hundreds of thousands of Presbyterians;— 
many of whom, unlearned "laity," trusted their public 
profession too confidingly, and looked not beyond 
them to the Lamp of God's Word. 

But if the boldest are not to be too much praised 
what shall we say of those who have seemed to 
have no consciences, or whose reasoning faculties 
are so dull that even in the light of this twentieth 
century they are such "blind guides" that the old 
Confession is still good enough for them? We say 



that only very young or bewildered or stupid sheep 
will any longer accept the ipse dixit of such Shepherds. 
We advise that their every expression be 
scrutinized in the light of God's Word, as more 
likely to be false than true. We bring no railing 
accusation against any of them, but merely state 
facts and their own confessions. As we understand 
the Word, the Lord will rebuke them shortly, in 
the approaching great time of trouble. But, alas for 
the poor blind sheep who are following them into 
that ditch! 

"CALAMITIES-WHY GOD PERMITS THEM." 



The Chicago Tribune has kept record of the 
calamities of the year and makes the following 
report:— 

"Nature has not been so busy with her forces 
of devastation for many years past as she has been 
during the first five months of the present year. 
Volcanic eruptions and earthquakes have destroyed 
48,450 lives, storms 704, tornadoes 416, cyclones 
220, floods 333, avalanches 228, tidal waves 103, 
snow-slides 39 and waterspouts 12, a total of 50,505 
lives destroyed by nature's elemental disturbances. 
If to this were added the lives lost by agencies 
over which man has more or less control, such as 
fires, mine disasters, explosions, railroad accidents, 
and vessel wrecks, it would be increased to over 
60,000, and this takes no account of individual lives 
lost in this country, which would bring the grand 
total up to about 100,000 lives lost in the short 
period of five months." 

The Boston Watchman (Baptist) says of the divine permission 
of calamities: 

"This problem baffles the author of the Book of Job, 
and all the discoveries of science and the light of the 
Christian revelation do not resolve the thick darkness 
that settles about it. When trouble comes for which we 
can see no moral antecedent and no good result, the irrepressible 
cry bursts from every human heart, 'Why?' 
And there is no answer but the answer of Job: 'Tho 
he slay me, yet will I trust in him.' 

"From our point of view the events of life are often 
wholly irreconcilable with our faith in the divine goodness. 
And yet we do not lose our faith. We believe that 
God is working out for us and for the race purposes of 
goodness that we cannot understand. That, it seems to 
us, is the Christian attitude toward this problem. Christianity 
does not resolve it, while it makes many other 
solutions of it untenable. But Christianity, in its revelation 
of the Father, inspires a confidence in Him that is 
not shaken by our inability to understand His way." 

The Truth Seeker says:— 



"It was the Lisbon earthquake which shook Voltaire's 
faith in a God who governs, who pervades all places and 
ages, and who has established a direct relation between 
himself and mankind. He was compelled to ask, What 
was my God doing? Why did the Universal Father crush 
to shapelessness thousands of his poor children, even at 
the moment when they were upon their knees returning 
thanks to him?" 

In view of the fact that the world is now in 
transition— from "the present evil world" to the 
"new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness,"— 
from the reign of sin and death under "the 
Prince of darkness" to the Millennial reign of the 
great Life Giver— it will not surprise us at all if 
the next twelve years shall prove to be full of horrors. 
The conditions now prevailing in the earth 
are not such as will be appropriate during the Millennium, 
and the changes will mean great disturbances 
of celestial and terrestrial affairs pertaining 
to our earth. These will naturally occasion great 
suffering and loss of life unless divine power be 
miraculously interposed for humanity's protection; 
and we see no reason to expect such interposition. 
On the contrary, we understand the Scriptures to 
teach that the divine plan is so timed that these 
physical disturbances will constitute a part of the 
great chastisement which the Lord designs shall 
break the proud hearts of men preparatory to his 
offer to all of the Balm of Gilead— restitution. — 
Acts 3:19-21. 

One effect of these calamities will surely be the 
overthrow of the faith of many,— of all who are 
merely nominal believers, whose faith led them to 
no love for the Lord and to no study of his Word 
and to no self-consecration to good works. Of 
these, as the Prophet has declared:— 
"A thousand shall fall at thy side 

Ten thousand at thy right hand."— Psa. 91:7. 

Of this time and its peculiar work not only in 
the convulsions of nature, but also in its social, financial 
and religious convulsions, the Lord's Word 
declares: "Forasmuch as this people draw near 
unto me with their mouth, and with their lips do 

R3033 : page 197 

honor me, but have removed their heart far from 
me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept 
of men: Therefore, behold, I will proceed to 
do a marvelous work and a wonder among this 
people;. ..for the wisdom of their wise men 
shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent 
men shall be hid." "None of the wicked shall 
understand; but the wise [the taught of God] shall 
understand. "-Isa. 29:13,14; Dan. 12:4,9,10. 
We are now in the little season appointed of 



the Lord for the sealing of his servants in their 

foreheads— intellectually. It behooves us therefore 

to give heed to the sealing of our own heads and 

hearts by availing ourselves of the assistances 

which the Lord now provides. Failure to do this 

and the giving of heart and time to the world or 

pleasure and self means disrespect to the great 

Teacher, and love of the present world rather than 

of that which is to come; and the reward of such 

a course is— to be left in darkness with the world. 

(I Cor. 4:2; Matt. 25:30.) Another duty of the 

hour, that will be appreciated only by the faithful, 

is the gathering together unto the Lord (out of sectarianism 

and darkness) of the Lord's jewels, the 

elect whose eyes of understanding have not yet 

been opened to present truth. These calamities, 

which will overthrow the faith of some, will stir 

up the truly consecrated to a closer investigation 

of the divine Word and plan, and thus prove helps 

not hindrances, even as all things work together for 

good to them that love God. 

Now is the time to be on the alert to render 
assistance to this class of our "brethren" still asleep 
and in darkness but now awakening and needing 
sympathizing hearts and helping hands. Our late 
issue of the tract "Calamities— Why God Permits 
Them," may prove a help, an entering wedge to 
something more elaborate— to some volume of 
Millennial Dawn. Order these to use as sample 
copies, freely. 



R3033 : page 197 

"LOVE-MAKING A DIFFERENCE." 

"Keep yourselves in the love of God. ..and of some have compassion, 
making a difference; and others save with fear, pulling them 
out of the fire."— Jude 21-23. 

WITH OUR MINDS all unbalanced through 

the fall, resulting from original sin,— tho not 

all fallen exactly in the same direction,— it 

is not surprising that we frequently find ourselves 

and other brethren in Christ in more or less confusion 

respecting the application of certain principles 

laid down in the Word of God. For instance, we are 

instructed that love is the fulfilling of the divine law; 

and that love of the brethren is one of the evidences 

of our having passed from death unto life; and that 

if we love not our brother, whom we have seen, it is 

a sure evidence that we do not truly love our 

Heavenly Father, whom we have not seen. (Rom. 13:10; 

I John 3:14; 4:20.) In their endeavor to 

measure up to these requirements of the divine 



standard, some are in danger of erring in an opposite 
direction— in danger of manifesting a brotherly 
love where it should be withheld, and that in 
the interest of the brother. Let us note the different 
kinds, or degrees of love which the Heavenly 
Father exercises and manifests. 

First, we have the love for the world. "God 
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son" to die for us. (John 3:16.) Second, in a much 
higher and special sense, "The Father himself 
loveth you"— you who have accepted Jesus Christ 
as your Redeemer, and who, in his name and 
strength and merit have consecrated yourselves to 
him— you are seeking now to walk not after the 
flesh but after the spirit. (John 16:27.) But that 
this special love of God can be lost in part, or eventually 
wholly, is clearly set forth by the Apostle's 
statement, "Keep yourselves in the love of God". 
(Jude 21.) If any, after having tasted of the good 
Word of God, the powers of the world to come, and 
being made partakers of the holy spirit, etc., shall 

R3034 : page 197 

walk after the flesh and not after the spirit, we 
may be sure that such will proportionately lose the 
love of God;— and, if he persist in this course, as a 
result will ultimately be "none of his." For, instead 
of loving such, who through their knowledge and 
attainments and disobedient course have become 
wicked, the Lord declares that he is "angry with 
the wicked," and that "all the wicked will he destroy." 
-Psa. 7:11; 145:20; Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-29. 

As sons of the Highest, who are seeking to be 
like unto our Father in heaven, and like unto the 
copy which he has set before us in his dear Son, 
our Lord, we are to have for the world in general 
that broad sympathetic pity and mercy-love which 
would delight in doing any and everything possible 
to be done for their uplifting, in accord with the 
divine program, in the divine time and order. Like 
our Father and our Elder Brother, we are to love 
the brethren "with a pure heart, fervently"— with 
sincerity. This love for the brethren is nothing 
like the love for the world. It is not the pity-love, 
nor mere generosity. It is far more; it is brotherly 
love. All of the children of God are brethren, as 
new creatures; all these brethren have hopes, ambitions, 
interests and promises linked together in 
the Lord Jesus and in the heavenly Kingdom in 
which they hope to share. All these brethren are 
joint-heirs, fellow-heirs one with the other and with 
the Lord. They are partners; their interests are 
mutual and co-ordinating. 

Additionally, they have a special mutual sympathy 
of compassion; for while, as new creatures, 



they are rich in divine favor and promises, they 

all have serious weaknesses, according to the flesh— 

draw-backs; altho the Lord is not reckoning with 

them according to the flesh, but according to the 

spirit, the intention, the heart desires, nevertheless, 

they each and all have besetments arising from these 

weaknesses and imperfections of the earthly tabernacle, 

which cause them to "groan," and to sympathize 

one with the other in their groanings. As 

the Apostle says, "We which have the first-fruits 

of the spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, 

waiting for the adoption, to wit, the deliverance 

of our body"— the complete Church. Thus the 

sons of God have a further mutual sympathy and 

R3034 : page 198 

love and care for each other, an interest in each 

other, helpfulness toward each other, which is entirely 

beyond and above and outside of any feelings 

which could possibly be appreciated by the 

world or exercised toward it;— because the world 

has no such conflict between the old nature and the 

new; no such covenant of sacrifice; no such acceptance 

in the Beloved; no such union of heart 

and purpose and aim and spirit. Oh, yes! the exhortation 

to love as brethren, fervently, is one 

which appeals to us specially. 

But now we come to another point. Our love 
for the brethren cannot be exactly of the same 
measure and exactly of the same intensity or fervency 
toward all. There is something which guages 
or regulates it. What is it? It is that we love God 
and the glorious principles of righteousness, which 
are represented in his character; and we love our 
Lord Jesus from the same standpoint, as being the 
very exemplifications of all that is good, noble, true, 
just, generous, loving; and our love for the brethren 
must, of necessity, be in proportion as we find the 
brethren to be copies of our Lord. We do not 
mean copies in the flesh, but viewed from the Lord's 
standpoint; copies in spirit, copies in heart, copies 
in motive, copies in intention, copies in loving zeal 
for righteousness, truth, etc. Thus, as we grow in the 
love of God and in the love of Christ and in the love 
of the principles which they represent, we grow also 
in love toward all men and toward the brethren, but 
particularly toward those who are growing most in 
likeness to the Lord. This is not partiality; this is 
not doing to others different from what we should 
wish them to do to us. This is following the Lord 
Jesus' example; for we find that amongst his apostles, 
even, all of whom were chosen, there were 
three specially beloved; and of those three one is 
specially noted as "that disciple whom Jesus loved." 
He was specially loved, because he was specially 



lovable; and so with us and the brethren. We 
should love them all warmly, fervently, but of necessity 
with varying degrees of fervor, and the fervor 
should increase with each in proportion as we 
note his growth in heart-likeness to our Lord. 

And if this be so, what shall we say of those 
who, after having come to a knowledge of the truth, 
and after having tasted and appreciated its goodness, 
fall away into sin?— of those who cease to walk 
after the spirit, and begin to walk after the flesh? 
Can our love for them burn with the same fervency 
as before? By no means; it should not do 
so. As the Apostle says in our text, we should 
make a difference. In doing so we are following the 
example of our Heavenly Father; for we have just 
noted that only by walking after the spirit can any 
of us keep ourselves in the love of God. Only by 
following the same course, therefore, should any be 
able to keep himself in the love of the brethren. Any 
deflection should bring corresponding loss of brotherly 
love and fellowship. 

This making of a difference is really essential to 
the purity and progress of the Church. If we make 
no difference between those brethren who walk 
after the spirit and those who walk disorderly, or 
after the flesh, we are taking away the very premium 
and blessing which the Lord intended should go to 
those who walk after the spirit; and we are giving 
a premium, which the Lord did not intend should 
be given, to those who walk contrary to his Word, 
after the flesh. It is as much our duty to withdraw 
fellowship from those who are unworthy of it as it is 
our duty to grant fellowship, and that with fervency, 
to those whom we see to be walking in the 
footsteps of Jesus. We are not to think that it is 
love that is prompting us to take the wrong course 
of encouraging wrong-doers,— it is not love, but ignorance; 
and the remedy for ignorance is to learn 
of the Lord, from his Word and from his example. 

The Apostle Paul calls our attention to our 
duty respecting the brethren, and how we should 
conduct ourselves toward them under varying circumstances, 
saying that faithful brethren should 
be esteemed very highly in love for their works' 
sake; that other brethren who are unruly should 
be warned; that those who are feeble in their mental 
comprehension of the truth should be strengthened; 
that those who are weak should be helped, 
supported; and that we should exercise patience 
toward all. -I Thess. 5:12-14. 

We are at present specially referring to the proper 
attitude to be observed toward unruly brethren 
—they are not to be treated as those who are esteemed 
very highly in love for their works; otherwise 
they would be encouraged in being unruly. 
On the contrary they are to be warned, cautioned, 



—in love, truly, and with patience, but not with 
marks of the same love and esteem as tho they were 
walking orderly in the footsteps of Jesus and in 
harmony with the directions of his Word. The 
marks and evidences of our love and esteem must 
be sincere; and must be in proportion as we see 
in the brethren evidences of the right desires of 
heart,— to walk after the spirit of the truth. The 
Apostle Paul intimates how our disapproval ought 
to be shown, in cases which seem, in our judgment, 
to be of sufficient importance to demand a manifestation 
of disapproval. 

Evidently the Apostle did not mean that the 
brethren should be watching each other for an occasion 
of fault-finding in every word and every act; 
but that, on the contrary, they should be so full 
of love one for the other that trivial matters would 
be entirely passed over, as merely of the weakness 
of the flesh, and not at all of intention, of the heart. 
The matters to be considered worthy of manifestations 
of disapproval and warning are, rather, those 
which are so open and manifest on the surface as 
to leave no room to question the fact that they 
are displeasing to the Lord, and injurious in their 
influence upon the brother or upon the household 
of faith. For instance, if the brother had been seen 
under the influence of liquor; if he had been heard 
to utter vile or otherwise improper language; if 
it were a matter of general knowledge that he was 
living in sin; these would be such grounds as we 
believe the Apostle had in mind. But evidently the 
Apostle had no intention of cultivating a spirit of 
fault-finding and judging one another as respects 
the heart and private affairs,— use of time or money, 
etc. These belong to our individual stewardship 

R3034 : page 199 

and none should endeavor to interfere with the 
proper liberties of conscience and conduct which 
the Lord has granted to each. The Apostle is very 
stringent in his condemnation of such judging of 
one another, which so often leads to roots of bitterness, 
misunderstanding, disfellowship, etc., and 
which, as the old leaven, should be purged out of 
our hearts and lives.— Rom. 14:10,13. 

But now, for those who "obey not our word," 
the apostolic Scriptural directions in respect to 
their conduct, etc., is "note that man, and have no 
company with him, that he may be ashamed." 
Nevertheless, knowing the tendency of the fallen 
mind to go from one extreme to another, either 
of too great leniency or of too great severity, the 
apostle continues, "Yet count him not an enemy, 
but admonish as a brother." (2 Thess. 3:13-15.) 
To admonish as a brother does not mean to denounce 



roundly and severely; it means to admonish 
in a spirit of love, gentleness, meekness, patience, 
and with a sincere desire to help the brother to see 
the fault which we are certain exists, and which 
we are sure is not evil surmising on our part. 

The Apostle John shows us that this matter of 
distinguishing as between brethren that are to be 
esteemed and brethren that are to be warned, appertains 
not merely to conduct but also to doctrinal 
matters. Yet we may be sure that he does not 
mean that we are to disfellowship a brother merely 
because of some differences of view on non-essential 
questions. We may be sure that he does mean his 
words to apply strictly and only to the fundamentals 
of the doctrine of Christ: for instance, faith in God; 

R3035 : page 199 

faith in Jesus as our Redeemer; faith in the promises 

of the divine Word. These will be marks of 

a "brother," if supported by Christian conduct, 

walking after the spirit of the truth;— even tho 

the brother might have other views which would 

differ from ours in respect to certain features of the 

plan of God not so clearly and specifically set forth 

in the Scriptures. But for those whom we recognize 

as being doctrinally astray from the foundation 

principles of Christ, the Apostle intimates that 

very drastic measures are appropriate;— not persecutions, 

nor railing; not bitter and acrimonious disputes; 

not hatred, either open or secret; but a 

proper showing of our disfellowship with the false 

doctrines held and taught by them; a proper protection, 

so that our influence shall not be in any manner 

or degree used to uphold his denial of the fundamentals 

of the Gospel. This drastic course is outlined 

by the Apostle in these words: "If there come 

any unto you, and bring not this doctrine [confessing 

Christ to have come into the world, in the flesh, 

to redeem our race, etc.] receive him not into your 

house, neither bid him God-speed; for he that biddeth 

him God-speed is partaker of his evil deeds." 

-2 John 10,11. 

But, as our text intimates, we are to use discretion, 
judgment,— "and of some have compassion, 
making a difference." Some we may recognize as 
being merely entrapped of the Adversary, either in 
sin or in false doctrine, as the case may be, and not 
wilfully, intelligently, of their own volition. Toward 
such, still maintaining an attitude of firmness, we 
are nevertheless to express freely our trust that 
they are only temporarily wrong; and to seek to 
restore them, either doctrinally or in respect to their 
perverse moral course, to the position of fellowship 
with the Lord and with all the brethren who are in 
fellowship with him. Others we are to "save with 



fear, pulling them out of the fire." We may be 
obliged to speak very plainly to them; we may be 
obliged to tear open and expose before their eyes 
the sores of their own immoral course, showing 
them, as the case may be, the grossness of the sin 
or the grossness of the error in which they are involved; 
and doing so perhaps in strong language, 
if we realize that nothing short of this has availed 
to arouse them from their lethargy. In pulling 
them out of sin we are "pulling them out of the 
fire"— out of the Second Death— as the Apostle 
James says, speaking of this same class: "Let him 
know that he who converteth a sinner from the error 
of his way shall save a soul from death"— a 
brother who is a sinner, a brother, he explains, who 
has "erred from the truth."— James 5:19,20. 

Finally, we remark that the dealing of the brethren 
with the disorderly is not to be in the nature 
of a punishment; for it is not with us to punish. 
"Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." 
Our warnings or reproofs or withdrawals of fellowship, 
are to be merely in the nature of correctives, 
with a view, as the Apostle says, to the restoring 
of such an one. "Ye that are spiritual, restore such 
an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, 
lest thou also be tempted";— if not in the same 
manner, possibly in some other manner, in which 
you are weaker.— Gal. 6:1. 

As to what would be a sufficiency of evidence 
of repentance and reformation, each will require 
great wisdom and grace to determine. The heart 
in which brotherly love dwells richly, the heart 
which loves righteousness and hates iniquity, the 
heart which realizes its own imperfections, and that 
it is acceptable only through the Beloved and the 
New Covenant— that heart will rejoice at the first 
evidences of contrition and repentance on the part 
of the disorderly brother. If very full of love, his 
heart may go out to him almost too quickly; he 
may need to restrain himself; especially if it be a 
second or a third offense of the kind, or the circumstances 
otherwise very grievous. It will be apparently 
his duty to look for works in harmony with 
the repentance, and to wait to see some demonstration, 
in the nature of restitution for wrong done, 
or such an open and radical change of conduct as 
will give evidence that the heart has returned to 
its loyalty to God, to the truth, and to 
righteousness. 

The erring brother, truly repentant, will not be 
averse to giving such evidences, nor consider it unreasonable 
that his professed reformation shall be 
thus attested. Indeed, we may expect that such will 
feel so humbled in respect to his attitude, and the 
disgrace which he may have brought upon the 
cause, that he will feel disposed of himself, either to 



remain absent for a while from the company of the 
brethren, in penitence, or, if acceptable to their 
company, he will feel disposed to take a back seat— 

R3035 : page 200 

a very humble position amongst the brethren. And 
if the repentant offender had occupied the position 
of a leader in the company, humility on his part, 
no less than discretion on the part of the brethren, 
would seem to indicate that he should not be restored 
to any official or leading position in the congregation 
for a considerable time,— until ample evidence 
had been given of the sincerity of his 
reformation. 

But we close as we began, by urging that facts, 
evil deeds or evil doctrines, and not evil surmisings, 
knowledge, and not rumors, are the bases of 
Scriptural disfellowship. Hence the necessity for 
the observance of the Lord's rule. (Matt. 18:15.) 
While we are not to close our eyes to wrong in a 
brother, love will refuse to keep picking to find 
fault where none is openly apparent. And if fault 
is apparently discovered it is not to be "discussed 
among the brethren," but as the Lord directs should 
be taken direct to the offender by the discoverer 
and not so much as mentioned to others unless offender 
refuse to hear;— refuses to correct the fault. 
Oh, how much trouble would be saved, how many 
mistakes and heart-aches avoided if this rule were 
strictly followed! 



R3035 : page 200 

"GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD." 

-EXOD. 16:4-15. -JULY 6, 1902.- 

FOLLOWING the International S.S. course 
which seems to lead us in a very diversified 
and profitable course of general Bible 
study, we return now to studies in the Old Testament; 
—taking up the thread where we left it, in 
the passing of Israel through the Red Sea into the 
wilderness. The new quarter's lessons consider 
God's dealings with Israel, and the instructions 
given them in the wilderness. These were evidently 
intended to prepare a nation for self-government, 
which for nearly two hundred years had been in 
bondage, almost slavery. The first of this series 
of wilderness lessons may be designated a lesson of 
trust; and as we note Israel's experiences and the 
Lord's guidance of their affairs, doubtless we will 
all find lessons that will be helpful to us who, as 



spiritual Israelites, are being led by the antitypical 
Moses out of Egypt, the world, through a wilderness 
of instruction and trial and testing, toward 
the heavenly Canaan. 

Three routes led from Egypt toward Canaan, 
and the Lord chose for his people the most roundabout 
way of the three: he had in view from the 
first, their need of training. Their long bondage 
had made them servile and weak, lacking in self-reliance 
in the new way and fearful that their leader, 
in whom they trusted remarkably, might yet prove 
incompetent for their deliverance. What a resemblance 
to all this we find in the spiritual Israelites! 
when first leaving the world and its rudiments 
—although trusting in Christ, our fully accepted 
Leader, how apt we are to feel fearful of our ability, 
even under his guidance, to gain the promised glorious 
deliverance from sin and its slavery! 

The first disappointment in the journey was 
when the supply of water which they were carrying 
became exhausted and they had reached the 
waters of Marah (bitter) and found them brackish 
and unfit to drink; their disappointment was intense 
and they murmured against Moses. He in 
turn cried unto the Lord for help, and in response 
was shown a tree which being cast into the waters 
purified them. This was the first lesson of trust, 
and the Lord impressed it upon them as such. 
(Ex. 15:25,26.) This experience was followed by 
a joyful one when their journey brought them to 
Elim, to its many water-springs and its palm 
groves, where they rested. Similarly the spiritual 
Israelite is not long out of Egypt before he is permitted 
to have trying experiences; and seeking refreshment 
he perhaps finds bitter disappointments, 
corresponding to the waters of Marah. The first 
impulse of the beginner in this way will probably 
be in the nature of murmuring which, whether so 
intended or not, is a reflection upon the wisdom and 
guidance of our Leader. The lesson to be learned 
is perfect trust: to look to the Lord to turn our 
bitter disappointments into profitable lessons. As 
Moses purified the waters of Marah, so our still 
mightier Leader can make out bitter experiences 
sweet if we will but trust him. Then to us also 
comes a season of rest and refreshment, an Elim 
condition. The Lord does not permit us to have 
bitterness and trials continually, lest we should become 
thoroughly discouraged. He leads us sometimes 
by still waters, restoring our soul, refreshing 
and resting us in his grace, and these experiences 
rightly received and producing in us thankfulness 
and appreciation, tend to make us stronger 
for the further journey and lessons in the wilderness 
school of the present life. 

But evidently the lessons at Marah and Elim 



were not sufficient for Israel; they had not yet 
learned to trust the Lord, nor, that murmuring was 
an improper course; and so we find them murmuring 
again that Moses had led them out into the 
wilderness, away from the flesh-pots and leeks and 
onions of Egypt, to perish of hunger in the wilderness. 
How much more appropriate it would have 

R3036 : page 200 

been had they said to themselves, The Lord through 
Moses is our leader, and we will trust in him. Let 
us pray unto the Lord our God that he will supply 
all our needs according to the abundance of his 
wisdom and grace and power. However, they were 
not sufficiently advanced to take such a reasonable 
position, and were, therefore, infantile of disposition, 
so merely gave a wail of despair and disappointment. 
But the Lord was gracious and patient, 
and although he upbraided and instructed 
them respecting improprieties of their course, he, 
nevertheless, answered their wail as he would 
have answered their more appropriate petition for 
"things needful." 

QUAILS AND MANNA. 

It was necessary that the Israelites should learn 
the lesson of their complete dependence upon the 
Lord— the lesson of trust— hence the Lord did not 

R3036 : page 201 

prepare for them the bounties of manna and quails 

until they felt their need. Had these been given 

without their need being first felt, no doubt the 

Lord's bounty would have been considered as 

merely a part of his responsible duty; whereas, having 

learned of their need, they were the better prepared 

to appreciate the provision, and also to realize 

its miraculous source. So it is with the spiritual 

Israelites in respect to spiritual necessities, encouragements, 

food, sustenance: they are permitted 

to feel their needs, and to ask that they may receive 

spiritual nutriment freely. 

That the lesson might be the more impressed, 
the Lord first explained to Moses what he was about 
to do, and that there was a lesson to the people in 
connection with it; subsequently Moses and Aaron 
laid the promise before the people— that the Lord 
would give them flesh to eat that very evening; 
and that beginning with the next morning God 
would provide them with bread from heaven. They 
properly took no credit for this to themselves, but 
on the contrary, appealed to the people that they 
did wrong in murmuring against them as their 



leaders, and assuring them that they were really 
murmuring against the Lord their real leader. Had 
Moses and his assistant Aaron, and not the Lord, 
been their leaders, they would have taken great 
risks indeed in coming out, even from bondage, 
into the wilderness; because however well-intentioned 
Moses might have been, he was incompetent 
to supply the necessities for so vast a multitude. 
Evidently the people believed when they left Egypt 
that the Lord was leading and that Moses was 
merely his representative, and the fact that they 
now murmured against Moses and not against the 
Lord implied a lack of faith and a lack of trust, a 
disposition to fear that Moses was leading them 
on his own responsibility. Moses, on the other 
hand, meekly ignores his own relationship to the 
work, and loyally points them to the Lord as being 
the one who had led them thus far, and who was 
thoroughly competent to supply all their needs and 
to perform toward them all of his good promises. 
Spiritual Israelites are similarly to keep in mind 
the fact that they are not following human leaders; 
that the real Director of the course of spiritual Israel, 
the real Leader, is the Lord; and that men, at 
the very most, are his honored representatives. 
In cases of disappointment of expectations we are 
to remember that God was and is our real Leader, 
and are not to doubt, not to murmur, but to learn 
the lesson of trust, of confidence, and to cry unto 
the Lord for further deliverances. 

Human nature is vividly illustrated in the cry 
of the Israelites against Moses; their plaint was 
"Would to God we had died by the hand of the 
Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh 
pots, when we did eat bread to the full! for ye have 
brought us forth into this wilderness to kill this 
whole assembly with hunger." They forgot all 
about the bitter bondage of Egypt; the making of 
bricks without straw; the task masters; and how 
they had cried out to the Lord for deliverance; 
they remembered only some of the pleasant things 
—and we are not to expect, under all the circumstances 
narrated, that they had any superabundance 
in the matter of food. So now the discontented 
mind fails to see the leadings of God's providences, 
—leaves him out of its calculations,— forgets 
the exceeding great and precious promises set 
before us in the Scriptures, for the time thinks only 
of the things given up. How apt are all to remember 
the pleasures and gratifications of the sinful 
condition, and to forget its burdens and heartaches 
and disappointments ! 

All Israel, probably, was assembled, in its representatives, 
the chief men of all the tribes, and 
these matters were explained, and the lesson still 
further impressed, by the manifestation to them of 



the brightness of the Lord's glory in a cloud. The 
lesson of trust was being impressed; they were to 
know the Lord as their Leader and that all the provisions 
for their necessities were from him, although 
they were announced to them by the Lord's servants. 
This lesson, too, is for us. 

After these instructions had prepared them, 
the quails came and the manna. A strong wind 
from the sea brought quail in immense numbers, 
which, wearied with the journey, were unable to 
fly high and thus came within the reach of the 
Israelites, many of them falling from sheer exhaustion. 
This was no less a miracle than if natural 
means had not been used in connection with it; 
the lesson of trust which it taught was that God 
is abundantly able to control the natural means 
in fulfilment of his promises. Travelers in that 
region tell us that such occurrences are not uncommon; 
one of these says, "I have myself found the 
ground in Algeria, in the month of April, covered 
with quail for an extent of many acres, at daybreak, 
where the previous evening there had not 
been one." 

The provision of the manna was a miracle of 
another kind: wholly aside from the natural order 
of things, so far as we may be able to discern. The 
manna fell early in the morning and could be gathered 
after the dew had disappeared; it was evidently 
deposited in or from the dew by some power of God 
working probably in harmony with the natural laws 
of chemistry, not yet thoroughly understood. The 
grains were small and white and required painstaking 
labor to gather; nor was it then ready for use, 
but required to be either boiled or baked to prepare 
it as food. (vs. 23). Everything connected 
with the manna indicates not only that it was a 
most stupendous miracle, but a continuous one- 
lasting from this time for forty years; until Israel 
had entered the land of Canaan and ate of the old 
corn of the land. Again, it was miraculous that a 
double portion fell on the sixth day of the week and 
none on the seventh; and that it would spoil if kept 
over any night except the one following the sixth 
day. 

By these two miracles Israel was taught the 
great lesson of confidence in God,— that to him and 
him alone they were to look as their Leader. And 
so to spiritual Israel the Lord gives providential 
leadings, teaching them the same lesson of trust 
in himself. To us this applies not only in respect 
to earthly food, in supply of our physical necessities, 

R3036 : page 202 

but also to the heavenly food and the supply 

of all our spiritual necessities. It teaches the same 



lesson that is expressed in our Lord's prayer, our 
Golden Text; namely, "Give us this day our daily 
bread." The Lord's people are to recognize God's 
providences daily; to walk by faith, not by sight. 
We see but the one step before us, and that sometimes 
indistinctly in the light of the lamp of the 
divine Word; its more distinct utterances are in 
respect to the ultimate end of the Lord's leadings;— 
that he has accepted us, as his people, under the 
Mediator of the New Covenant; that he is leading us 
by him through present experiences, trials and testings, 
in order that we may be made meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light;— that he will 
continue to lead us if we will continue to follow, 
and will ultimately bring all of his faithful into 
the promised land, the heavenly Canaan. 

The Lord's supply of our earthly needs is perhaps 
best represented by the provision of the quails. 
He overrules natural affairs to provide us the things 
needful, sometimes more and sometimes less 
abundantly. And as the Israelites doubtless ate of 
the quails not only at the time of their gathering, 
but preserved some of them for future use, so we 
in respect to earthly things are to use the things 
of this world as not abusing them. We are to use 
them wisely, remembering that while they come to 
us in the ordinary course of life, they are, nevertheless, 
God's provision and to be used with frugality 
and judgment, to his praise. If the supply is 
abundant, we are to be thankful, and if it is deficient 
we are to trust. We are to learn the lesson 
of trust; and that after having done what we 
are able to do in the way of providing for our necessities, 
we can safely leave all else to him with 
whom we have to do,— our Father in Heaven. 

The lesson from the manna seems more particularly 
to illustrate our spiritual supplies, which 
come wholly from above. The manna is called in 
the Scriptures "The corn of heaven," "the bread of 
the mighty"-"angels' food." (Psa. 78:24,25; I Cor. 10:3.) 
Our Lord interprets the manna as a 
symbol of himself,— the Truth— of which a man 
may eat and never die. Nevertheless, this bread, 
although given freely, demands labor on the part of 
those who would appropriate it and obtain from it 
spiritual sustenance; it must be gathered, and it 
must be prepared as food. We cannot expect to 
come to Christ and to receive in an instant and 
without effort on our own part all the gracious 
mercy, blessing and truth that is in him. The 
truth is God's gift, to be sure; but it is so given 
as to require the putting forth of energy on our 
part, which will demonstrate our need, our hunger, 
our appreciation of this "bread of life." Neither 
can we receive enough in one day or one month 
or one year to sustain us perpetually; we need to 



come to the Lord daily, and to receive from him 
through his Word and spirit the life-giving forces 
by which we may be sustained day by day in the 
trials of life,— and by which we may grow strong 

R3037 : page 202 

in the Lord and in the power of his might. 

Lord, evermore give us this bread!— day by 
day, until, entering into the antitypical Canaan, 
the heavenly Kingdom, we shall have no further 
need of this daily supply, but be changed, perfected 
as new creatures in Christ Jesus in the First 
Resurrection! 



R3037 : page 202 

GOD FIRST-IN THE DECALOGUE. 

-EXOD. 20:1-11.-JULY 13, 1902.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart."— Luke 10:27. 

AFTER LEAVING ELIM, in our last lesson, 
the journey of the Israelites led to Mt. 
Sinai; but before reaching it their faith in 
the Lord was tested severely by a conflict with 
the Amalekites, a warlike tribe of the desert. Unused 
to military matters and encumbered with 
their families, flocks and herds, the men of Israel 
were forced to a conflict, and, strange to say, their 
leader, Moses, who some forty years previously 
had been a notable Egyptian general, did not attempt 
now to take charge of the battle, but entrusted 
it to Joshua, while he went to the top of 
a hill overlooking the field of battle, and there in 
the sight of the contending peoples, engaged in 
prayer with uplifted hands. It was here that Aaron, 
Moses' brother, and Hur, his brother-in-law (husband 
of Miriam), upheld the hands of Moses in 
prayer; because it was noticed that the Lord's 
special blessing attended the Israelites when Moses' 
hands were upheld. Thus Israel vanquished the 
foe, and thus it was demonstrated that it was the 
Lord who fought with Israel and conquered their 
enemies. No doubt Israel learned a lesson of faith 
in the Lord, and through Moses' example learned to 
trust, not in Moses, but in the Lord as their Leader. 
And the humble conduct of Aaron and Hur in this 
incident became the groundwork of a great lesson of 
helpfulness in the Lord's service— showing how 
assistance in the service is recognized of the Lord 
and such co-operation acceptable. So with spiritual 



Israelites. In all the trials and conflicts with our 
Adversary and his deluded followers, we are to 
learn distinctly the lesson that all our trust is to 
be in the Lord, our Leader, the antitype of Moses, 
Captain of our Salvation; who does not, in an 
earthly sense, actually lead us in the conflict, but 
is in the Mountain, in the Kingdom: his merit prevails 
for our blessing and succor, and all of his faithful 
servants in turn recognize themselves as merely 
co-operating with him. 

Another incident worthy of notice occurred 
about this time: Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came 
to meet him here, bringing Moses' family (Ex. 18); 
moreover, the Lord used this man for giving Moses 
some valuable suggestions respecting the government 
of the Israelites; and Moses was humble 
enough to receive such instruction as of the Lord, 
notwithstanding the fact that it came from an Ethiopian, 
one who was not of the seed of Abraham, 
and who did not join himself to them. Thus God 
sometimes even now uses outsiders to give suggestions 
and lessons to his covenant people; and wise 
is the man or woman humble enough to receive 
instruction from any quarter— when found to be in 

R3037 : page 203 

harmony with the divine will. The advice given 

to Moses,— that he should no longer attempt to be 

the law-giver for the people in all the minutiae of 

their affairs, but a sort of supreme judge, and Mediator 

between God and the people, was a wise suggestion, 

evidently from the Lord, by whomsoever 

given. So also was the next suggestion, that the people 

be organized according to their tribes and families, 

and that each tribe should thus have, in itself, 

its own proper servants and officers and judges for 

minor details. Of this arrangement some one has 

said, "This [arrangement] became the basis (Kalisch) 

of Alfred the Great's Saxon constitution, and 

thus the basis of the constitution of modern England 

and America"— a government of the people, 

by the people, through their own representatives. 

THE GIVING OF THE LAW. 

The transaction at Mt. Sinai was so arranged as 
deeply to impress all who were present. It was to 
be another lesson for the people respecting God, his 
right to control them and his will concerning them. 
Boundary marks were fixed around the mountain, 
which was declared holy because of the Lord's 
presence in it; a man or beast trespassing upon it 
was subject to death: meantime the mountain 
shook with earthquakes, and fire and smoke, thunders 
and lightnings, and trumpet-like sounds and 



voices manifested to the Israelites the importance 
of the event at hand. But if the Lord thus impressed 
them by the solemnity of their surroundings 
with the importance of the covenant which 
he was about to make with them, his message to 
them, introducing the commandments, was very 
gracious and gentle. In this preamble he reminds 
them that he, the Lord, had brought them out of 
the land of Egypt: they had by this time gotten 
beyond any desire to return to Egypt; they were 
learning to trust in the Lord, to realize his care and 
protection and deliverance from enemies and from 
want. 

Meantime, the people, in obedience to the Lord's 
direction, had purified themselves, their clothing 
and their camp; and, as directed, they were endeavoring 
to abstain from all impurities, as a prerequisite 
to their meeting with and entering into covenant 
relationship with the Lord of Hosts. The 
spiritual Israelite also has something analogous to 
this. First he must realize the justice of God and 
the greatness of God, and his own unworthiness 
and weaknesses; he must see something of the 
terrors of Sinai before he will be in the proper condition 
to receive the favors which our Lord desires 
to bestow. Properly, he too will seek to purge 
himself so far as possible from all filth of the flesh; 
properly also, he will seek a mediator, and as the 
Israelites said to Moses, so will he say to Christ, 
"Entreat the Lord for us, that we may speak to 
thee, and speak thou to him." We realize our need 
of a mediator through whom the Word of the Lord 
will come to us, and by whose merit and grace we 
shall be helped in satisfying the demands of the 
divine law. 

But a greater lesson is included in this type. In 
this still larger view Moses typified Christ Jesus 
the Head, and the Church, his body, complete; in 
this larger view Israel typifies so many of the world 
of mankind as are desirous of entering covenant 
relationship with God; in this larger view the fire 
and smoke and voices and trumpets and earthquakes 
of Mt. Sinai represent the great time of 
trouble and manifestations of divine power which 
are to come in the end of this Gospel age to convince 
the world of its need of the Lord's help and to 
make the world ready to enter into the New Covenant. 
In this larger view the three days of purification, 
setting bounds about the Mount, etc., represent 
the period of this Gospel age from the first 
advent down to the glorification of the Church- 
typified in the going up of Moses into the mountain, 
to be the representative of the people, to receive 
the Lord's Law and to bring it down to the 
people. Thus counting the matter according to the 
days of the week,— a thousand years to each day,— 



our Lord's first advent occurred early on the fifth 
day;— the fifth day has passed, the sixth day has 
passed, and we are now in the early morning of 
the seventh or "Millennial" day; and it is in this 
third day "early in the morning" that the antitypical 
Moses [Christ and the Church] is to ascend into the 
mountain, Kingdom of the Lord. It is in this third 
day, and very shortly now we believe, that the 
great and terrible manifestations of divine dignity 
and majesty are to be made known to the world in 
general. 

This is in full accord with the statement of the 
Apostle referring to this time, and to this same 
type. (Heb. 12:22-29.) For some time the Lord 
has been dealing with the world with a view to the 
bringing in of this New Covenant. Two (thousand 
year) days ago we approached the mountain, the 
Kingdom of God; there God, through the antitype 
of Moses, began to mark out the bounds of the 
Kingdom class, who might and who might not approach, 
come into the Kingdom. From that time 
the proclamation of purification has been made, 
the people being commanded to cleanse themselves; 
or, as the Apostle again says, "The times of this 
ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth 
all men everywhere to repent: because he hath appointed 
a day, in the which he will judge the world 
in righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained" 
-Christ. -Acts 17:30,31. 

The instruction to purify and to get ready has 
been more or less heard and more or less heeded 
throughout the world; and now, shortly, we may 
expect the marshaling of the people as described 
in Ex. 19:17-20, so graphically described by the 
Apostle as picturing the events with which the 
present age is to close: "Yet once more I shake 
not the earth only, but also heaven." He explains 
that in the great changes now at hand the transformation 
will be a complete one, which will thoroughly 
shake out and remove everything in connection 
with the civil, religious and social affairs 
of man that is not in harmony with the laws of the 
Kingdom— the Millennial Kingdom. Only the 
faithful who shall constitute the Kingdom-class 
shall stand the shaking of this time.— 
Heb. 12:26-28. 

R3038 : page 204 

THE FIRST FOUR COMMANDMENTS. 

The law delivered to Moses was upon two tables 
of stone. Although not so specified, it is a generally 
accepted opinion that the first four commandments 
were upon one stone and the remaining six 
upon the other. This would make about an even 



division as respects the matter; but more particularly 

it divides as between the duties of Israel 

toward God and toward men. Although the Decalogue 

(the law in ten commandments) was given 

to fleshly Israel and not to spiritual Israel, nevertheless, 

the latter may learn from it some very valuable 

lessons respecting the divine will. God does 

not address the house of Sons as he addresses the 

house of servants,— ours are not commands as to 

what we shall not do; ours is one command respecting 

our duty toward God, and it is so comprehensive 

that it takes in all that was said to Israel in 

the ten commandments, and as we shall presently 

see, much more. 

(1) "Thou shalthave no other gods before me." 
The thought is not that they were prohibited from 
having other gods before Jehovah, in the sense of 
superiority, implying that they might have some 
gods on an equality with or inferior to him. Rather, 
the thought is that they should have no other gods 

in his presence— that so long as they recognized Jehovah 
as their God, none others were to be recognized 
in any sense or degree. 

(2) The Second Commandment is an elaboration 
of the first, lest the people might say, 'We will 
have no other gods, but we will make for us images 
to represent our one God so that they may 

help the mind through the eye. But the Lord prohibits 
this, and we can readily see the wisdom of 
the prohibition. Many Christian people have felt 
that they could pray before pictures of the Lord or 
while looking at a crucifix, better than without such 
an aid: indeed we know that Greek and Roman 
Catholics throughout the world (nearly three times 
as numerous as those termed Protestants) continually 
use images, pictures, beads, etc., as reminders 
and helps to the mind and faith; but we believe 
that the effect has been seriously injurious; the 
tendency downward rather than upward, and that 
this, to some extent, accounts for the fact that the 
races using images, etc., are inferior to those not 
using them, but practicing the higher and purer 
worship of God which recognizes no intermediary, 
no crucifix, no image, no picture, but communes 
directly with the Lord. 

The Gospel Church has a still higher thought 
than was given to the Jews on this subject. Our 
Master's words suggest that even fathers and mothers 
and wives and children might intrude upon our 
love and devotion and take the place of the Lord 
in our affections; and that this must not be permitted 
by any who would be of the elect. In comparison 
we must love less than God all other beings, 
so that the first strength of our love and devotion 
may be given to our Creator. "Thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, mind, 



soul and strength." This would also include the 
thought that wealth, or self or ambition must not 
be permitted to take the chief place in those who 
would be the Lord's. Many seem to be in danger 
along these lines. We cannot read their hearts, 
but the vast majority not only of the world, but of 
those who profess devotion to the Lord, are bowing 
themselves down to idols of wealth, social ambition, 
personal ambition, etc., and serving these with 
all the strength and time and means and knowledge 
which they have consecrated to the Lord. We 
are not saying a word against the procuring of 
"things needful" in a manner "honest in the sight 
of all men;" we refer to something beyond this,— 
the attempt to lay up riches, honor, etc., with the 
time and knowledge and talents consecrated to the 
Lord. Is not this idol worship from the standpoint 
of the New Covenant? 

The Lord announces himself as a jealous God 
who wants all of our affections, all of our confidence, 
our entire trust. He wants that we should 
be so fully in accord with him that his will shall 
be supreme in all the affairs of life. This is not to 
be considered selfishness on the part of the Almighty; 
because this, under his overruling providences, 
means to his creatures the largest amount 
of happiness, the largest amount of success in the 
duties and affairs of the present life, and the largest 
amount of preparation for the blessings which the 
Lord has prepared for and promised to those who 
love him. 

The declaration that the Lord will visit the iniquities 
of the fathers upon the children unto the 
third and fourth generation of those that hate him, 
and show mercy unto thousands of them that love 
him and keep his commandments, does not represent 
anger, bitterness, resentment, selfishness;— 
rather these words express the law of nature, under 
which in wisdom God has placed humanity. Every 
one who uses his mind and his talents in accord 
with the Lord's will, brings a blessing not only upon 
himself but extends, in a natural way, that blessing 
to his children and theirs. On the contrary, those 
who live contrary to the Lord, who mind earthly 
things, become more and more "earthly", "sensual," 
"devilish," and surely transmit these groveling and 
deficient tendencies to their children, influencing 
and injuring them unto the third and fourth 
generation, in a perfectly natural manner. 

The Apostle points out to us that this is the 
secret of the extreme degradation that we see about 
us in various parts of the world today. There was 
a start to all this degradation. Of course the original 
start to degradation and sin was in the disobedience 
of father Adam, and in the death-sentence 
upon him. But in proportion as people since have 



disregarded the Lord's will and arrangement and 
laws, so far as they knew them, in the same proportion 
have they injured and degraded themselves 
and their posterity. The Apostle's words are, 
"When they knew God they glorified him not as 
God, neither were thankful; but became vain in 
their imaginations and their foolish heart was darkened. 
Professing themselves to be wise, they became 
fools and changed the glory of the incorruptible 
God into an image made like to corruptible 
man, and to birds, and to fourfooted beasts and 
creeping things. Wherefore God also gave them up 
to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, 

R3038 : page 205 

to dishonor their own bodies between themselves: 
who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshiped 
and served the creature more than the 
Creator. "--Rom. 1:21-31. 

It has been suggested that the original of vs. 6 
might be rendered a thousand generations, and that 
this would imply a continuation of present conditions 
of imperfection and need for divine mercy 
for a period of at least 20,000 years, instead of one 
thousand— the Millennium. We disagree with such 
an interpretation entirely, suggesting that in a very 
proper sense of the word every child is generated, 
and hence might not improperly be spoken of as 
a generation. This is in accord with the translation 
given in the common version which we approve. 

The command to the Israelite that he should 
not take God's name in vain, did not signify that 
he should not name the name of the Lord, yet going 
to an extreme in the matter the Israelites avoided 
the covenant name of God,— Jehovah. The expression, 
"in vain," evidently signified lightly, frivolously 
or in any other than a sacred or reverential 
manner. No such command is needed by the "new 
creature in Christ." How could he willingly or intentionally 
speak lightly or irreverently of his 
Heavenly Father, after being begotten of the holy 
spirit? To have a will to speak otherwise than 
reverently would be sure indication that he had 
not been begotten of the holy spirit;— that he was 
a bastard and not a son. However there is a sense 
in which we may well take a lesson from this command 
to Israel, a sense in which it is applicable to 
spiritual as well as natural Israel. As a people 
Israel had taken God's name,— they had professed 
themselves to be God's people, under his guidance 
and leadership; it was their duty to see to it that 
this should not be a vain, empty, or meaningless 
covenant, or agreement; that it should be carried 
out to the full. So with us spiritual Israelities, we 
have entered into a covenant with God; we have 



named the name of the Lord upon us, calling ourselves 
his people, claiming him as our Father, and 
confessing Jesus as our Redeemer. It is proper for 
us to remember that this solemn profession or obligation 
or covenant is not a vain, frivolous matter; 
that it should be entered into with solemnity, and 
with full appreciation of its importance and of our 
responsibilities under it. The Lord will not hold us 
guiltless, if, having taken his name upon us and 
receiving his benediction as his children, we then 
either sin wilfully or in any degree reflect dishonor 
upon him whose name we bear. 

"REMEMBER THE SABBATH DAY." 

The fourth commandment designates the seventh 
day of the week for rest, not only for the head 
of the family but for every member of it, including 
servants and cattle and visitors. It was made the 
duty of the head of the family to see to it that this 
divine command was carried out in his home, for the 
blessing of himself as well as for the comfort and 
good of those under his care. The new law, Love, 
the basis of the New Covenant into which we spiritual 
Israelites, as the "house of sons," have entered, 
has no command respecting the seventh day 
of the week, nor indeed respecting any day. If it 
was good that the Israelites should rest, would it 
not be good also that we should rest one day in 
the seven? Yes, surely; on general principles it is 
advisable that all men observe such a rule of physical 
rest from toil one day in seven. Is there any 
reason why we should object to the seventh day of 
the week for such a rest? None whatever so far as 
the Christian is concerned. 

Being left without a specific law on the subject, 
he is at liberty to make such arrangements for his 
rest as will be most profitable to him under the general 
law of Love. Being without a specific law on 
the subject Christian people, desiring to have one 
day of seven for worship, gradually fixed upon the 
first day of the week as being the one which to 
them would have the largest meaning, because of 
its being the Memorial of the Lord's resurrection, 
and hence, the Memorial of the Christian's joy and 
faith and hope with respect to the eternal life promised 
through our Redeemer. Do you consider the 
choice of the first day of the week a good one? We 

R3039 : page 205 

certainly are glad that throughout the civilized 
lands the first day of the week is so observed; we 
are glad, too, that it is not observed according to 
the Jewish law, merely as a day of physical rest, 
but rather that it is much used by Christians as a 



day of fellowship of spirit and growth in grace, 
knowledge and love. 

But why did the Lord not put in the law of the 
New Covenant some mention respecting some day 
of the week, first, seventh or some other day? We 
answer because the entire law is a "Law of Liberty," 
—designed to test by its liberty those to whom it 
is given. It leaves each one unfettered that he may 
the more abundantly show the kind and extent of 
his devotion to the Lord. Instead of demanding 
one day of the seven the Law of Love really controls, 
regulates our entire time; seven days in the 
week we are to love the Lord our God with all our 
heart, mind, soul and strength; and seven days of 
the week we are to love our neighbor as ourselves; 
and seven days in the week we are to rest also— rest 
from our own works— rest by faith in the finished 
work of Christ— rest in the love of God— rest in the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding, 
ruling in our hearts continually. The seventh day 
commanded to the Jew as his rest day, while it was 
beneficial to him, was also typical: it typified the 
Christians' rest of faith, this heart relationship to 
the Lord, in which, as children of God, all such may 
continually rejoice— every day and every night. So 
the Apostle explains the matter (Heb. 4:4-11), declaring 
further that there is a still larger rest remaining; 
namely, the eternal life condition to be 
entered into on the great seventh day,— the Millennial 
age. 

Some have suggested that in the expression 
"Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy" the 
word remember implies that the Sabbath day had 
been previously instituted and commanded; and 
that this was merely a reminder of it. From this 
we dissent. There was no law given previous to 
Israel's arrival at Sinai; there was no mention of 
the keeping of a Sabbath previous to Israel's arrival 

R3039 : page 206 

at the wilderness of Sin of which Mt. Sinai is the 
center. It was instituted in connection with the 
giving of the manna. (Exod. 16:23.) We are not 
to read into the Lord's Word what is not there. The 
words of the text signify that Israel should be careful 
continually to remember this injunction put 
upon them, respecting the seventh day, and that 
thenceforth it should be kept holy, sacred, free 
from work, as unto the Lord. All this is implied 
further in the declaration of the 1 1th verse respecting 
God's having rested on the seventh day; and 
the explanation is that similarly, now, in the giving 
of the law, God was blessing the seventh day and 
honoring it as a reminder of the six days of creation, 
and the seventh day in which God rested from creative 



work. 

We have heretofore explained why the days of 
creation should not be understood as literal days 
of twenty-four hours each, but as larger days of 
seven thousand years each; and this subject we 
hope to treat still more at length (D.V.) in Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. 6. We merely note here, that 
the seventh day which God observed was one of 
these larger days of seven thousand years; and that 
it began just after the creation of our first parents 
and that since then God has rested from any creative 
work, and has merely permitted, as far as earth 
is concerned, that things already created should 
take their course;— many of them a downward 
course, as in the case of man in his fall from primeval 
perfection into sin and death. The Apostle explains 
that God is still resting, and waiting for 
something,— leaving a further work for the Lord 
Jesus to do,— the work of redemption and restitution. 
The redemptive work he has already accomplished; 
the restitution work he will begin as soon 
as the election of his Church— the "bride," the 
"Lamb's wife" is accomplished. Meantime God 
rests, leaving the matter in the hands of him whom 
he hath ordained to be "Lord of all," and to whom 
he has decreed all things shall be subject, for the 
purposes of restitution,— so far as possible. And 
as God is thus resting and leaving the matter in the 
hands of Christ, so all who come to a knowledge of 
the truth, to a knowledge of God's plan, are to rest 
similarly,— leaving the case in the hands of our 
glorious Redeemer and seeking so far as we may be 
able, not to direct him, not to do the work for him, 
but to co-operate with him in the work which he 
is now doing in selecting the Church; and by and by, 
to co-operate as he has promised we may, in the 
work of blessing and restoring all the families of 
the earth who will hear his voice and become obedient 
to his law. 



R3040 : page 206 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
IN MY FLESH SHALL I SEE GOD. 



Question.— In what sense can the statement in 
Job 19:26 be true, since we understand he will not 
have power to "see God" as a human being? 

Answer.— The passage might be understood in 
two different ways: (a) As an expression of Job's 
trust in the Lord that notwithstanding the serious 



malady with which he was afflicted, and the apparent 
utter destruction of his skin, by a loathsome disease, 
yet he hoped for recovery and that he should yet praise 
the Lord in the flesh and in health. Or (b) it may be 
understood to refer to a future life and Job's confidence 
that though his sickness might result in death, complete 
dissolution, yet it did not mean in him an everlasting 
extinction. As previously stated, God would 
call and he would answer in his flesh. His seeing God 
in the flesh should not be understood as that which is 
impossible, of which our Lord says, "No man hath 
seen God at any time," and of which the Apostle says, 
"Whom no man hath seen nor can see." It should be 
understood in the way in which it is commonly used 
today; viz., that God's people see him in his works, as 
we sometimes say, "I see God's hand in this." And 
again, we are informed that "all flesh shall see the salvation 
of God." And again, "Look unto me and be 
ye saved, all the ends of the earth." 

VARIOUS READINGS OF OLD MSS. 



Question.— Why do you quote and comment on 
Luke 22:43,44, when old MSS. omit these verses? 

Answer.— Because while some old MSS. omit these 
verses, we find that others do not. If you will look in 
the foot-notes of Tischendorf Testament, you will find 
that "S2" omits these verses: the S represents the 
Sinaitic MS. but the 2 represents a secondary or altered 
reading of that MS. From this it is evident that the 
Sinaitic MS. originally contained these verses; but 
some later hand obliterated them, thus making this 
MS. to concur with the Vatican and Alexandrine. 
On the whole we are inclined to think these verses 
genuine, partly from the fact that they are in old MSS. 
and partly from the fact that the incident narrated is 
only what we should expect under the circumstances. 

CHANGED FROM GLORY TO GLORY. 



Question.— In what sense of the word are we 
"changed from glory to glory," even as by the spirit 
of the Lord?-2 Cor. 3:18. 

Answer.— After we are justified by faith we are 
called to the adoption of sonship; and after we accept 
that call by making a full consecration of ourselves to 
the Lord we are made recipients of the spirit of his holiness, 
the spirit of adoption into his family, and after 
we receive this spirit of adoption we are guided by it 
and taught by it respecting the things pleasing and acceptable 
to our heavenly Father; we are, so to speak, 
under this influence moulded and fashioned into the 



likeness of his dear Son our Lord Jesus. This moulding 

and fashioning we are required to do to a considerable 

extent for ourselves, but are stimulated to such 

transformation of character by the light of the knowledge 

of the divine character which we behold in God's 

Word. This transforming of our characters is not instantaneous 

but gradual— we grow more and more like 

Christ, we are changed from glory to glory in our minds, 

our wills, our hearts, our characters— this change will 

not be complete until our resurrection, when we shall 

be like him and see him as he is, and share his glory 

to the full. An article on this subject will be found 

in our issue of March 1, 1893. 



R3039 : page 207 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Brother Russell:— On the occasion of your last visit to 
our house, you lost on the floor the check you had received for 
your satchel, etc. at the hotel opposite the depot. I felt sure 
you would be able to get them without the check, yet I concluded 
to return it and learn positively that you had procured 
them. While on this errand I met a man I hadn't seen for 
years, whom formerly I had known well. I was compelled to 
introduce myself to him, because he said he couldn't recognize 
me. When I made myself known he was astounded and said, 
"Why, what have you been doing to yourself? You look 
younger than you did when I saw you last, which is more than 
ten years ago; besides you have lost that care worn-look you 
had, and now appear so much happier. What has caused such 
a change in you?" I answered "Good news! The influence 
of the truth causing me to cast all my care on Him." He said, 
"I would like to hear something that would be the means of 
making so great a change in me." I said, "You can hear it if 
you have ears to hear." I then questioned him as to whether 
he was still a Christian, and he told me he was seeking diligently 
to know what was truth, had once left the Methodist 
Church and attached himself to the Advent denomination, but 
soon learned he had gained nothing by the change and returned 
to the Methodists, only to be as dissatisfied as ever. He was 
really anxious to hear the details of my experience, and seemed 
glad that I didn't have to go outside God's Word to get the 
message of comfort. I then told him how MILLENNIAL DAWN 
came to me and opened the eyes of my understanding, enabling 
me to realize the truth that God is love, and showing me my 
privilege to be joint sacrificer with the Lord and co-laborer with 
him in this the greatest period of all time (thus far)— the harvest 
of the age. His interest was awakened, he was eager to 
get the book, even desiring to purchase one at once if I could 
tell him where to procure it. We were several blocks from Bro. 
Brown's. He went there with me and took away what I hope 



will be as great a treasure to him as it has been to me. 

So you see, dear brother, the loss of your check, though it 
may have caused you some annoyance, occasioned that seemingly 
chance meeting and started another MILLENNIAL DAWN on 
its wonderful mission. 

Two causes make the Washington folks very joyous now; 
viz., The early prospect of the Volunteer work, and the established 
fact that there will be a convention here in October. Bro. 
Fowler, our captain, told me a few days ago that he believed 
every one would engage in this work;— and why shouldn't we? 
If we appreciate the opportunity extended us by our dear Lord, 
we will not only delight to do his will, but will earnestly strive 
to do it in the most acceptable manner. 

Experience has taught us that there is much to be learned; 
we have realized the necessity of being as "wise as serpents and 
as harmless as doves." A soft answer has many times turned 
away wrath; a quiet courteous manner has gained for us respect, 
and been the means of obtaining an audience with the person, 
for the printed sermon we have presented, that could not have 
been accomplished in a loud or boisterous way. To get into a 
contention, even for the truth, on these occasions diverts from 
the specific service. There is a time when silence is golden; it 
seems to me that while engaged in the Volunteer work is that 
time; the message we deliver will speak more eloquently than 
mortal tongue, for it is our Lord knocking at the door of the 
hearts of his people. 

And now, Bro. Russell, I entreat you to make use of every 
opportunity to say to the brethren where ever you may go, to 
put forth earnest efforts to come to the Annual Convention in 
Washington, D.C., October 4th, 5th and 6th. Warm hearts 
will meet them here. We hope for a glorious time of help to 
the Church, not forgetting the nearly starved and blind and 
ignorant who are yet where we were once. May our Lord's 
blessing be on all efforts tending to make this convention a success 
and may it be with us in this as in all else, "God first," 
to his honor and glory through Jesus. 

With love, I am your brother in the love and service of our 
Master. J. T. D. Pyles, Dist. of Columbia. 



Dear Brother Russell:— I know that your time is very 
much taken up; but I would love so to tell you of a dear Sister 

J , whom we met in P . She came into the DAWN 

Truths about 1890, and has been a TOWER reader since 1892. 
She said that in all her Christian life she had felt the need of 
"light," and that the DAWN truth didn't seem something new, 
but only the expression of something she has always wanted. 
She had no education at all, could barely read; and couldn't 
write. She said when she read the first DAWN, she had to spell 
out the words. But, notwithstanding, she said, "My heart just 
runs over with joy all the time, and please say to Brother 
Russell for me that he has made one poor ignorant old woman's 
life rich, oh, so rich! and that every word he has written I have 
read, and not only read, but lived on. May God bless him 
always!" 



How often my own heart feels the blessedness this dear old 
sister speaks of. Truly your sister, 

Helen Brewster.— Indiana. 



Dear Brother Russell:— I have been wanting to write to you 
for some time, but have delayed knowing there are so many 
corresponding with you that your time must be fully occupied. 
I want to tell you, however, how I am getting along. It is now 
over four years since I obtained the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Since then I have obtained and read and reread the 
five volumes and the WATCH TOWER as well. The light that 
dawned upon me then has been growing brighter. It took me 
some time to grasp the truths of God's plan as I see it now. 
The orthodox (?) teachings were hard to eradicate, but I went 
to the "law and the testimony" and now I see "the more excellent 
way" shining out on almost every page of the Word. I 
purchased a number of vol. I, and loaned them to others that 
wanted them, also distributed the tracts and TOWERS you sent 
me. Many persons are interested in a measure; others reject 
the truth with scorn. I meet opposition from a number of 
sources, chiefly from the clergy, and especially the Church I 
formerly belonged to (Baptist). Sermons are preached on 
"hell," "the immortality of man," "the Holy Ghost," etc. I 
can thank God for this light he has given me of his Word 
(through your instrumentality) and smile amid the storm. It 
inspires me with more energy to use every opportunity to spread 
the truth. 

"I love to tell the story 

Because I know 'tis true, 
It satisfies my longings 

As nothing else can do." 

I have been trying to study the Bible all through life, but 
found so many perplexities I hardly knew what to think about 
it, and when I went to the leaders for light, I was told "They 
are the deep things of God and not for us to understand." Now 
I can, in the language of the one Christ healed say, "Whereas 
I was blind, now I see," and I am thankful to my Heavenly 
Father that I have "eyes to see and ears to hear" the "glad 
tidings of great joy which shall be to all people." 

One minister in this section (the French Missionary) has 
become quite interested. We can however look forward with 
joyful anticipation to the good time coming when "the blind 
eyes will be opened, and deaf ears will be unstopped." 
Yours in Christian fellowship, 

N. E. Butler, Nova Scotia. 



page 209 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 