Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
The Holy Bible emphasizes the need for keeping useful habits. (1 Cor. 15:33) To help others cultivate and keep the good habits that God approves, Jehovah’s witnesses carry on their ministry from door to door. In their field ministry they offer Bible literature that promotes fine habits such as prayer, the putting of God’s kingdom first in one’s life and the regular study of the Holy Scriptures. Such literature also stresses the right kind of association that is needed to keep these good habits. To help all interested persons find the happiness that comes from keeping divinely approved habits, Jehovah’s witnesses are offering during the month of August the Bible-study aid Life Everlasting​—in Freedom of the Sons of God and a booklet, for just 50c.
ANNUAL MEETING OF PENNSYLVANIA CORPORATION
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will hold the annual meeting of the members of the corporation on Sunday, October 1, 1967. In view of the fact that the annual meeting does fall on Sunday this year it is anticipated that the attendance may be larger than usual, thus making it advisable for the meeting to be held where we believe there will be sufficient room for all who wish to come. Therefore, the plans are for the annual meeting to be held at the Civic Arena in Pittsburgh. The program will begin at 8:30 a.m. and the doors to the Civic Arena will be open well in advance of program time.
Formal letters of notice will be sent to the members of the corporation. Mention is made of the annual meeting here as a reminder to the members to provide the Society’s Secretary with their mailing address and also to inform the readers of The Watchtower who desire to attend that they will be welcome and that the meeting will be held this year at the Civic Arena in Pittsburgh.
“LET HIM SING PSALMS”
James, the half brother of Jesus, wrote (Jas. 5:13): “Is there anyone in good spirits? Let him sing psalms.” What wonderful counsel that is! And the apostle Paul admonished “singing and accompanying yourselves with music in your hearts.” That is the title of the songbook of 128 pages and 119 songs containing words and music written by Jehovah’s witnesses. Regular edition is 20c; deluxe edition, gold-edged and gold-embossed cover, 50c. Accompany yourself with a fine orchestral rendering of all 119 songs on ten monaural 12-inch vinyl long-playing records (33 1/3 r.p.m.), the set for only $8.50. Send today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 10: The Need for Security. Page 493. Songs to Be Used: 72, 44.
September 17: The Way to Security. Page 498. Songs to Be Used: 79, 77.

