Kingdom Proclaimers Report
God’s Name Cleared of Reproach
GOD’S Word, the Bible, says: “Maintain your conduct fine among the nations, that, in the thing in which they are speaking against you as evildoers, they may as a result of your fine works of which they are eyewitnesses glorify God in the day for his inspection.” (1 Peter 2:12) True Christians, therefore, endeavor to maintain fine conduct in order to avoid bringing reproach upon Jehovah’s name.
In a remote area of Zambia called Senanga, a schoolteacher had a radio stolen from his house. Since Jehovah’s Witnesses had been preaching in the area, the man accused them of the theft. He reported the matter to the police, claiming that the Witnesses had stolen his radio. As proof that the Witnesses had been to his house, he produced a tract he had found on the floor. However, the police refused to believe him. They advised him to go and make a more thorough investigation.
The Witnesses who had worked in the teacher’s neighborhood that day were encouraged by the body of elders to go and talk to the teacher about the matter. Some of the brothers went and spoke to him, explaining that they wanted to clear Jehovah’s name of reproach. During their discussion, they told him that they had met a young man in his house and had given a tract to him. From their description, the teacher recognized the man. In fact, they belonged to the same church. The teacher spoke with the young man, but he denied the charges. The teacher then discussed the matter with the young man’s parents and went back home. Within an hour, the young man’s mother returned the stolen radio.
Moved by remorse, the teacher approached the body of elders and asked for forgiveness for making false accusations. The elders accepted his apology but requested that the findings be made public so that everyone would know that the Witnesses were innocent. An announcement was made at the school, thus clearing Jehovah’s name of reproach. Jehovah’s Witnesses can keep on preaching freely in the area.
[Maps/Picture on page 19]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
AFRICA
Zambia
[Credit Line]
Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1997 Digital Wisdom, Inc.

