A New Dimension to Bible Reading
Have you had the pleasure of listening to someone who is skillful in reading from the Bible? A good reader can bring to life the dynamic narratives, heartwarming dialogues, powerful arguments, forceful counsel and a host of other Biblical details to which no casual reading can ever do justice. With this in mind, the Watchtower Society has produced cassette recordings of the entire Christian Greek Scriptures in English, and portions thereof in 10 other languages.
What have been the reactions of those who have obtained copies of the cassettes? “I thought that you wouldn’t get much out of them after hearing them once,” said one woman. “But how wrong I was! I never got tired of the tapes playing over and over, because I truly get more and more out of them.”
Many have commented on how the tapes have helped them to build their appreciation for even familiar Scriptural passages. One person put it this way: “Listening to it over and over again has brought out many fine points in the account that are missed from a reading or an occasional playing of the tape.”
Others felt that listening to the recordings helped them to visualize events and actually feel the impact of what had happened. “It was as if I was there reclining with Jesus Christ at his evening meal . . . and to see Mary perfume the Christ for burial,” wrote an appreciative listener. An 81-year-old woman who has been one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for over 50 years said that listening to the tapes daily made her realize for the first time that Jesus and the apostles were human and had their trials and hardships as we do. This, she said, made her “feel close to them.”
We have heard from another person who, when telling about a visitor who had been studying the Bible for only about three months, said: “I was amazed at his Scriptural knowledge and his ability to recite and quote scriptures in the Bible. It was no surprise when I learned that he would constantly be playing the tape recordings in his car while driving, before he retired at night, and even early in the morning.” Someone else commented that limiting oneself to one tape per week helps in remembering what verses belong to what Bible book.
Many have found the Bible tapes a ready tool in helping them to make the best use of their time. Housewives, especially, have commented many times that with the cassettes they can keep their minds on spiritual things while doing housework or cooking. Those who have to travel to work each day are able to ‘buy out’ the time spent on the road by playing the cassettes in their car. One Witness who was hospitalized for an extended period of time was extremely grateful for the tapes, which she and a “hospital mate,” another Witness, played regularly during their stay.
The apostle Paul tells us: “Faith follows the thing heard. In turn the thing heard is through the word about Christ.” (Romans 10:17) Listening to Bible tapes regularly can, indeed, be an effective way to strengthen your faith.

