From Our Readers
New Age  Thank you very much for the series on the New Age movement. (March 8, 1994) Formerly I probed into information on UFO’s, extraterrestrial life, and reincarnation. I followed courses in Yoga and meditation and received therapy involving hypnotism. Eventually I ran into serious spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical problems and even came under the grip of the demons. The Utopia I so strongly longed for seemed further away than ever. Five and a half years later, I am now serving Jehovah and have been liberated from the darkness of the New Age movement.
E. D., Netherlands
Prior to becoming a Christian, I was involved with the New Age thinking and way of life. Recently my younger sister has expressed the desire to become involved with a group of New Age advocates. So I went over this article with her. She was alarmed at the obvious connection the New Age has with mysticism and the occult. Now she is determined to stay away from New Age thinking.
L. S., England
Your article started off well. Shortly thereafter, though, you state that “to earthling man his way does not belong.” Finally, you state that New Age beliefs can only bring more darkness. Are you saying that we should abandon all idealistic viewpoints and just hope everything works out all right? Just how is it that you come to the conclusion that it is not man’s place to try to make a better world for himself?
A. L., United States
It is the Bible​—not “Awake!”​—that says “to earthling man his way does not belong.” (Jeremiah 10:23) Human efforts to bring about a New Age are thus futile. Even so, true Christians do not ignore today’s problems. By teaching others the principles of God’s Word, Jehovah’s Witnesses have helped millions to ‘benefit themselves’​—economically, physically, and spiritually. (Isaiah 48:17; Matthew 28:19, 20) At the same time, we point others to the real hope of a coming “new heavens and a new earth”​—something that God, not man, will bring about. (2 Peter 3:13)​—ED.
Double Life  Your articles on leading a double life (December 22, 1993, and January 8 and 22, 1994) motivated our 17-​year-​old son to reveal a sin he was involved in for over four years. To all outward appearances, he seemed to be making fine spiritual progress. We were deeply shocked and repulsed by this sin, but we were able to react in a loving and forgiving manner because of your articles.
J. P., United States
I stopped associating with the Christian congregation for more than a year. But those articles were truly encouraging and full of love. As you said, the first step was to approach Jehovah in prayer. It’s very hard, but it has brought me great blessings.
M. G., France
Youths Resist Blood Transfusions  I am 12 years old, and I have just read the series “Youths Who Put God First.” (May 22, 1994) I was very impressed by the courage that these young Christian brothers and sisters showed, facing death with such confidence in Jehovah and in the resurrection. Their courage and faith in Jehovah made me weep with joy.
B. C. R., Spain

