Is $1.50 Too Much?
1 For over a year now the subscription rate for The Watchtower and Awake! has been $1.50 for either magazine for a full year. How do you feel about that price? Do you hesitate to offer subscriptions, feeling $1.50 is too much?
2 Look at it from the standpoint of the householder. Most homes have certain publications that they receive on a subscription basis. Do you know what they are accustomed to paying for them? Monthly magazines that many persons have coming into their homes have subscription rates of $4.97, $7.50, $8.50 and $10.50. Popular weekly news magazines that are received in many homes have subscription rates of $10.00, $12.00 and $14.00 per year. So when you ask $1.50 for a year’s subscription for an excellent magazine that is published twice a month, the price is extremely low.
3 But there is something more to consider. Do you know of any magazine in the world that contains information more important to the householder than what is found in The Watchtower and Awake!? There is none. Why? Because these two magazines are the only ones that direct their readers to the only Source of salvation and to His kingdom as the only true hope for mankind. Because they draw their message from the Bible, what they contain is literally lifesaving.
4 Since this is true, is $1.50 too much to ask? Many persons are Jehovah’s Christian witnesses today because of the fine information published in The Watchtower and Awake! It got them started on the way to eternal life, and it has helped them to stay on that way. Certainly such ones do not feel that $1.50 is too much to ask, do they?
5 Subscriptions can do things that a single piece of literature may not. They are persistent in their efforts to help; again and again the magazines come, trying first in one way and then in another to stimulate interest in learning about Jehovah and his purposes. With sincere interest in the lasting welfare of those to whom we preach, we can help them to benefit from this loving service by enthusiastically encouraging them to subscribe.

