Preparing the Service Meeting
1 As faithful witnesses for Jehovah, we want to have as full a share as possible in preaching the good news of God’s kingdom and making disciples of those who respond favorably to his Word. It is also our desire that our everyday conduct will testify to the good results that come from applying Bible principles. Our weekly service meetings greatly assist us to accomplish this.
2 The presiding overseer is responsible for the service meeting. He should be keenly interested in making it as upbuilding and instructive as possible. He may personally want to take oversight of these meetings each week, making assignments of the various parts and offering suggestions on how to adapt them to local needs, or he may at times share that responsibility with other elders. In any event, it is his responsibility to be sure that the service meetings are properly prepared and presented to the congregation.
3 Elders and ministerial servants are requested to take charge of individual meeting parts. The presiding overseer does not always have to handle the concluding portion; at times he may open the meeting or he may care for a meaty Scriptural discussion in the middle of the meeting. All who are assigned to present material should give careful thought, not merely to coverage, but also to teaching.
4 The material provided in Kingdom Ministry should be covered, but if it does not apply to the circumstances locally, it can simply be mentioned very briefly and then matters of local concern can be developed for the benefit of the congregation. In these cases appropriate instructions should be given to the one handling the part. In this way, each portion of the meeting will be helpful and instructive no matter what the local conditions may be. The body of elders may be aware of a certain situation that needs consideration and this can be given attention when convenient.
5 In harmony with what was stated at our recent district assemblies, you will observe that there are no meeting themes provided in this Kingdom Ministry. This will be true in succeeding issues as well. The theme that will be emphasized throughout the year, when appropriate, is the one that is represented in the yeartext.
6 When demonstrations or discussions are included in the program, any who are in good standing with the congregation, including children, may be invited to participate. If we attend each service meeting with the thought of giving, not merely receiving, how rewarding the meeting will be for us and our brothers as well!

