Promoting Respect for the Divine Name
1 Isn’t it wonderful to have the truth, to be favored with the privilege of knowing Jehovah and blessed with the responsibility of declaring his name throughout all the earth? Could there be anything more satisfying, more worth while?​—Ps. 148:13.
2 During September, we are featuring the Evolution book in our field ministry. Why? Many people wonder where man came from, why wickedness is permitted and how much longer it will be before a real change is brought about. In giving the answers, the Evolution book promotes respect for Jehovah as the Creator.
3 Schoolchildren returning to class, parents interested in protecting their young ones against the God-dishonoring evolution doctrine, yes, each of us, old and young alike, can promote respect for Jehovah’s name by making good use of the Evolution book.
4 Additionally, you may find it advantageous to have with you others of the 25c publications as you share in the field ministry during September. Feel free to offer any of them when you realize that they could help a certain householder. Or, if you prefer to present the ‘Know Jehovah’ book you may do that. All these publications promote respect for Jehovah.
5  Another way in which each one of us can promote respect for the divine name is by our conduct. When one does not curse, steal, engage in immoral sexual practices, is not hateful or oppressive in his dealings with others, such a one is different, isn’t he? Just think of the respect promoted for Jehovah’s name by our everyday manner of living as Christian witnesses of Jehovah.
6 Further, since Jehovah is a clean, orderly God, one who is wholesome and pure in every respect, he encourages us to be the same. (2 Cor. 7:1) In this regard, have you stopped to look at your Kingdom Hall lately? Is it clean? Does it need repair? Do we treat this property with respect, with concern? We should.
7 And what about our homes and our persons? Do they reflect and promote respect for the God we worship? What about our book bags, our Bibles, our literature and the clothes we wear at our meetings and in the field ministry? They do not have to be new, but surely they can be clean and neat.
8 When we finish our work in September, what will we be doing in October? Promoting respect for the divine name by making special use of Awake! magazine. During October with each new subscription a free bound book will be given to the subscriber, instead of the usual booklets. The books that will be used in this way are the 50c ones that were copyrighted in 1961 or earlier. That includes such fine books as “Let Your Name Be Sanctified,” “Your Will Be Done on Earth,” “The Kingdom Is at Hand” and others. As you know, these books can aid sincere persons to learn the truth, and we would like to see them put to good use. We encourage the brother who cares for the literature in each congregation to lay these books out on the counter so the publishers can see what is available.
9 Imagine it! A full year’s subscription for one of the finest magazines in the world, along with a bound book, for just $1.50. In our day, with soaring prices, whoever heard of such a thing? We have, because we have something that people need, and we earnestly want them to have it.
10 When sending to the Society new subscriptions obtained during October, congregations will remit $1.40. This is also the amount that congregation publishers will turn in to the brother who handles the subscriptions. What about the cost of the book? If publishers show their subscription slip to the one caring for literature supplies, he will give them free one of the books regularly placed for 50c​—any one that is in stock. Pioneers will continue to remit 75c for new subscriptions, and during October the same arrangement for replacing books that are given as premiums will apply to them as applies to congregation publishers. Then at the end of the month, the congregation may request full credit from the Society for all these books given free with new subscriptions, and the account will be credited at the regular congregation rate. On the Remittance and Credit Request form, a separate entry should be made, reading: “Books given free with subscriptions,” and then the total number should be shown; this total will include all books given for this purpose to congregation publishers as well as pioneers.
11 How wonderful it is that Jehovah has allowed us lowly persons of the earth to honor and promote respect for his name!
[Blurb on page 1]
Promote respect for the divine name.
[Blurb on page 8]
Is your family study regular and meaningful?

