Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 10
10 min: Song 46. Introduction, text, comments and Theocratic News items.
 3 min: August accounts report.
20 min: “Promoting Respect for the Divine Name.” Cover by questions and answers. May want to demonstrate where and how to offer book, using talking points in “Evolution” book as suggested in paragraphs 2 and 3.
12 min: “Preparing the Service Meeting.” Question-and-answer coverage.
15 min: Concluding comments. Include discussion of principles in article “Woman’s Regard for Headship​—How Demonstrated.” (July 15, 1972, “Watchtower,” pp. 445-447) Make sure all understand the occasions when our sisters should wear a head covering. Song 114.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 17
 7 min: Song 61. Introduction, text and comments. Include coverage of Question Box material.
28 min: The Need for Self-Control. Questions based on “Aid,” p. 1468. Audience discussion using questions here. (Very brief introduction: If we are to love Jehovah with all of our heart, soul, mind and strength, we need to control every fiber of our being. We need to keep the motivations of our heart in check, control our thinking faculties and direct our strength and activity in a way that is beneficial. We need self-control to serve Jehovah whole-souled and continue to have his approval and blessing.) (1) What is self-control? (“Aid,” p. 1468) (2) How have we benefited from Jehovah’s exercise of self-control toward mankind? (Jer. 18:7-10; 2 Pet. 3:9) (3) How can Jesus’ example of self-control encourage us in the event we are dealt with unjustly at work or in school? Also, what circumstances that arise in field service call for self-control? (1 Pet. 2:21-23) (4) When situations arise in the home that cause us to become irritated, why should our way of handling matters be completely different from that of worldlings? (Develop with examples.) (Gal. 5:22, 23; 2 Tim. 3:1-7) (5) Why would a parent’s loss of self-control when correcting a child diminish the value of the discipline? (Eph. 6:4; Heb. 12:9-11) (6) As imperfect humans, what must we do in order to keep our sinful inclinations under control? (1 Cor. 9:25-27; 2 Pet. 1:5-8) (7) Why is it especially vital that overseers or elders have self-control? (Titus 1:8-11; 2 Tim. 2:23-26) (8) How does the case of King David illustrate that a long record of faithful service to Jehovah is not enough to maintain self-control? (2 Sam. 11:2-4) (9) When would it be advisable for a man or a woman to marry, and why? (1 Cor. 7:9, 32-38) (10) How can one keep passionate desires in check when one is too young to get married? (Rom. 12:12; Phil. 4:8, 9) End with encouragement to cultivate self-control in every aspect of our lives.
10 min: To Conform or Not to Conform. (August 1, 1972, “Watchtower,” pp. 473-476)
(4 min.) Discussion between two teen-agers, one of whom initially has poor attitude toward Scriptural counsel in article. Make discussion applicable to local circumstances. Excellent information. Most appropriate as young folks return to school.
(6 min.) One of elders reasons with audience on value of teen-age articles. How many parents have actually discussed them with their teen-age sons and daughters? How many articles have been discussed​—three, four or more? (No need to get show of hands; just raise these questions.) Have had twelve articles now. When will they discuss the remaining ones? (Why not resolve in your heart right now when you can do this?) The information is most vital. Some of it may be hazy in the mind of young person if discussed many months ago. It is good to review this information from time to time. Need to go over often to compete with pressures exerted daily by old system through schoolmates, neighbors, etc. One youngster said regarding these articles: “Although I understood what was said in these articles, my appreciation for them was enhanced greatly when my parents sat down and discussed them with me.” Could review some of the main thoughts in these articles during the past year and show how timely and encouraging the information is. Select what is most appropriate for young folks locally.
15 min: Concluding comments, Read (as time permits) and discuss “Organization” book, chapter 1, paragraphs 1-7. Include a few key scriptures. Also, announce arrangements for series of talks from “Paradise​—Theocracy” book. Song 75.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 24
 5 min: Song 113. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: Reporting Our Preaching and Disciple-making Activity.
(3 min.) Proper View of Reports. Talk based on “Organization” book, pp. 127, 128. Highlight reasons for reporting as well as benefits from reporting.
(12 min.) Audience discussion on following points based on “Organization” book, pp. 126, 127: (1)  When are reports to be turned in? (2) What should be reported relative to hours in field service? (For example, witnessing done during the noon hour at place of secular employment, witnessing to relatives, to neighbors, etc. Show that it is not a matter of our keeping track of these things so as to get “credit” for them, but it is simply that the Society would very much appreciate having a full report.) (3) What may be reported as return visits? (Include such things as the writing of letters to give a witness, making phone calls to give a witness or to make an appointment for a Bible study or to take a newly interested one to a congregation meeting, delivering a magazine, etc.) (4) What magazine placements may be reported? (In addition to those distributed on the street, from house to house, etc., encourage the brothers to include back issues that are given away free, perhaps being left in the door when someone is not at home. At the present time some of our brothers seem to have the idea that it is not right to count some of these things, but it would be appreciated if they would include them all so that our reports will be complete.) (5) How and when are Bible studies to be counted?
End this discussion by making the following points: Reports, when submitted, provide encouragement for all of us because they help us to see that prophecy is being fulfilled, that the good news is being preached and that the “other sheep” are being gathered.
15 min: Presentation for “Awake!” campaign.
(3 min.) Chairman: During October the “Awake!” magazine will be featured again and we will offer a subscription for $1.50, and give a 50 cent bound book free with it. Feel free to use any Scriptural presentation that appeals to you. It may be, however, that you would like to use the following presentation.
(12 min.) Chairman discusses presentation with audience and then someone is called upon to demonstrate. Theme: “What Does It All Mean?” After introducing yourself you might say: “I’m calling to bring to your attention the significance of world conditions. Things are happening so fast in the world today, a person hardly knows what to think, isn’t that true? [Pause to allow for householder’s reply.] Would you like to see better conditions? [Comment briefly on world and/​or local conditions.] The Bible foretold these very conditions. [Paraphrase Luke 21:10 and 11a; you may also consider verse 26a, if you wish. But what does it mean? Note Jesus’ words at Luke 21:28. [Read.] The Bible shows that some would scoff at Jesus’ statement, but note the warning recorded at 1 Thessalonians 5:2, 3. [Read.] So the present system is to be a going concern according to the Bible when Jehovah’s sudden destruction comes upon it. This news magazine is specially designed to alert you to fulfillments of Bible prophecy so you may know where we are in the stream of time and what one can personally do to gain God’s approval.” Offer subscription.
10 min: “Is $1.50 Too Much?” Questions and answers.
15 min: Concluding comments. Read (as time permits) and discuss “Organization” book, chapter 1, paragraphs 8-12; read some scriptures. Encourage brothers to come prepared to discuss October 8 “Awake!” at next service meeting. Song 58.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 1
10 min: Song 69. Introduction, text and comments, and brief comments on Branch Letter.
12 min: Presenting the Good News. Discuss scriptures in article.
15 min: Discussion of October 8 special “Awake!” All encouraged to comment as to importance of material, also good points to show to householders. This should prove most beneficial.
13 min: Talk on need for vigorous field ministry. Stress house-to-house preaching. Base thoughts on “Organization” book, pp. 114-116.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include some thoughts from the June 15, 1972, “Watchtower” article “Trust in God, Not Your Own Understanding,” pp. 363-365. Highlight the danger of marrying an unbeliever, also importance of being confident in God’s righteousness. Song 32.

