From Our Readers
Education  I just graduated from a Nigerian university and missed having top grades by a margin of 2 percent. I was somewhat depressed. So when you published the article “Keeping Education in Its Place” (August 22, 1994) and showed that education should not be pursued for the sake of shining scholastically, I began to see things in their proper perspective. While my professors have encouraged me to pursue postgraduate courses, I am giving matters serious thought in the light of what I have learned.
G. J., Nigeria
I am 14 years old and under a lot of pressure to pursue higher education. With the help of your article, I have decided what I would like to do. I want to be a pioneer [full-​time evangelizer], and if I need extra training to get a job, I would like to go to a vocational school and learn photography.
H. O., United States
I chose not to obtain supplementary education. I prefer to use that time to teach others about our Creator. People are usually amazed at how much I know about a variety of subjects. They ask, “Are you in college?” I tell them I have learned what I know from the Bible and the literature provided by the Watch Tower Society.
M. L., United States
Your article showed the need of considering the pros and cons of supplementary education. I felt the need to go to school again but did not want to neglect spiritual activities. I explained my schedule of Christian meetings to the school secretary, and he arranged my classes so that I could attend all my meetings.
M. F. S., Brazil
Weaker Vessel?  Thank you for the enlightening article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: The ‘Weaker Vessel’​—An Insult to Women?” (October 8, 1994) Every male should read this article, as it is so beautifully laid out.
G. B., United States
I never clearly understood the Bible’s expression at 1 Peter 3:7 about women being ‘weaker vessels.’ I always thought that women were lesser creatures, and I grew up seeing men treating women with very little respect. But that article straightened out my thinking.
T. C., United States
Opposite Sex  Thank you so much for the “Young People Ask . . .” articles “Why Is It So Hard to Keep My Mind Off the Opposite Sex?” and “How Can I Get My Mind off the Opposite Sex?” (July 22, 1994; August 8, 1994) It was nice to know that I am not crazy, since at age 12 I have strong feelings for a boy I know. The second article helped me to stop thinking about him so much. I told an older Christian sister in my congregation, and she helped me.
P. Z., United States
The part on masturbation hit home. I thought masturbating would help me cool the flames of sexual desire, but it only makes it worse. I pray Jehovah will forgive me for being involved in this disgusting practice.
P. M., United States
The article came at the right time for me. In school the number-​one topic is sex. There is a girl at school who attends the same congregation I do. I find her to be very intelligent, clever, and pretty. The article helped me to avoid constantly thinking of her and looking for her.
M. F., Germany

