Just Ahead​—The Best of Times!
ACCORDING to the Bible, God intended that the human race live forever in an earth-​wide paradise. (Genesis 1:28; 2:8, 9) Obviously, we have veered far from God’s original purpose. What happened?
The first human couple disobeyed God, resulting in imperfection and death for themselves and all their offspring. (Genesis 2:16, 17; 3:6, 7, 17-19; Romans 6:23) The Bible explains: “Sin came into the world through one man, and his sin brought death with it. As a result, death has spread to the whole human race because everyone has sinned.”​—Romans 5:12, Today’s English Version.
Despite this situation, God’s purpose remains unchanged. “My word is like the snow and the rain that come down from the sky to water the earth. They make the crops grow and provide seed for planting and food to eat. So also will be the word that I speak . . . It will do everything I send it to do.” (Isaiah 55:10, 11, Today’s English Version.) What does God promise to do for us?
BLESSINGS UNDER GOD’S KINGDOM
Eternal Life
“The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”​—Psalm 37:29.
“Death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Revelation 21:4.
Security
“Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more; and you will certainly give attention to his place, and he will not be.”​—Psalm 37:10.
Satisfying Work
“People will build houses and get to live in them​—they will not be used by someone else. They will plant vineyards and enjoy the wine​—it will not be drunk by others. Like trees, my people will live long lives. They will fully enjoy the things that they have worked for.”​—Isaiah 65:21, 22, TEV.
Health
“No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ The people that are dwelling in the land will be those pardoned for their error.”​—Isaiah 33:24.
No Disabilities
“The eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped. At that time the lame one will climb up just as a stag does, and the tongue of the speechless one will cry out in gladness.”​—Isaiah 35:5, 6.
Abundance of Food
“There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”​—Psalm 72:16.
Peace
“Come, you people, behold the activities of Jehovah, how he has set astonishing events on the earth. He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”​—Psalm 46:8, 9.
WHAT YOU NEED TO DO
What must you do to enjoy these blessings that God has promised? The Bible answers at John 17:3: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” Yes, by learning about God​—his name, his purpose, and his laws—​we gain a sense of direction. Furthermore, by learning about Jesus​—his life on earth, his ransom sacrifice for our sins, his position as Ruler of God’s Kingdom—​we can have confidence that God’s purpose will be fulfilled.
God’s toleration of wickedness has served to demonstrate beyond all doubt that man, like a traveler in an unfamiliar area, cannot direct his own steps. (Jeremiah 10:23) Indeed, through a multitude of governments​—from dictatorships to democracies—​man has tried every route imaginable. Yet, his success has been limited at best.
How thankful we can be that God’s Kingdom will answer the prayer uttered by millions: “Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:10) The blessings of God’s Kingdom will be enjoyed on earth when soon it replaces all human governments. The Bible promises: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.
What a grand time that will be! A knowledge of the Bible can indeed infuse us with hope. Yes, these are troubled times​—and getting worse. But that only proves that we are living in the last days of this wicked system of things. Soon these worst of times will be superseded by the best of times under God’s Kingdom!

