
Help the Householder to Reason




 1. Which approach in the ministry is the best?
1 Which approach in the ministry is more effective—one that is dogmatic or one that helps the householder to reason and draw the correct conclusions? The apostle Paul used the latter when speaking to Jews in Thessalonica, and “as a result some of them became believers.” (Acts 17:2-4) What is involved in reasoning with others?
 2. How may we imitate the example of Paul when we share the good news?
2 Consider Feelings and Background: A reasoning approach takes into account the feelings of those in the territory. Paul started a discourse to unbelieving Greeks at the Areopagus by mentioning things they likely knew and accepted. (Acts 17:22-31) Therefore, when preparing your presentation, consider the common beliefs and prejudices of people in your territory. (1 Cor. 9:19-22) If the householder raises an objection, try to find common ground, and build your conversation on that.
 3. How can we reason more effectively with others by the skillful use of questions?
3 Use Questions Skillfully: We cannot give a traveler directions to help him reach his destination unless we know his current location. Similarly, we cannot help a householder to reach the proper conclusion unless we know his current opinion. Before reasoning with a listener, Jesus often asked questions to find out the person’s thinking. For example, when someone asked Jesus, “By doing what shall I inherit everlasting life?,” Jesus sought the man’s viewpoint before answering. (Luke 10:25-28) On another occasion, when Peter gave a wrong answer, Jesus skillfully used questions to correct his thinking. (Matt. 17:24-26) Therefore, if the householder asks a question or expresses a wrong opinion, we can use questions to help him to reason on matters.
 4. Why should we try to help the householder to reason?
4 When we help the householder to reason, we imitate the Great Teacher, Jesus, as well as other skillful evangelizers in the first century. We dignify the householder and show him respect. (1 Pet. 3:15) As a result, he may be more inclined to allow us to return.




