page 2 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



R1486 : page 2 

YOUR PROMPT RESPONSES. 



Thanks, dear friends, for the promptness with 
which so many of you are responding to our 
request to know whether or not you desire the 
WATCH TOWER visits during 1893. Your welcome 
letters are just pouring in upon us. This 
together with the other extra work of this season 
has quite overpowered our office force. 
All are busy, but all are insufficient. We usually 
send a card of acknowledgment for all 
sums of two dollars or more where books, etc., 



are not ordered (leaving the date on the address-tag 

to indicate the receipts of smaller 

sums). But as we are quite unable to do 

this at present we know that you will kindly 

excuse us. We cannot at present find time even 

to give the ordinary newspaper receipt on the address-tag 

this receipt we will endeavor to give 

to all on our next issue. 

Just a word of answer now, therefore, to all 
your letters at once, to say that we greatly enjoy 
the testimonies which so many of them give, 
of your clearness of mental vision on spiritual 
subjects; of your devotion to the Lord, and to 
the Truth, and to us, as their servants and yours. 
God bless you! 

The donations to the Tract Fund accompanying 
the above mentioned letters (which must 
be acknowledged in like manner) have been 
unusually large, and the newly filled out "Good 
Hopes" for 1893 are very numerous. The interest 
thus manifested is greatly appreciated by us, 
as well as by the Master, in whose name we receive 
and in whose service we use them. Be assured 
that every self-denial of an earthly sort these may 
cost you will be more than compensated for in 
spiritual favors. We regard this increase in 
your free-will offerings as a sign, either of much 
more prosperous times than before or else of a 
richer spiritual growth in appreciation of the 
lengths and breadths, the heights and depths of 
the love of God. We believe it to be the latter; 
and we praise God on your behalf.— 
Phil. 4:17. 

THE PREVAILING TYPE OF PREACHING. 



The Rev. Robert R. Proudfit, of Highlands, 
N.J., has withdrawn from the Presbyterian 
Church. His reasons are these: 

"While humbly receiving the Scriptures of 
the Old and New Testaments as containing the 
Word of God, I decline to subscribe to a merely 
human declaration of their contents, even 
though that declaration be so able and so venerable 
as the Westminster standards. 

"I further decline to be called 'reverend' 
as being too much like being called 'rabbi,' 
against which our Lord expressly enjoined his 
disciples. 

"Again I decidedly prefer not to be identified 
with any particular denomination of the 
followers of Christ, such names and the spirit 
which they engender seeming to me unscriptural 
and baneful rather than beneficial. It is 



sufficient for me to be a 'companion of all 
them that fear God.' 

"Finally, I suspect that the world and the 
visible church are somewhat surfeited with 
preaching, at least of the prevailing type. Like 
the army of the Potomac early in 1862, the 
church has been abundantly, perhaps excessively, 
organized and drilled."— Selected. 

R1491 : page 2 

BACK TO THE HOLY LAND. 



There is a report from Jerusalem that Baron 
Edmond de Rothschild has completed negotiations 
with the Turkish government for the 
establishment of Jewish colonies on the Rothschild 
lands in Palestine, and also for permitting 
Russian Jews to settle there.— New York Sun. 



page 2 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, 
Arch Street, Allegheny, Pa. Readers and friends 
will be warmly welcomed. Preaching in English 
every Sunday afternoon at 3:30 o'clock. 

Preaching in German at 10:30 a.m. 



R1485 : page 3 

VOL. XIV. JANUARY 1, 1893. NO. 1. 

RETROSPECTIVE AND PROSPECTIVE. 



At the threshold of each new year it seems 
but natural to look about us— backward at the 
year just gone, and forward to the year drawing 
on— reviewing our conflicts and God's mercies 
past and, with hope as our telescope, prospecting 
the future. 

From your letters and otherwise, dear readers, 
fellow-servants of our King and fellow-heirs 
of his glory, we know something of the trials 
temporal and spiritual which have bestrewn your 
paths; but we know much more of how the 
grace of God has blessed you all spiritually 



through Christ. And we earnestly trust that, 
with us of the TOWER Office, you can apply to 
yourselves the words of the poet— 
"Looking back, I praise the way 
God has led me, led me day by day." 

Our day is peculiar in many respects. Not 
only is it a day of blessings, advantages and 
conveniences beyond any other, but it is a day 
of dissatisfaction and discontent beyond any 
other. Not only is it a day of greater light and 
understanding respecting the Lord's plan, but 
it is a day in which the great Enemy of the 
truth is permitted to spread before the awakening 
nominal and real Church more sophistical 
delusions in the name of "new light" than 
ever before. Not only is it true that a man or 
woman has five times the opportunity for usefulness 
in God's service, ever before enjoyed, 
but it is also true that business, worldly pleasure 
and ambition are five times as active and 
powerful to keep us back from this possible 
usefulness. It behooves us, therefore, not only 
to get awake to our present privileges, blessings 
and opportunities, but to keep awake to 
them. He who does not realize that this will 
require a constant battle with selfishness, within 
and without— with the World, the Flesh and 
the Devil— is very liable to fall into the snare 
in learning of it. 

Nevertheless it is possible, even now, for the 
intelligent Christian to have absolute contentment, 
to escape the errors of our day and to 
keep himself actively in the love and service of 
God. This blessing, with the peace that passeth 
all understanding, is, however, only for the 
few: for those whose faith is resting in the 
perfect work of Christ— in the ransom which 
he gave— and who are fully consecrated, heart 
and body, to the Master's will and work and way 
in every matter. Such he does not leave in 
darkness and doubt in this day when the hearts 
of the worldly-wise are "failing them for fear 
and for looking after those things coming upon 
the earth," but to them are fulfilled the promises 
—"He will show you things to come;" "Ye 
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make 
you free"— free from the bondage of error, 
free from the bondage of fear, and from those 
other bondages of creeds of men and of social 
and religious societies into which fear is driving 
many under the plea of "Union." 

But while we do well, dear friends, to remember 
gratefully the mercies of the past year and 
to rejoice in the grace sufficient with which it 
was so richly supplied, it is wise for us to look 
carefully to our steps for the year beginning. 



R1485 : page 4 

While we did not fall last year, some did. Our 
trials and testings may be more severe during 
the year beginning, and unless we feel our own 
insufficiency and look to our Master continually, 
we shall be liable to depart from humility, 
to become puffed up with pride and haughtiness, 
the sure precursors of a fall. And again, if 
we look merely to our own weaknesses we will 
become so discouraged as to yield readily to 
the adversary's assaults. Our only safe position 
will be to feel humble and to realize our 
insufficiency, but to trust implicitly and always 
to him who has promised that he will never 
leave us, nor forsake us. (If there be any breach 
between us, if any leaving and forsaking, it will 
be on our part, not his.) We can safely trust 
our all to him who assures us that "All things 
shall work together for good to them that love 
God (with all their hearts)— to those called according 
to his purpose." We need have no 
fear of the ultimate results, so long as we find our 
wills fully submitted to our Master's will, and 
our hands and thoughts filled with his work. 
We may have full confidence, and may rest in 
peace upon the promise, "He will not suffer you 
to be tempted above that ye are able, but will, with 
the temptation, provide also a way of escape." 

"Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary, 
the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, 
seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist 
[by standing] steadfast in the faith, knowing 
that similar afflictions are being accomplished 
in your brethren in the world."— 1 Pet. 5:8. 

The more we realize that we are in the harvest 
—the winnowing and testing time— the 
more we should each seek to follow the Apostle's 
advice, "Make straight paths for your feet lest 
that which is lame be turned out of the way." 
Each of us has learned some of his weak or 
vulnerable points of character, and each should 
seek, not only to strengthen these weak points 
but also specially to fortify himself against 
temptations and besetments of the adversary 
upon those weakest points, lest he thereby be 
turned out of the straight and narrow way. 

This means a circumspection of your affairs 
in general: home affairs, business affairs, all, 
should be ordered and systematized with a view 
to protect your own weak points to the Lord's 
praise and to the good of yourself and others. 
See that your heart is fully given up to the 
King, and then, with the wisdom which he will 
supply those who seek it, divide your time and 



talents among your various duties so as to spend 
and be spent more to the honor of the Lord 
and to the service of his truth, and you will 
find yourself liberally repaid in spiritual favors. 

We suggest to all WATCH TOWER readers as 
a motto and watch-word for 1 893 the words of 
the great Apostle Paul— 

"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you 
like men, be strong. Let all your deeds be done 
inlove."-lCor. 16:13,14. 

THE POLITICAL OUTLOOK. 



Dissatisfaction and unrest tell the story of 
the entire civilized world. The growth of intelligence 
is making the world more unhappy 
daily, because selfishness is the basis or principle 
upon which every fresh degree of enlightenment 
must be erected; for the world knows 
not of the other basis, upon which the new 
nature builds, the basis of Love. Consequently, 
intelligence makes possible gigantic Trusts, 
Pools and swindling schemes on the part of 
many who occupy places of power; and the 
same intelligence permits those less favorably 
circumstanced to detect the frauds, to see their 
own comparative disadvantage so far as a rapid 
or fraudulent accumulation of wealth is concerned. 
Hence the gradual unrest. None but 
real saints of God know what full rest there is 
in Christ— the result of having the Christ-basis 
—Love for God and men— substituted for 
selfishness. 

We clip the following on this subject from 
a New York Tribune editorial, and call special 
attention to its closing sentence:— 

"And yet how far from realization is this 
noble idea of peace to-day. That Europe is 
an armed camp is a hackneyed truism. England 
holds millions of Oriental peoples under her 
sway, not by the bond of brotherhood, but by 
the iron hand of force. France is rent into 
factions by a great national scandal, in which 
many of her honored sons figure as despoilers 

R1486 : page 4 

of the widow and orphan. The tragedy of the 
great anti-Semitic persecution is not yet played 
out in Russia, and in some other European 

R1486 : page 5 

countries the echoes of its cry of hate are 



ominously distinct. Nor has the shadow of 

gaunt famine yet ceased to fall athwart the land 

of the Muscovite. At the same time, a social 

unrest unparalleled in history has taken possession 

of the nations of Europe, and has found 

a lodgment even in our own land. Its dominant 

note is a profound dissatisfaction with 

things as they are, not always rational or intelligent, 

but based on certain facts which no 

candid investigator will deny. This unrest is 

constantly leading to the social insurrection 

known as anarchy, and to the industrial wars 

known as lockouts and strikes. It may not be 

that the present social system is disintegrating; 

but it is certainly true that it contains within 

itself movements and elements which are symptomatic 

of a change in its character. And 

whether that change shall come by evolution 

or revolution depends largely on the wisdom 

and discretion of those who now hold the 

places of influence and power in the world. 

These are the facts that confront us this morning 

as we repeat the angels' song of peace and 

good will. Does not the situation suggest to 

us rather those words of the Master, recorded 

in holy Writ, I came not to send peace, but 

a sword'? 

"Nor is the prophetic dream of brotherhood, 
for which Christmas stands, realized in the 
churches. The great Roman Catholic Communion 
in this country is stirred to its depths 
by controversies that vitally affect its very life 
and character. Every Protestant denomination 
is touched with the same unrest that is affecting 
social life. Old traditions and dogmas are 
in process of reconstruction, and new views are 
forcing themselves to the front. As a result of 
all this, there is strife to-day between those 
who join in singing the praises of the Babe in 
Bethlehem, and multitudes of good men are 
arrayed against each other in a deadly conflict 
of opinion." 



After the conflict will come rest, and after 
the battle will come peace. Happy those who, 
in this enigmatic age, in spite of so much that 
is calculated to puzzle and sadden us, have 
such a clear prevision of the future that they 
can see the coming triumph of truth over error, 
of good over evil, in every land and clime." 



R1486 : page 5 



EXALTATION VIA HUMILITY. 



"Let him that would be greatest among you be servant 
of all. ...One is your master, even Christ, and all 
ye are brethren. "--Matt. 23:10,11. 

Pride is selfishness gone to seed. The selfish 
spirit greedily gathers to itself as much as 
possible of all that it esteems good and valuable 
—wealth, learning, honor, fame and distinction 
among men. A measure of success in 
the acquisition of these treasures further leads 
the selfish soul to a feeling of self-complacency, 
independence and indifference to the well-being 
of others, which, gradually but rapidly developing 
into arrogant and self-assertive pride, 
will continue to ripen with every gleam of the 
sunlight of temporal prosperity. As selfishness 
continues to ripen it swells itself to ridiculous 
proportions and delights to vaunt itself, and 
gloats over its imagined importance and worthiness 
of honor and praise. 

Who can love such a disposition? It is utterly 
unworthy in all eyes save its own. 
No wonder, then, that it is written, "God 
resisteth the proud and giveth his favors to the 
humble." And again, "Pride goeth before 
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall." 
How could it be otherwise? for these inflated 
values must at some time come down to a solid 

R1487 : page 5 

basis: wind will not always pass current for 
worth, and the punctured bubbles of earthly 
vanity will reveal the true status of every individual. 
And well will it be in the cases of 
those in whom the humbling realization does 
not awaken a spirit of rebellion and strife 
against God, which must inevitably end either 
in contrition or in destruction. 

How much easier and how much wiser is the 
course of humility. The humble spirit seeketh 
not its own, is not puffed up, and does not attempt 
to speculate on inflated values, does not 
think of self more highly than it ought to 
think, but thinks soberly— neither overrating 
nor underrating its own acquirements or 
achievements. Humility strives always to do 
business on a solid basis, though it strives lawfully 
to acquire a real worthiness and to achieve 
the true glory of the divine commendation and 
favor. 



The man who underrates his worth comes 
much nearer the truth than the man who overrates; 
for the fact is that no member of the 

R1487 : page 6 

fallen race, however favorably he may compare 

with some of his fellows more bruised by the 

fall, has anything whereof to boast. Consider, 

for instance, how meager is the aggregate of 

human knowledge in every direction. As a 

race we are unable to trace our own history for 

centuries from the beginning, or to account 

for our origin, or to prognosticate our destiny. 

We are unable to fully comprehend the deep 

philosophy of our physical and mental organisms. 

There are mysteries within us and all 

around us which the wisest men cannot fathom; 

and only those narrow souls whose world of 

thought is bounded by the horizon of their own 

temporal interests ever vaunt their learning or 

wisdom, or feel that they have aught of which to 

boast. Their fellow-men may call them great 

and wise and reverend, but they know too well 

how small and ignorant they are and how unworthy 

of reverence, realizing that beyond the 

ken of their short vision are vast unexplored 

fields of knowledge. The truly noble soul feels 

humbled upon the borders of the vast unknown, 

thankfully accepts the divine revelation as to 

his nature, origin, destiny, etc., and patiently 

awaits the Lord's good time for a fuller understanding 

of all the mysteries of his wondrous 

grace. Pride of wealth or of fame is of still more 

ignoble character. Wealth selfishly hoarded 

and enjoyed certainly adds no degree of merit 

to the possessor, whether he inherited or acquired 

it; and fame among fallen men only 

proves that he who gained it has not to any 

considerable extent outstripped the popular limit 

of advancement. At best he is only abreast 

of his times. The man who has outstripped 

the current of popular thought is never a popular 

or famous man. Every such one has had 

to attest his true moral courage by facing popular 

opposition and enduring the popular reproach; 

or, in other words, by humbling himself. 

In view of these considerations we see how 
just and wise is the divine rule for abasing the 
proud and exalting the humble, and how sound 
our Lord's counsel to his disciples, to cultivate 
the spirit of humility and to avoid even the appearance 
of pride. Observing the growth and 
manifestation of this spirit among the Pharisees, 
who did all their works to be seen of men, 
who loved the uppermost rooms at feasts and 



the chief seats in the synagogues, and to be 
called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, he said, "But be 
not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master, 
even Christ; and all ye are brethren"— or, in 
the language of to-day, Be not ye called Reverend 
Doctors of Divinity, and let there be no 
distinctions of clergy and laity; for one is your 
truly reverend Lord and instructor, even Christ, 
and all ye are brethren. "Let him that would 
be greatest among you be servant of all;" for 
the divine rule is that "whosoever shall exalt 
himself shall be abased; and he that shall 
humble himself shall be exalted." 

God's plan, viewed as a whole, shows that 
the exaltation of any individual or class of his 
creatures is always for the purpose of blessing 
others who are not so exalted. Thus, for instance, 
the exaltation of our Lord Jesus and his 
Church is for the blessing of all others; so also 
was the election and special favor to Israel to 
result in blessings to the nations not so favored. 

Such a rule, it will readily be seen, is the 
prompting of the highest benevolence and of 
the fatherly love of God for all his creatures 
of every name and order, and manifests the 
depth of his wisdom as well as his love, both in 
rewarding the truly worthy and in bringing 
righteous and benevolent power forward for the 
accomplishment of righteous and benevolent 
ends. Thus in benevolent service and mutual 
love he will in due time bind together in one the 
whole family in heaven and in earth, through 
the mediation and service of the greatest of all 
servants, Jesus Christ. 

Let us heed this counsel of the Master, and 
let us humble ourselves under the mighty hand 
of God, that he may exalt us in due time. 
(1 Pet. 5:6.) We have already done so to some 
extent in refusing to own as our masters the 
various heads of the great nominal church. We 
own neither Luther, nor Calvin, nor Knox, 
nor Wesley, nor Campbell, nor any other man 
or body of men, as our master; nor do we own 
the pope of Rome as our pope, our Father: 
God is our father, and his anointed Son is our 
Lord and head. To them, and not to our brethren, 
let us look for the reward of faithfulness: 
"For," says the Apostle (Heb. 6:10), "God 

R1487 : page 7 

is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor 
of love which ye have shown toward his name, 
in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do 
minister." 
It is indeed no easy matter to tread the pathway 



of humility, to continually check the human 

aspirations and to keep the sacrifice on 

the altar until it is fully consumed. But thus 

it is that we are to work out our own salvation 

to the high calling with fear and trembling, lest 

we come short of worthiness for the prize of 

the high calling promised to the faithful overcomers 

who tread closely in the footsteps of 

our blessed Forerunner,— who was meek and 

lowly of heart. -Phil. 2:8,12. 

It is when we are thus humble and faithful 
that the Lord makes us his chosen vessels 
to bear his name to others. Thus emptied of 
self, he can fill us with his spirit and with his 
truth, and we can go forth strong in the Lord 
of hosts and in his mighty power to do valiant 
service as soldiers of the cross. 



R1491 : page 7 

AT CLOSE OF DAY. 



If you sit down at set of sun, 

And count the acts that you have done, 

And, counting, find 
One self-denying act, one word 
That eased the heart of him who heard, 

One glance most kind, 
That fell like sunshine where it went— 
Then you may count that day well spent. 

But if, through all the livelong day, 
You've cheered no heart by yea or nay; 

If through it all 
You've nothing done that you can trace, 
That brought the sunshine to one face; 

No act most small, 
That helped some soul at trifling cost- 
Then count that day as worse than lost. 
—Selected. 



R1487 : page 7 
IN OUR DAY. 



"Beware, therefore, lest that come upon you which is 
spoken of in the prophets: Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, 
and perish; for I work a work in your days, a work 



which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare 
it unto you. "--Acts 13:40,41; Isa. 29:14; Hab. 1:5. 

This prophecy was one of sufficient importance 
to be recorded by two of the Lord's 
prophets, Isaiah and Habakkuk; and from the 
Apostle Paul's reference to it in speaking to 
the people of his day, which was the end or 
harvest of the Jewish age, we see that it had an 
application to that peculiar time. And since 
that age with its harvest and all its peculiar 
circumstances was, as we have seen (MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter vii.), a type of 
the Gospel age and its harvest, we recognize 
this prophecy, as well as the other prophetic 
features of the context, as having a yet fuller 
and more special application to the present 
time— the harvest period of the Gospel age. 

It is true to-day, as it was in the harvest of 
the Jewish age, that there are many despisers of 
the truth— especially of the truth due and now 
coming to light in this, our day. But, nevertheless, 
the Lord's great work goes steadily forward: 
he is doing "his work, his strange work, 
and bringing to pass his act, his strange act." 
(Isa. 28:21,22.) It is indeed a strange work 
to those unacquainted with the Lord's plan, 
which sets aside all human theories and plans, 
and pursues a course in direct opposition to 
them all. The world looks on and beholds 
this work of the Lord, and with fear and trembling 
as to the final outcome they regard its 
wonderful progress. And not only the world, 
but the vast majority of his professed followers, 
too, who have not been living on such intimate 
terms with the Lord as to be led into a 
clear knowledge of his wonderful purposes, regard 
the future with fearful forebodings, and 
his present "strange work" as an innovation 
rather than as a preliminary preparation for the 
glorious reign of the Prince of peace; for they 
wist not that this is "the day of his preparation" 
spoken of by the Prophet (Nahum 2:3), 
for the setting up of Christ's kingdom. 

Before that kingdom can be fully established 
in the earth, all power and authority, of whatever 
sort it be, which belongs to this present 

R1487 : page 8 

order of things, must pass away. As a consequence 
of this preparation for Christ's kingdom, 
which is now nigh, even at the door (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., The Time is at 
Hand), we behold the shaking of the nations 
and the trembling of the very foundations 



of the whole structure of human society 

as at present organized unwittingly under Satan, 

"the prince of this world." The great crisis 

of this world's affairs has not yet been reached, 

but the preparations for that crisis are progressing 

steadily both in civil and in ecclesiastical 

circles. And if we would be among those who 

are truly wise we will apply, not only our heads, 

but also our hearts, unto the instruction of the 

R1488 : page 8 

"sure word of prophecy that shineth as a light 
in a dark place until the day dawn;" for it is 
written (Dan. 12:10) that "none of the wicked 
shall understand, but the wise [not according 
to the wisdom of this world, which shall perish 
(Isa. 29:14), but with the wisdom of meekness 
which confesses human ignorance and relies 
solely upon the wisdom which cometh from 
above: they] shall understand." 

Those who thus rely upon God, and are simple 
hearted enough to take him at his Word, 
view his present work in the light of his glorious 
plan: they see light in his light: they realize 
the necessity for the great scourge of 
trouble which shall shatter all human ambition 
and pride and humble the nations in the dust. 
They see, too, the deformities of human theories 
and the fallacy of human arguments and 
the futility of all human schemes for the uplifting 
and blessing of the world, as they view 
them in contrast with the divine plan of the 
ages which God is working out. (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I.) In consequence of this 
superior vantage ground from which, as children 
of God, we are permitted to view "the 
work, the strange work" of our day, we are not 
at all surprised to see all systems of men tottering 
to their final overthrow; nor are we dismayed 
as we are brought to realize that their 
utter destruction is sure. 

But what do we see, as from God's standpoint 
we look out over "his work, his strange 
work," in this our day? We see, first of all, 
that which interests us most, viz., that the Lord 
is gathering together his saints and separating 
them as wheat from the tares— as loyal, devoted 
children of God from a great multitude of mere 
professors. (Psa. 50:5.) We see that such are 
being wonderfully led by a path which hitherto 
they knew not, enabling them to comprehend 
the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the love of God as manifested in his 
wonderful plan of the ages. 

Secondly, we see the binding together of the 



various companies of tares into great denominational 

bundles and labeled with various sectarian 

names. (Matt. 13:30.) Thirdly, we see the 

present heavens (the ruling religious powers of 

the world— viz., Roman Catholicism and Protestantism) 

beginning to roll together as a scroll. 

(Isa. 34:4.) That is, each is retaining its own 

distinctive features, yet both are coming closer 

together in mutual recognition, sympathy and 

co-operation— rolling together just as a scroll 

does, from the two ends. Any one at all familiar 

with the trend of thought in ecclesiastical 

circles to-day will mark this rolling together 

of the heavens. Protestantism is very 

solicitous, for instance, for Roman Catholic cooperation 

on the subject of Sunday legislation 

and various other proposed reforms, and to this 

end is constantly courting the favor of Rome. 

Presbyterians are anxious to expunge from their 

creed that clause which recognizes the Papacy 

as the "Man of Sin;" Methodists speak of it as a 

"great Christian camp," and Protestants of 

every name and order are doing homage to 

what they are pleased to call the mother church, 

all unconscious apparently of the fact that the 

Lord calls it a harlot church and the mother of 

harlots. (Rev. 17:1-5.) Union! is the watchword 

to-day throughout the length and breadth of 

Christendom, so called. In union is strength, 

they say; and strength to brave the coming 

storm, of which they all feel apprehensive, is 

what they all feel the need of. Singly and alone 

they realize that they are unprepared to meet 

the great time of trouble of which the Prophet 

Daniel declares that it shall be "a time of trouble 

such as never was since there was a nation." 

(Dan. 12:1.) And consequently they are all 

willing to make any compromise necessary to 

secure what they call Christian unity. They 

R1488 : page 9 

want so-called Christianity to make an imposing 
appearance before the world in numerical 
strength. And Papists are none the less anxious 
than Protestants, though, seeing the anxiety 
of Protestants, they prefer rather to stand 
back and be courted than to take the initiative 
in this movement. But they are quite willing 
for policy's sake to speak now of the Protestant 
heretics as their "separated brethren," and 
Catholic priests are quite willing to sit side by 
side on the platform with Protestant clergymen 
in religious gatherings. 

In no particular instance is this disposition 
of the heavens to roll together more manifest 



than in the proposed religious congresses 

which are to convene in Chicago during the 

season of the great International Exposition. 

There it is proposed to gather together for religious 

conference and co-operation, not only 

the representatives of all the creeds of Christendom, 

but of heathendom as well; and many 

are the religious enthusiasts who seem disposed 

to persuade even the heathen that they are 

Christians if in any degree they manifest the 

Christ spirit, which they define simply as a disposition 

of love to God and love to man. 

In seeking a basis of union it is also clearly 
observable that Christians of every name and 
order are willing, for the sake of what they call 
Christian Unity, to drop out of their creed the 
only true foundation of Christianity, viz., the 
doctrine of the ransom. Such are some of the 
indications of the rolling together of the ecclesiastical 
heavens, or ruling religious powers. 

Fourthly, we see the elements of the earth- 
civil society— getting ready for the final conflagration 
when, it is said, "the elements shall 
melt with fervent heat" (2 Pet. 3:10-12)-the 
heat of human passion and wrath. We see the 
angry nations armed to the teeth and impoverishing 
their treasuries to equip themselves for the 
emergencies of the near future, while statesmen 
and politicians everywhere view the situation in 
civil affairs as extremely precarious, and are 
put to their wits' ends to devise ways and means 
for the protection of civil government against 
the dangers that threaten it from the growing 
dissatisfaction among the masses of the people. 
This was very manifest in the policy of Prince 
Bismarck of Germany in his course with reference 
to the church of Rome, when, a few years 
ago, he sought to rid Germany of Popish influence; 
but finding subsequently the necessity 
of that influence for the preservation of civil 
authority in Germany, he retraced his steps from 
considerations of mere political policy. 

We see, further, that men in every condition 
of life are banding together to resist others of 
opposing sentiments, so that the appearance of 
the world to-day is that of a great battle-field 
where mighty hosts of contending parties are 
definitely mustering their forces and preparing 
for a desperate conflict. Such has been the 
condition of things for a few years past, and 
the perfecting and equipping of these organizations 
will be the work of a few more years; 
and then will follow the world's crisis— a crisis 
in which all the powers of light and darkness 
will struggle for the ascendancy; and the result 
will at first seem to be disaster and utter ruin, 



until above the wreckage of all human law and 
order the power and authority of the Prince of 
Peace begin to be recognized. 

Such is the outlook of our day as viewed in 
the light of the holy apostles and prophets; 
but the conservative Phariseeism of to-day shakes 
the cautious head and says, Nay, it is not so; 
we cannot be on the eve of a new dispensation 
and of a revolution so stupendous, involving 
the whole present social structure, both civil 
and religious; for Lo, "all things continue as 
they were from the beginning." (2 Pet. 3:4.) 
And in their zeal to bolster up the tottering 
structures of priestcraft and statecraft, whose interests 
are so closely allied, they array themselves 
in bitter opposition to the present great 
work of the Lord and the promulgation of the 
truth concerning his plans and purposes. And 
as the heralds of the divine purpose spread 
abroad these tidings, and the great work of the 
Lord in this our day is shown to be along the 
exact lines of his revealed purposes and for the 
utter destruction of the present order of things, 
the opposition increases and both the truth and 
its advocates are despised and rejected. And, 
strange to say, many of God's children are 
among the despisers, having partaken of the 
spirit of this world and become lukewarm and 

R1488 : page 10 

indifferent to God's truth, while they have 
sought out many incongruous theories and devices 
of their own and consecrated their lives 
to these human purposes. 

It is to such that the words of our text are 
addressed— "Beware, therefore, lest that come 
upon you which is spoken in the prophets." 
What is that? It is spiritual blindness and 
darkness; "For the wisdom of [even] their wise 
men [even the honored and learned doctors of 
divinity, the leaders and representatives of nominal 
Christianity] shall perish, and the understanding 
of their prudent men shall be hid." 
"The priest and the prophet [the leaders and 
teachers] have erred through strong drink [being 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world]: 
they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of 
the way through strong drink; they err in 
vision, they stumble in judgment," and hence 
cannot discern the wonderful plan and work 
of the Lord in this our day.— Isa. 29:14; 28:7. 

Greatly to be dreaded indeed is this spiritual 
blindness which shuts out from view the glorious 
vision of God's wonderful plan of the ages 
and the work of the Lord— his "strange work" 



—in this our day, and its glorious outcome 
when his wrath is overpast. Such despisers of 
the truth, however highly they may be esteemed 
among men, must fail to enter into the reward 
of the faithful overcomers of this age, who are 
to live and reign with Christ a thousand years. 
-Rev. 3:21; 20:6. 

Let us, then, beware of that spirit which despises 
the instruction of the Lord, and when 
in his providence some human instrumentality 

R1489 : page 10 

is raised up in God's own time and way to declare 
the divine plan and work, let us rejoice 
and be glad. No human instrumentality has 
anything in this matter whereof to boast: the 
work is the Lord's, and the highest honor that 
any man can claim is to be his mouth-piece, 
his messenger. The prophecies concerning 
present truth were all securely closed up and 
sealed until this time of the end (Dan. 12:9), 
and no wisdom or learning could break those 
seals until God's due time had come. Let us, 
therefore, as we now behold the work and plan 
of the Lord, "lift up our heads and rejoice," 
remembering, as the Psalmist expresses it, that 
"God is our refuge and strength, a very present 
help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear 
though the earth [society as at present organized] 
be removed, and though the mountains 
[kingdoms] be carried into the midst of the sea 
[though they be engulfed in a sea of lawlessness 
and anarchy]; though the waters thereof [the 
ungovernable masses of humanity] roar and be 
troubled, [as we see them now and shall see 
them much more so, and] though the mountains 
[kingdoms] shake [with fear and dread 
and with an uncertain stability] with the swellings 
thereof. "-Psa. 46:1-3. 

With joy we have seen the light of truth 
breaking, and with joy it is our privilege to 
view every prophetic fulfilment, whether it be 
in the advancement of the truth, or in the cumulation 
and culmination of the troubles of this 
evil day; for every step of the Lord's great 
work brings us nearer the glorious outcome of 
everlasting peace not many days hence. 



R1489 : page 10 

A MOMENTOUS STRUGGLE BEGUN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose you 
herewith another editorial from the New York 
Sun of Dec. 15th, 1892, on the Prof. Smith heresy 
case. It is of the same purport as the Dr. 
Briggs case, and points clearly to the inevitable 
dilemma of the future, either to give up the Bible 
or give up the creeds. The Sword of Truth is 
certainly doing its work effectually now, exactly 
as you have interpreted the Scriptures. How 
easily would the acceptance of the truth of the 
Bible settle all their disputes if they could but 
see it. Yours, J. C. BELL, JR. 

"At last a Presbyterian heretic has been found 
guilty. He is the Rev. Dr. Smith, a professor 
in the Lane Theological Seminary of Ohio and 
a prominent minister of the Presbyterian church. 

"The charges against him were substantially 
the same as those on which Dr. Briggs is now 
undergoing trial in New York. That is, he 
has taught that scientific Biblical scholarship 
proves that there are errors in the Scriptures. 

R1489 :page 11 

Like Dr. Briggs and many other distinguished 
and nominally orthodox Biblical critics, he rejects 
the Mosaic authorship of the first five 
books of the Bible, upon which, according 
to the Rev. Dr. Birch, the authority of the 
Gospel rests, and generally in his teachings he 
has been in agreement with this modern school 
of criticism. 

"On Monday the Cincinnati Presbytery pronounced 
such doctrine to be contrary to the 
doctrine of the Bible itself and of the Westminster 
Confession, and it condemned Dr. Smith 
to suspension from the Presbyterian ministry 
until he renounces and recants his heretical 
teaching. Of course, he will not purchase his 
restoration at that price: and he will not be 
tempted to make the humiliating submission 
by fear that he will be burned at the stake. 
Even if the constituted Presbyterian authorities 
refuse to tolerate his doctrine, he knows 
that he can get toleration for it elsewhere, and 
even among Presbyterians themselves. The 
Cincinnati Presbytery convicted him by a small 
majority only, though his teaching is opposed 
to the Westminster Confession in both its spirit 
and its letter, and is utterly subversive of the 
Presbyterian faith in the Bible as held for generations 
past. 

"If it is thus made apparent that Dr. Smith 
has sympathizers with his views even in the 



conservative Cincinnati Presbytery, how must 

it be here in New York, where leading Presbyterian 

ministers and laymen have expressed 

their agreement with Dr. Briggs so openly? 

What does his suspension amount to under 

such circumstances? Because of his condemnation 

as a heretic by the one party he is all 

the stronger with the other party. If the Presbyterian 

Church drives him out as a heretic, 

he is only the first of a great company of its 

ministers whom in justice it must condemn to 

go out with him. 

"Dr. Smith will appeal from the Presbytery 
to the Ohio Synod and thence to the General 
Assembly, thus keeping alive an issue of tremendous 
importance to the Presbyterian Church. 
Unless the sentiment of both of these appellate 
courts changes radically meantime, there is no 
probability of his obtaining a reversal of the 
judgment from either of them. The great majority 
of the General Assembly has been strongly 
opposed to such views as his for two years 
past, and there are no indications that the opposition 
will be less next spring. It is more 
likely to become more intense. Even at the 
risk of dividing the denomination, the Presbyterians 
must hold their ministry to the teachings 
of their doctrinal standards, for it is better 
to split than to go to pieces altogether. If the 
Bible is not the perfect and absolutely true 
Word of God received by inspiration from 
heaven, Presbyterianism has no foundation of 
divine authority: it rests on human reason. 

"That is the issue, and the Presbyterian Church 
must meet it squarely and decide it positively. 
It may be confused by subtle theologians like 
Dr. Briggs and Dr. Smith, even in their own 
minds, but really it is the issue between faith 
and agnosticism. The conviction of Dr. Smith 
is only the beginning of the most momentous 
struggle in the whole history of Protestantism." 



At this writing the decision of the New York 
Presbytery in the case against Dr. Briggs is announced 
as decided in his favor. Thus has the 
Presbytery of New York— one of the most influential 
religious bodies in the world— decided 
and proclaimed to the world its disbelief in the 
Bible as the inspired Word of God, and its 
conviction that the few Bible statements which 
measure up to Nineteenth century ideas should 
be treated respectfully for that reason, and that 
the remainder should be regarded as legends 
and old wives' fables. Truly the wisdom of this 



world is foolishness with God.— EDITOR. 



R1489 :page 11 

"ALWAYS FOR ALL THINGS. 



"And be not drank with wine, wherein is excess; but 
be filled with the Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms 
and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody 
in your heart to the Lord; giving thanks always for 
all things unto God and the Father in the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ; submitting yourselves one to another 
in the fear of God."— Eph. 5:15-21. 

From the contrast here instituted between 
being drunken with wine and being filled with 
the Spirit, as well as from the fact that Christians 
and not worldlings are here addressed, 
we understand the wine to be used as a symbol 
of the spirit of the world. And the Apostle 
here warns the children of God not to become 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world, but 
counsels us, on the contrary, to be filled with 
the Spirit of God. It is not enough that we 
banish from our hearts the spirit of the world, 
but we must keep filled with the holy Spirit of 

R1489 :page 12 

God, else the spirit of the world will come in 
unsolicited and take possession. 

The spirit of the world— the disposition and 
sentiments of the world on every subject— we 
find all about us, and the inclination of our 
natural mind is in the same direction: it is the 
mind of the flesh, the carnal mind, the selfish 
mind. To partake largely of this mind or disposition 
is to become intoxicated with it; and 
this intoxication stupefies the spiritual senses 
and beclouds the reasoning faculties, and so 
greatly mystifies the vision of truth that its 
clear discernment is impossible. But the spirit 
of Christ has the very opposite effect: it is the 
spirit of love and of a sound mind, whose 
healthful tendency is to illuminate the understanding 
and to invigorate every noble faculty 
of the soul. 

The effect of such spiritual invigoration and 
illumination is that of joy and peace and praise; 
and when two or three such meet their hearts 
naturally flow together; and while they make 
melody in their hearts together to the Lord, 
they often delight to express themselves in 



psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, and in 
prayers of thanksgiving to God the Father, in 
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Nor do such ever find themselves so beset 
with the cares and vexations of the present life 
that they can find no cause for thanksgiving; 
for, being graciously enlightened by the spirit 
of God, they know that all things, however 
vexing or perplexing or trying they may be, 
are working together for good to them that 
love God— to the called according to his purpose; 
and therefore it is their privilege to rejoice 
at all times and under all circumstances, 
and their pleasure always to give thanks to God 

R1490 : page 12 

for all things. 

As for days of national thanksgiving, we, as 
citizens of the heavenly kingdom, have no special 
need of them; for every day should be with 
us a day of thanksgiving for all things— for the 
prosperity of our "holy nation" under the 
righteous authority of Christ our King, for its 
peace and joy and its glorious hope, for its 
privileges of spiritual enlightenment and blessing, 
for the perfection of its laws and the shaping 
of its course and destiny, and for the needed 
discipline as well, which is to prepare it for its 
future exaltation and glory. Let the people 
of the world and less enlightened Christians 
give thanks, as doubtless many of them do, out 
of a sincere heart, for the common blessings of 
this present life— for the air and sunshine and 
rain, for bountiful harvests and for seasons of 
comparative peace with the nations abroad. 
Yes, blessed be God, out of his abundant mercy, 
these rich blessings are common to all— to the 
just and to the unjust— and it is well that the 
attention of all men should be called to mark 
and consider them. But they tell of no special 
favor to any of the nations or kingdoms of 
this world, all of which, as soon as the appointed 
"times of the Gentiles" are fulfilled, 
must give place to the universal Kingdom of 
God. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap, 
xiii.) God's supervision of these in the present 
time is not any interference in their chosen 
course, but simply an overruling of their free 
course so that they may not interfere with, but 
rather that they may ultimately minister to, his 
own wise ends, in the same sense as it is said 
that He maketh even the wrath of man to 
praise him. 

And while the world thus marks and rejoices 
in, and in some cases returns thanks to 



God for, the truly glorious common blessings 
which our loving and benevolent Father showers 
alike upon the evil and the just, let our hearts 
not only rejoice in these things, but also in the 
higher spiritual favors bestowed upon the sons 
of God, giving thanks always and for all things 
unto God the Father in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Truly this is a happy frame of mind to be in, 
and those who can do this at all times and under 
all circumstances have reached an enviable 
altitude of Christian character and experience. 
All about us are trials and vexations on every 
hand, and the man or woman who has become 
so superior to these that he takes cognizance 
only of the end to be gained by this refining 
process, and who therefore patiently and even 
thankfully submits to the painful ordeals in hope 
of the glorious end designed by Divine Providence, 
may also confidently rejoice in hope of 
the final reward of the overcomers. 

R1490 : page 13 

Along with this beautiful frame of mind produced 
by the indwelling spirit of God, the 
Apostle also links the grace of humility or submission 
—"submitting yourselves one to another 
in the fear of God." Where the spirit of 
joy and thankfulness reigns pride finds no place, 
but each, in lowliness of mind and in the fear 
of God, submits himself to the other for helpful, 
loving counsel or criticism, to the end that 
so, by mutually taking heed to the word of the 
Lord and seeking to measure up to all its requirements, 
the bride of Christ may make herself 
ready for the marriage. 

It is in view of the urgent necessity of sober 
watchfulness and attention to the will of the 
Lord regarding us that the Apostle calls upon all 
who are to any extent intoxicated and stupefied 
by the spirit of the world, saying, "Awake, 
thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, 
and Christ shall give thee light."— Put away 
the worldly spirit and awake to the importance 
of being filled with the spirit of God, and look 
to him for the light that will surely follow, with 
its blessed, invigorating and health-giving 
influences. 

"See then that ye walk circumspectly" [carefully, 
picking your steps. Oh, how carefully we 
must tread this narrow way!] not like ignorant 
persons, but as wise men, securing the 
season for yourselves [taking advantage of your 
opportunities] because the days are evil. [The 
times are perilous, and only by sobriety and the 



wisdom of meekness shall we be able to walk 
this narrow way to its glorious terminus.] 

"Wherefore," he adds, "be ye not unwise, 
but understanding what the will of the Lord 
is." And may the will of God and the joy 
and peace of God fill our hearts and leave no 
room for the spirit of the world to intrude upon 
us. 



page 13 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1490 : page 13 

JOSHUA THE TYPICAL HIGH PRIEST. 



I. QUAR., LESSON IV., JAN. 22, ZECH. 3:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Seeing then that we have a great High 
Priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus, the Son of 
God, let us hold fast our profession."— Heb. 4:14. 

Although this chapter is not stated to be a 
vision, that is the inference. It will be remembered 
that a mixed multitude of those who 
trusted in God's promises, out of all the tribes, 
had returned from Babylon to the Holy Land. 
They had endeavored as best they could to restore 
the temple and its services, and Joshua 
was the High Priest; but withal their matters 
were in but a poor condition, very unlike the 
former glory of Solomon's time. The object 
of this vision was in part, no doubt, to encourage 
the then fainting hearts of Israel, and 
to lead them to trust in the acceptableness of 
their humble arrangements for God's service. 

However, the vision's special significance is 
as a prophecy, in which the literal Joshua, of 
the prophet's time, has nothing whatever to do. 
Our interpretation of the vision, briefly stated, 
would be about as follows:— 



Joshua typified the entire "Church of the 
first-born ones" during the present life— beset 
and opposed by their adversary, Satan. Our 
Lord Jesus is represented by the head and his 
consecrated followers by the body of the typical 
High Priest. All are opposed by the same 
adversary, for "He was tempted in all points like 
as we are, yet without sin." The body of Joshua 
was represented as clothed in filthy garments 
—which represents the fact that "all our [the 
Church's] righteousness is as filthy rags." 

The change of raiment typifies the removal 
of our sins and the providing instead of Christ's 
righteousness in and through God's arranged 
way— Christ's sacrifice— which was not then 
made known. The announcement of the angel 
to the cleansed Joshua (verse 7) corresponds to 
the Church's high-calling to the divine nature 
and Kingdom of God after its members have 
been justified by faith in Christ. 

VERSE 8 addresses Joshua separately from the 
under priesthood (—his body— just as our Lord 
and the royal priesthood under him— his body 
—are sometimes addressed separately), telling 
them that they are not the reality, but merely 
types of the true Christ. "Hear now, O Joshua 
the high priest, and thy companions, sitting 
before thee, for they are sign-men [or types]. 
For, lo, I am about to bring in my [real] Servant 

R1490 : page 14 

the Sprout"— a fresh sprout— one not of the 
old Adamic stock, blighted and dying because 
of original sin, but a new sprout, having fresh 
vitality: holy, harmless and separate from sinners, 
and yet a man— "the man Christ Jesus." 

Using another symbol, a stone, the Chief 
Corner Stone, to represent this coming One, 
verse 9 declares: "Behold the stone that I have 
laid before Joshua [the type]. Upon that one 
stone rest seven eyes [perfect or divine wisdom, 
seven representing perfection and an eye representing 
knowledge]. Behold, I will engrave 
the engraving thereof, saith Jehovah of hosts. 
[God is superintending the engraving of his 
character and law upon all the "living stones" 
of the Church— the body of Christ— as surely 
as he superintended the trial development of 
our Lord, the Chief Corner Stone: as it is written, 
They shall be all taught of God.]— 
1 Pet. 2:4-7. 

"And I will remove the iniquity [unfruitfulness, 
etc., as well as sin] of the land in one 
day [the Millennial Day— "a day with the 
Lord is as a thousand years" with men]. "In 



that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, ye shall call 
every man his neighbor, under the vine and 
under the fig tree." 

The Golden Text is very appropriate. Our 
Lord, the Captain of our salvation, has been 
proved perfect through obedience to the things 
which he suffered; and now, in the completing 
of his body-members, he stands not only as our 
Redeemer, to make us fit to stand trial under 
the high-calling; and also as our Example of 
how to overcome, but more: he, as our High 
Priest, makes good our unintentional shortcomings, 
and also stands ready to succor all 
his consecrated members— promising that we 
shall not be tempted above that we are able to 
bear, because he will provide, for such, ways 
of escape. 

R1490 : page 14 

ZERUBBABEL THE TYPICAL BUILDER. 



I. QUAR., LESSON V., JAN. 29, ZECH. 4:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Not by might, nor by power, but by 
my spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts."— Verse 6. 

This, like the vision of the preceding lesson, 
was doubtless intended to encourage the Israelites 
living at the time it was given; but, like 

R1491 :page 14 

it also, its chief lesson belonged not to them, 
but to us. -1 Pet. 1:12. 

The golden candlestick (literally, lamp) with 
seven branches (or burners) is the same as that 
which, in the typical Tabernacle and Temple, 
shed the only light of "The Holy." The same 
seven lamps in one are brought to our attention 
in the Book of Revelation (1:20), and there 
explained to symbolize the Church of Christ 
during the present time. The seven represents 
perfection or completeness; hence as a whole 
the lamp-stand represents all the true saints or 
light-bearers in all the various phases of the 
Nominal Church development— Rev. 2:1,5. 

The oil represents the holy spirit which, burning 
in the true believers, causes the illumination 
of the sanctified in Christ Jesus. 

The two olive trees from which the olive oil 
proceeds to the seven lamps we understand to 
be typical of the Scriptures of the Old and New 
Testaments— God's two witnesses. The holy 



spirit is "the spirit of the truth;" and God's 
Word is truth! God explained this to Zerubbabel 
(verse 6), saying, "Not by an army nor 
by force but by my spirit [the spirit of the Truth 
—the spirit or influence of God given through 
his exceeding great and precious promises, etc. 
—the olive trees— (2 Pet. 1:4) the Word], saith 
Jehovah of hosts. Who art thou, O great mountain 
before Zerubbabel? Thou shalt become a 
plain, and he shall bring on the headstone with 
shoutings of, Grace, grace unto it." 

A mountain symbolizes a kingdom; and the 
one here represented as an obstruction before 
Zerubbabel typifies Satan's kingdom— the dominion 
of evil under the Prince of this world. 
Zerubbabel typifies Christ. His name signifies 
"a shoot [or sprout] out of Babylon." Literally, 
he was a son or shoot out of David and 
Jesse (as our Lord also is called), and secondly, 
as a sprout out of Babylon [confusion], he was 
a further type of Christ, who was out of, and 
yet separate from, sin and all mixture of evil. 
Undoubtedly the people of that day understood 
Zerubbabel to be the branch or shoot mentioned 
in the vision of Chapter 3:8, not realizing that 
Zerubbabel and Joshua were but types of Christ, 
in whom the two offices of King and Priest 
would be combined. 

VERSES 9,10 blend the type and the antitype. 
Zerubbabel had begun the rebuilding of the literal 
Temple, and the people understood that it 
would be completed by him. They might not 
then despise the humble beginning of the work, 
but rejoice to see it progress under his direction 
—realizing that the seven eyes (i.e., the perfect 
wisdom of God which holds survey of all the 
earth) were superintending the work. 

The real application of these verses is to 
Christ, who began the construction of the true 
Temple of God— "which temple ye are." His 
earthly ministry and the work of his followers 
have all along seemed small and weak, and far 
from what might be expected by any respecting 
so great a Temple for so grand a purpose. 
But those who realize the situation from God's 
standpoint can rejoice in the outcome, realizing 
the Lord's promise that "the day of small 

R1491 :page 15 

things," the day of suffering, the day of trials, 
will soon give place to the Millennial Day of 
joy, perfection and blessing. The despised 
"little flock," whom the world knows not, even 
as it knew not its Master, will soon be glorified 
with him, and share his Kingdom. The 



poor, rich in faith, and those that are nought, 
and that are despised, and that are foolish according 
to the wisdom of this world, are soon 
to be gloriously manifested as the Sons of God, 
the body of Christ and the embodiment of divine 
wisdom and power and love, that as his 
Kingdom they, with Christ their Lord and Head, 
may, as the "Sun of Righteousness," shine forth 
in blessing and life to the groaning creation— 
already redeemed by the precious blood. 



page 15 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The TOWER, to 
which I subscribed some time since, comes regularly 
to hand, and is much enjoyed by myself 
and wife. I note that you like to hear from 
subscribers, and I thought it might not be uninteresting 
to you to learn that I am one of 
those into whose hands "Food for Thinking 
Christians" [now out of print] fell, in London, 
about the year 1881. I had several years previously 
given up as entirely unscriptural and 
ridiculous the wretched dogma of eternal torment 
and the inherent immortality of mankind. 
I remember well your book being loaned to 
me by a friend, and my taking it home, sitting 
up all night and literally devouring its contents. 
Unfortunately it was read too quickly 
for perfect digestion and assimilation, but looking 
back, I can see now that it was not altogether 
seed sown by the wayside. I have been 
wandering about among the sects all these years 
since, "seeking rest and finding none," becoming 
successively a Methodist, a Disciple, a 
Baptist and again a Methodist. I have been 
clinging to the latter church, because it seemed 
to me that it had more love and zeal than some 
of the other denominations, but I have had no 
sympathy whatever with the erroneous doctrines 
I knew it to be teaching. 

A year ago, in Baltimore, it was my good fortune 
to meet a Baptist brother who had been 
reading the DAWNS. He kindly lent me the 
volumes, one after another. I again swallowed 
their contents— getting through the three books 
in a little over a week, besides verifying most 
of the passages. I can scarcely tell you the 
change they have wrought in my whole religious 



life. I have been set to thinking as I have 
never thought before; and the blessed Word of 
God, which has to a large extent hitherto been 
a sealed book to me, is now unfolding to my 
mind in a truly wonderful manner. It is now 
my only study, and I have renounced all worldly 
ambition in order that I can find out fully 
what is the will of God concerning me, and 
that I may learn how best to do it. Many 
times in the past I have felt sick at heart at the 
thought that it seemed impossible to learn the 
truth fully, in view of the extraordinarily divergent 
teachings of the numerous sects, all 
claiming to expound the Bible aright; but it 
has been my humble and constant prayer to 
the good Lord to lead me into the light; and 
now, thank God, I feel that my prayer, to a 
very large extent, has been answered, and I am 
still trusting to the same leadings of the energizing 
and illuminating Spirit of God, praying 
fervently that the Word may yet become a 
"Lamp unto my feet and a light to my path." 

I am glad to tell you that I was found by 
Brother Hewes some two months ago, when he 
called at my house selling DAWNS. Since then 
myself and wife have been meeting regularly 
at his house for study of the Word, singing and 
prayer, and these meetings have been wonderfully 
profitable to us. I have read, re-read and 
am still reading DAWNS with increasing interest 
and profit, and so is my dear wife; and we 
do feel that you have been the means, in the 
Lord's hands, of disseminating the needed light 
upon much of Scripture hitherto hidden, but 
now due to be revealed, and we are abundantly 
thankful to him therefor. 

Yours in the one hope, W. J. C . 



Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am impelled to 
write and thank you for the last TOWER, especially 
the article, "Obedience Better than Sacrifice." 
It has been a great blessing to me, 
not only in awaking me to a realization of my 
own condition, but also in aiding me to regain 
at least a partial footing in the way of light and 
peace. The devil has surely been leading me 
by a quiet and subtle way into a condition of 
lethargy and doubt that found me, on awaking, 
nearly in the "outer darkness." 

No doubt from a spirit of pride and overconfidence 
I was easily assailed. He began by 
persuading me that many of the expressions used 
in the TOWER, as regards false doctrines, were 



uncalled for. While I did not feel in sympathy 

page 16 

with such doctrines and theories, yet I can 
see now that he was leading me as an "angel 
of light," very stealthily but surely in this and 
other ways. I had partially realized it as I had 
begun to lose that rest and peace which should 
be ours; but your article seemed to be sent of 
God to awaken me, and lead me back. I assure 
you, dear brother, I feel my own unworthiness 
and weakness, and for a time I hardly 
dared to look up; but I know he is willing to 
help me. 

Just at the proper time the devil caused the 
enclosed article on "Inspiration" to come in 
my way, and I seemed in just the condition for 
it to cause a disturbance— a doubtful spirit. 
How thankful that I was awakened before it 
was too late! 

My object in writing you is not only to 
thank you, but to ask you to pray for me. I 
need it. Pray that I may be given a spirit of 
humility and strength to obey, and that my own 
will and pride may be subdued. Oh, I am so 
anxious. Your article was indeed to me "a 
word in season." I thank God for it! How 
forcibly I have learned to know the meaning 
of Paul's words, "Let him who thinketh he 
standeth take heed lest he fall." Pray for me! 

Sincerely, C . 



Michigan. 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., DEAR BRETHREN: 

...Robed in his righteousness, I am looking 
forward to be clothed upon with a glorious 
body, to have this mortal put on immortality, 
to when there will be no more a law in the 
body at variance with the law of the mind; but 
alas ! before I am made meet for an entrance 
upon this inheritance of the saints in light, how 
much cleansing from the filthiness of the flesh, 
how much washing with water by the Word, I 
need; how much refining before the dross is 
all consumed, and how little will there be left. 
Nothing left but the will to be one with the 
members of his anointed body— one in Him. 
Yours in our blessed Redeemer, 
W. C. BROWN. 



Ohio. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed please 
find $1.00 for the TOWER for '93. It can never 
be more appreciated than it has been, for it is 
more precious to me than its weight in fine 
gold. It has been like a mirror in aiding me 
to adjust the robe which my Master has given 
me, that I might appear at the royal marriage 
of the King— where (if I hold out faithful unto 
the end) I hope to meet you. I see so much 
to be done, by way of adorning the robe; 
and all I can do makes me realize all the 
more that it is all of Christ and nothing of self; 
yet I love to "wait upon the Lord." Yea, I 
would rather be a door-keeper in the house of 
the Lord than to dwell in a palace. 

It seems as if I am now a mere drone in the 
bee-hive of earnest workers, but I leave that all 
to the Master of the harvest. He knows my 
heart. Paul tells us, "Having done all, stand;" 
and here is the standing in which patience is 
to have her perfect work. I find it requires 
strength from above to do this. I have done all 
I could, and now I am just resting with childlike 
confidence in my Lord, for he has answered 
my petition for strength to so do. 
Yours in the blessed hope, 
MRS. S. H. RAY. 



Canada. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose you 
a dollar for renewal of TOWER for 1893. Being 
a newspaper publisher of over thirteen years 
experience, I know the value of prompt renewals. 
The dollar in advance saves interest, saves 
disappointment and worry, and gives the sender 
an easy conscience. I would not do without 
the TOWER if I had to live on two meals a day 
until I saved the money to pay for it. Its 
teachings are priceless to the true child of God. 
May its influence for good increase from year 
to year, and be the means of scattering light 
and truth to the uttermost parts of the earth. 
J. E. A 



Illinois. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I should like, if 
possible, to express to you my love and thankfulness 
for the blessings I have received through 
the reading of ZION'S WATCH TOWER during 
the year just closed. Many times have I been 
seemingly cold and despondent when the TOWER 
would come so full of rich food that in reading 



it the fire of zeal would glow in my heart, 
and I would feel like shouting praises to God, 
the Father, who has prepared such great things 
for his children. All praise to God, who gave 
his Son to die for us— and not for us, only, but 
also for the whole world— and to Christ, our 
blessed Redeemer. 

May his favor ever abide with you and Sister 
Russell, that you may hand out meat in due 
season during the year just ahead. A happy 
new year to you both, is my prayer. I am 
glad to feel that I am remembered by you at 
the throne of grace, that the grand truths may 
become more clear to me. 

Yours, in the Redeemer, J. F. SHEHORN. 



"With the heart man believeth unto righteousness; 
and with the mouth confession is 