VOL. XIX. SEPTEMBER 1 & 15, 1898. No. 17 & 18. 



CONTENTS. 



Council Bluffs Convention Notice, etc 258 

The Parousia of our Lord Jesus and 
His Subsequent Apokalupsis and 

Epiphania at His Second Advent 259 

For What are We Watching? 260 

Proofs of His Presence 265 

"Behold the Bridegroom!" 269 

Presence Gradually Revealed 271 

"Cometh not with Observation" 273 

"Knew not the Time of Their 

Visitation" 275 

Israel's Overthrow and its Cause 278 

page 258 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



THIS ISSUE AS A FREE SAMPLE. 



Our subscribers are invited to send us, plainly written on 
postal cards, the full addresses of their friends and acquaintances 
interested in our Lord's second coming but not aware of 
his parousia. To all such we will be pleased to send a copy of 
this issue free, during September. 

COUNCIL BLUFFS CONVENTION. -OCT. 1-5. 



We had not thought of this as a general convention except 
for the friends of Iowa, Nebraska and nearby states, but we 
learn that others will probably attend. We assure all of a hearty 
welcome. Remember the date, October 1st to 5th, and be sure 
to send a card to the WATCH TOWER office not later than Sept. 
20th, stating the number in your party. See last TOWER. 

'PILGRIMS' IN THE FAR WEST AND SOUTH. 



Brother Draper's proposed route lies to the North West. 
He is going by rail. Brother Ransom's route is South West, 
through Indian Territory, Oklahoma and Texas. He is traveling 
via wagonette, Sister Ransom with him. So far as possible all 
points where there are five or more WATCH TOWER subscribers 
will be visited. Others of the preaching brethren "Pilgrims" 
are in central and Eastern states, and one will (D.V.) make a 
Southern tour during the Winter. If these children of the great 
King come to you, give them a hearty welcome, remembering 
the Master's word, "He that receiveth you receiveth me,... 
and him that sent me." 

Remember that none of these "Pilgrims" either take up 
collections or ask for money: all their expenses are provided 
for, out of your special fund, from this office. Neither do these 
"Pilgrims" come to "devour widow's houses" by a prolonged 
stay. They will remain only two or three days, and will be 
disappointed if there are not arrangements for at least two 
meetings each day of their stay. Have all arrangements made 
for the exact day mentioned on the notification postal cards 
sent in advance of them, as they must be punctual, and their 
routes are all arranged weeks in advance. Do your part in 
gathering in the "hearing ears." This service and the Colporteur 
service are both being greatly blessed of the Lord. 



R2359 : page 259 

THE PAROUSIA OF OUR LORD JESUS 

AND HIS 

SUBSEQUENT APOKALUPSIS AND EPIPHANIA 

--AT HIS SECOND ADVENT.- 

"Watch, therefore; for ye know not the day* your Lord doth 
come." "What I say unto you, I say unto all [believers], 
Watch! "-Matt. 24:42; Mark 13:37. 

WHATEVER the character of the watching, and 
whatever the thing to be looked for, there can 
be no question that the exhortation to watch for an 
event whose precise time is not stated implies that the 
watching ones will know when the event does take 



place. Watch, because ye know not, in order that at 
the proper time ye may know, is the thought; and the 
intimation clearly is, that those who do not watch will 
not know: that the events which are to be known in 
due time to the Watchers will be recognized by them, 
and not recognized by others, at the time of 
accomplishment. 

This, the only logical interpretation of our Lord's 
exhortation, is fully corroborated by several of the 
apostles. The Apostle Paul urges us, saying: "Yourselves 
know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh 
as a thief in the night, and when they [the world, 
unbelievers] shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden 
destruction cometh upon them as travail upon a woman 
with child; and they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness, that that day should overtake 
you as a thief" (1 Thes. 5:3,4); because, being children 
of the light, ye brethren will be watching and be 
enlightened and taught of the Lord. The Apostle 
Peter suggests the means by which the Lord will teach 
us and informs us respecting our location upon the 
path of the just which shineth more and more unto the 
perfect day. He shows that it will not be by miraculous 
revelations, nor by dreams, but through the Word 
of testimony, the Bible. He says, "We have a more 
sure word of prophecy, to which ye do well that ye 
take heed, as unto a light which shineth in a dark 
place, until the Day dawn and the Day-star arise in 
your hearts."— 2 Pet. 1:19. 

The united testimony of these Scriptures teaches 
us that, altho it was not proper nor possible for the 
Lord's people to know anything definite in advance, 
respecting the exact time of the second presence of the 
Lord Jesus and the establishment of his Kingdom, yet 
when the due time would come the faithful ones, the 
watchers, would be informed,— would not be left in 
darkness with the world. It is in vain to urge, as 
contradicting this, our Lord's statement, "Of that day 
and hour knoweth no man, no not the angels in heaven, 
neither the Son, but my Father only." Those who 
use this Scripture to prove to themselves and to others 
that no man will ever know anything respecting the 
time of the second advent find it to prove too much, 
and thus spoil their own argument; for if it means that 
no man will ever know, it must similarly mean that no 
angel will ever know, and that the Son himself will 
never know. This evidently would be an absurd construction 
to place upon the passage. The Son did not 
know at the time he uttered this statement, the angels 
did not know then, and no man knew then: but the 
Son certainly must know of the time of his own second 
advent, and at least a little while before it takes place; 
the angels also must know a little while before it takes 
place, and the true children of God, the "watchers," 
as we have seen above, are to watch in order that they 
also may know at the proper season, and not be in 



darkness, in ignorance, with the world; and that their 
watching shall be rewarded is guaranteed:— "None of 



*Thus read the oldest Greek MSS. 

R2359 : page 260 

the wicked shall understand; but the wise [in heavenly 
wisdom] shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

FOR WHAT ARE WE WATCHING? 



This is an important question. Many of God's 
people have been offended, "stumbled," as respects the 
doctrine of the second coming of our dear Redeemer, 
by reason of peculiar, extravagant, unreasonable, illogical 
and unscriptural views on the subject, presented 
by some, who professedly love the Lord's appearing, 
known as Second Adventists. But this is all wrong; 
we are not to reject one of the grandest and most prominent 
doctrines of the Scriptures, simply because some 
fellow-Christians have erred egregiously respecting the 
matter, and brought a certain amount of worldlywise 
contempt upon everything connected with this subject. 
On the contrary, this doctrine, as a glorious gem, should 
be given the first place among the precious jewels of 
divine truth, where it can cast its halo and splendor 
and brilliancy over all connected and related promises 
and blessings. It should not be left in the imperfect 
setting which hides its glory and beauty, but should 
be recovered, remounted, set in its true place, to the 
glory of God and to the blessing of all who are sincerely 
and truly his people. 

We need offer no apology for the interest which 
we feel in this grand subject, which is the center upon 
which all the testimony of divine grace, through all 
the holy prophets, is focused. Rather do they need 
to apologize who, knowing that the second coming of 
the Lord and the resurrection of the dead hold the 
most important places in the Scriptures, next to the 
doctrine of the atonement for sin, have nevertheless 
neglected this while they have quarreled, skirmished, 
fought and bled over trifling things of no real importance, 
doctrinaily or otherwise. 

Our watching is to be for the second coming of 
him who redeemed us, who said, "If I go away, I will 
come again and receive you unto myself." The watching 
is to be specially with the thought that our Lord 
Jesus comes at his second advent in the majesty and 
glory of the Father, King of kings and Lord of lords. 
The watching not only includes the thought of the second 
presence of our Lord, as King, but it has attached 



to it the wonderful results which are promised to flow 

from the coming of the King; for the coming of the 

King means the coming of the Kingdom for which he 

taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be 

done on earth as it is done in heaven." And the coming 

of our Master, the King, and the establishment of 

this glorious Kingdom means the fulfilment of the long-waited-for 

promise made to the seed of Abraham: the 

promise which Israel after the flesh was not found 

worthy to inherit; the promise for which God has been 

selecting the members of the Bride of Christ during 

this Gospel age, to be with the Lord Jesus and his 

joint-heir in carrying out its beneficent provisions; 

the promise which is sure, but which has never yet 

had, in any sense of the word, a fulfilment; the promise 

which reads, "In thy seed shall all the families of 

the earth be blessed." 

Watching implies hoping, and it also implies waiting. 
We are waiting for what the Apostle terms "that 
blessed hope, the glorious appearing of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ," who shall transform his Church 
to his own spiritual image and likeness, in order that 
we ("changed") may be like him, see him as he is, 
and share his glory, and be associated with him in his 
great work of bringing in the Millennial blessings to 
the world of mankind. Nevertheless, this waiting time 
and hoping time is a time of more or less tribulation, not 
only on the world, which lies still under the yoke of 
sin and under the blinding influences of Satan, but also 
to the waiting, hoping and watching Church, of 
whom the Apostle says, "We ourselves groan within 
ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the deliverance 
[from death] of our body"— the body of Christ, 
of which we are members in particular.— Rom. 8:23. 

HOW ARE WE TO WATCH? 



Our watching consists not in looking up into the 
sky— "stargazing;" for those who study the Lord's 
Word to any purpose soon learn that "the day of the 
Lord so cometh as [like] a thief in the night," and 
that its dawning cannot be discerned with the natural 
eye. If the Lord's people would discern anything by 
watching the sky with their natural eyes, could not 
the world discern the same thing? If the second advent 
of our Lord were to be an open, outward manifestation, 
would not the world know of it just as soon 
as the saints, the watchers? In such event it could 
not be true that the day of the Lord should come as a 
thief, as a snare, unawares, upon the world, while the 
Church would have foreknowledge thereof— not be left 
in darkness. 

We are to watch the signs of the times, in the light 
of the Lord's Word, our lamp: as the Apostle declares, 



"We have a more sure Word of prophecy,... as a light 

shining in a dark place,— until the Day dawn." The 

Gospel age has been a night-time, and the Lord's people 

have been waiting for the dawn of the Millennial 

morning, with the promise ringing in their ears, "God 

will help her [the Church] early in the morning." 

(Psa. 46:5.) The word of the Lord, through the prophets, 

has been the lamplight all through this Gospel 

age, upon the Church's pathway, as the Lord expressed 

it through the Prophet David, "Thy word is a 

lamp to my feet, a lantern to my footsteps." The 

R2359 : page 261 

lamp of the truth of revelation has guided all the faithful, 
watchful pilgrims in their journey toward the Celestial 
City— the Heavenly Kingdom. O, what a comfort 
it has been, and how dreary would have been our 
pilgrimage without it! 

"Looking back, we praise the way 
God has led us, day by day!" 

Those who have taken heed to the landmarks, 
pointed out by the Lord through Daniel and Isaiah and 
Jeremiah, and all the holy prophets, realize that we 
have come already a much longer journey than was expected 
by the Church when first she started out; but 
we realize also from these landmarks that we have approached 
very closely to the end of the journey, very 
near to the time when the great blessing, for which 
God's people have so long waited and prayed, is at 
hand. For instance, the Watchers have noted the 
Lord's testimony through the Prophet Daniel that "the 
time of the end" would be a period of time (more than 
a century), and that in this "time of the end" there 
would be a great increase of travel, running to and fro 
throughout the earth, and a great increase of general 
intelligence, increased knowledge, as it is written, "In 
the time of the end many shall run to and fro, and 
knowledge shall be increased."— Dan. 12:4. 

Watching carefully respecting our whereabouts, 
hopeful and solicitous respecting the gracious things 
which God has promised, none of the Watchers are indifferent 
to these fulfilments of prophecy, which are to 
be seen on every hand to-day. All men discern these 
things, but not all alike: the faithful, the Watchers, 
discern them not only as facts, but also as fulfilments 
of prophecy; as proofs that we are already in the period 
termed "the time of the end." Further investigations 
and applications of the prophetic measurements prove 
to the watchers that we have been in "the time of the 
end" since 1799, and that it is also termed "the day 
of his [Jehovah's] preparation." Looking about them, 
they see the preparation that Jehovah God is making 
for the Kingdom of his dear Son. They see the lifting 
of the curtain of ignorance, and the letting in of 
the light, and that thus God is using mankind at the 



present time to make ready in a natural way the mechanical 
and other arrangements and conveniences which 
ultimately shall be so great blessings to the world, 
when the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in his beams, and the Millennial Day shall be ushered 
in, with all its multiplied blessings and mercies 
and opportunities;— "the times of restitution of all 
things, spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began."— Acts 3:21. 

Watching intently, earnestly, interestedly, because 
they know of the good things God hath in reservation 
(1 Cor. 2:10-13), the Watchers note that Daniel's 
prophecy further points out that, as the increase of 
travel brings the increase of knowledge, so the increase 
of knowledge will bring an increase of discontent to the 
world of mankind in general; and the result will be as 
prophetically stated, that "there shall be a time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation." The 
Watchers, seeking to note whether these things have 
yet a fulfilment or not, look about them and behold 
on every hand discontent, unhappiness; far more than 
when the world enjoyed far fewer of the mercies and 
blessings of heaven. These latter day gifts of Providence 
(preparations for the Millennial age), instead of 
provoking thankfulness, gratitude and love to God and 
generosity to man, produce in unregenerate hearts ambition, 
greater avarice, selfishness, envy, hatred, strife, 
and other works of the flesh and of the devil. Yes; 
the Watchers can clearly discern the great approaching 
climax of human trouble in which the Scriptures 
distinctly declare that all the present human institutions 
shall go down in anarchy, in confusion, in chaos. 
But the Watchers do not lose sight of God and his 
providence. They see that, while the approaching 
social and ecclesiastical catastrophe will be the natural 
result of the operation of selfishness under highly favored 
conditions, nevertheless they remember that God 
is at the helm, and that he is able to cause the wrath 
of man to praise him, and the remainder of man's wrath 
(which would not praise him) he will restrain. 

The Watchers look not merely at the outward 
signs, as seen in the world. They scrutinize carefully 
and repeatedly their "chart," the Bible's prophetic 
outline of the world's history, furnished by the King 
himself. It is because they see the time of trouble 
outlined in the prophetic chart that they know that it 
is sure to come, and are able in advance of others to 
"discern the signs of the times," and not to be in darkness 
respecting the "things to come." It was in respect 
to this that the Lord promised the watchers that the 
holy spirit should guide them into all truth, as each 
feature becomes due, and would show them things to 
come— future things— in advance of the world's knowledge, 
and in advance of the facts themselves. (John 16:13.) 
But the same chart which shows the downfall 
of all earthly institutions, political, social and ecclesiastical, 



shows also that their fall is so timed in the 
great plan of Jehovah that it shall be the very hour in 
which he will establish in the hands of the elect Church 
(who then shall be a royal priesthood glorified— priests 
upon their thrones— the religious as well as the civil 
rulers of the world), whose exaltation shall be to the 
glory of God and to the blessing of every creature. 
The Watchers remember well that the King gave 
them an outline of the history of the Gospel age at the 
very time that he told them to watch, intimating to 

R2359 : page 262 

them that they were to watch for the things which he 
therein noted. The Watchers are those who are in 
harmony with the King and who have respect to his 
promises, and they, therefore, do not neglect the words 
which he spoke. And as they note this very prophecy 
in connection with which he tells them to watch, they 
see in it clearly that the day of the Lord will be ushered 
in at the close of this Gospel age, secretly, quietly, 
unobtrusively, "as a thief in the night,"— unaware 
to the world, and known only to the Watchers. 

PAROUSIA VS. EPIPHANIA, APOKALUPSIS. 



Because not heedless, careless, indifferent servants 
of the King, but faithful and earnest, the Watchers 
have scrutinized every little particular which fell from 
the lips of him who spake as never man spake; and all 
the messages which he has sent them through his faithful 
apostles and prophets. And discriminating carefully, 
they discern that there are three words of distinctly 
different signification used in the respect to the Lord's 
second advent; namely, parousia and epiphania and 
apokalupsis. Parousia is used in respect to the earliest 
stage of the second advent, while apokalupsis relates to 
the same advent later;— not that apokalupsis and epiphania 
relate to another or a third advent, but merely 
to a later feature of the second advent. These Greek 
words, it is true, are somewhat obscured or hidden in 
the Common Version of the Bible, and probably for a 
purpose. The Lord's purpose evidently was to keep 
the world and the wicked in ignorance of his gracious 
plan until his due time; nor did he wish the particulars 
to be understood by the Watchers until nearly the 
time of the fulfilment. But now we are "in the time 
of the end," in "the day of his preparation," in the 
time in which it was foretold that then "the wise [not 
the worldlywise but the humble Watchers who are wise 
enough to take heed to the Word of the Lord] shall 
understand." (Dan. 12:10.) And hence, since many 
of the Watchers are not Greek scholars, God has made 
gracious provision through valuable helps (such as 



Young's Analytical Concordance and the Emphatic Diaglott), 

so that the very humblest of his people may 

have a clear and discriminating understanding of the 

meaning of certain features of his Word which hitherto 

have been kept hidden under imperfect translations: 

and these matters God himself has been bringing to 

the attention of his people, through MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, ZION'S WATCH TOWER and the OLD THEOLOGY 

TRACTS. The Watchers all over the world are being 

reached by these "Helping Hands for Bible students," 

which the Lord himself is extending to them. 

By these helps, the Watchers are rapidly coming 
to see that the word "parousia," translated in our 
Common Version "coming," does not mean what our 
English word signifies; namely, to be on the way, approaching; 
but that on the contrary it signifies presence, 
as of one who has already arrived. The Watchers note 
also that the Scriptures predicate certain things respecting 
the Lord and respecting his parousia (his presence), 
which clearly intimate that he will be present and doing 
his work, his great work (of setting up his Kingdom 
and smiting the nations with the sword of his mouth) 
wholly unknown to the world,— "as a thief in the night." 
The Watchers also notice that the Scriptures clearly 
indicate that after the Lord has done certain things 
during his presence (parousia) and unknown to the 
world, he will later make a manifestation of his presence; 
—a manifestation which will be discerned by all mankind: 
and the outward manifestation is designated his 
"epiphania" which signifies "shining forth" or "bright 
shining." 

The Watchers get the two thoughts respecting the 
Lord's second coming: that first, altho really present a 
spirit being, like the angels who, we are told, encamp 
round about them that fear God and deliver them, and 
who are "all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister 
to those who shall be heirs of salvation," and whose 
ministry is an invisible one (Psa. 34:7; Heb. 1 : 14), — 
so also our Lord, now a glorious spirit being, of the 
divine nature, will not be manifest to the natural eye 
during his presence— his parousia. Hence the necessity 
that the Lord's faithful ones shall "watch," because 
they, no more than the world, can discern a spirit being 
with their natural eyes. The Watchers in due 
time are to discern the presence (parousia) of their Lord 
by the eye of faith. The sleepless eye of faith will in 
due time take note of the "sign of the Son of Man,"— 
the indications of the presence of the King. 

During the period of the parousia (presence) preceding 
the epiphania (shining forth) a certain work 
will be accomplished, unknown to the world, unknown 
to the nominal Church, known only to the Watchers. 
Ah, how important to us the words of our Master, exhorting 
us to be Watchers! And, by the way, this 
watching includes a watching of our own hearts as well 
as of the Lord's Word and the outward signs— to insure 



our worthiness to be continued in the light, and 
under the instructions of the great Teacher. "If any 
man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his;" 
and if any man lose the spirit of Christ he ceases to be 
his; and hence we all need to "watch" that we may, 
as the Scriptures direct, "Keep our garments unspotted 
from the world;" and "Keep ourselves in the love of 
God, while looking for the grace [aid] of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, which is able to keep us from falling and 
to present us faultless in the presence of his glory with 
exceeding joy." For whoever has the spirit of Christ 
may be a Watcher, and as a Watcher may know of the 

R2359 : page 263 

gracious things connected with the great "salvation 
which shall be brought unto us at the revelation of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ," but whoever ceases to 
have the spirit of Christ must of necessity cease also 
to be a Watcher and shall be in ignorance of the things 
of the day of the Lord like the world, of which he then 
probably would be a part. 

As the light by which the eye of faith may discern 
the parousia, we have the "more sure word of prophecy 
to which we do well to take heed." It has shone 
upon the pathway of the Watchers all along through 
this night, but now its various prophetic rays have focussed 
and clearly indicate that we are already living 
"in the days of the Son of Man," while, as he expressly 
foretold, the world in general goes on as usual, in 
utter ignorance of his presence, and of his harvest work, 
and of the beginning of the Day of the Lord; it continues 
as usual— eating and drinking, marrying and 
giving in marriage, planting and building. It is a mistake 
to suppose that our Lord, in giving this information 
respecting the events of the time of his presence, 
meant us to understand that it would be wicked for the 
world to eat, drink, plant, build and marry; these are 
not improper things and any such interpretation is 
strained and faulty and results from an utter misconception 
of the subject. Our Lord wished merely to 
show that the world would be in ignorance of his presence 
"in the days of the Son of Man," and in utter ignorance 
of the great time of trouble or "Day of Vengeance" 
which his inauguration of his Kingdom will 
signify to the kingdoms of this world, which are to 
be dashed to pieces as potters' vessels. The ignorance 
of the impending trouble here will be similar to that 
of the people who lived in the days of Noah. "As it 
was in the days of Noah, so also shall it be in the days 
of the Son of Man. "-Luke 17:26. 

As "the days of Noah" were not days before Noah's 
time, neither are "the days of the Son of Man" 
days before the Son of Man's presence. The days of 
the Son of Man are the days of his parousia, or presence, 
—invisible and unknown to the world, known only 



to the Watchers and seen by them only with the eye 
of faith. "As in the days that were before the flood 
they were eating, drinking, marrying, ...and knew 
not,. ..so shall also the [parousia] presence of the 
Son of Man be:"— the world will simply go on about 
its usual affairs, and know not of the Lord's presence. 
-Matt. 24:38. 

But why should our Lord be thus present? What 
will be his work during the period of presence preceding 
his epiphania or manifestation to the world? 

His work is clearly outlined in various of his parables 
which were given that the Watchers might know 
—might not be in darkness. The parable of the wheat 
and the tares shows this period of the parousia (presence) 
preceding the epiphania (manifestation), and 
represents it as the "harvest" time of this age. The 
Son of Man sowed the good seed, and his servants followed, 
doing work in the field down through the age; 
finally the end of the age comes when the full crop of 
wheat is ripe, and then the harvest is reaped. The 
parable shows the separation of the two classes of the 
nominal church during the "harvest." For be it noted 
that the wheat-field is not the entire world, but 
merely the professedly Christian part of the world- 
Christendom: much of the field is not yet sown. And 
the parable relates only to the wheat-field, and particularly 
to the wheat. The tares (spurious Christians) 
are dealt with only incidentally. The tares choke the 
wheat, yet nevertheless the Master will obtain a sufficiently 
large crop, for— "All his purposes shall be 
accomplished." 

The separation of the tares from the wheat, and 
the gathering of the wheat into the garner of heavenly 
conditions precedes the work of cleansing the wheat-field 
of its symbolic tares by symbolic "fire;" and this 
entire harvest work is to take place during the parousia 
(presence) of our Lord, before his epiphania (manifestation). 
He is the Chief-Reaper, and all the under-reapers 
will work under his direction and eye; and 
every kernel of true symbolic "wheat" will be gathered 
into the glorious symbolic "garner" by resurrection 
and "change." 

The truth will be the separating medium, and not 
until the separation is complete and the "wheat" all 
garnered into the glory of the heavenly nature, will 
the "fire," the great time of trouble mentioned by the 
Prophet and by our Lord, burn and consume, symbolically, 
all the "tares:" so that thereafter none will make 
false professions of being Christians while really of the 
world and possessed of its spirit. 

The parables of the Pounds and of the Talents 
cover this same period of time. In both of these the 
Lord represents himself as a great householder and 
heir to a throne, who has gone into a far country to be 
invested with kingly powers and to return to use those 
powers. Departing, he left with his servants various 



riches of grace and privilege, "to every man according 
to his several ability," saying to them, "Occupy till I 
come." The return of the nobleman of the parables 
unquestionably represents the second coming of our 
Lord and Master. Now note the work first due to take 
place upon his return as King, as shown by these parables. 
He does not first deal with the rebellious world, 
—those who would not have him to rule over them; 
but, first calls "his own servants," and reckons with 
them— rejecting some from further service because of 
unfaithfulness, and accepting others to a participation 

R2359 : page 264 

in the joys of the Kingdom which he at once 
establishes. 

This reckoning with the servants signifies a reckoning 
with the Church first, after his return; and corresponds 
to the separating of the wheat and tares, in 
the other parable. It is comparatively easy for anyone 
to realize that this part of the Lord's work at his 
second advent is the work which precedes the epiphania 
or manifestation to the world. It is during this period 
that the Watchers are to be aware of the presence (parousia) 
of the Lord, and of his scrutiny or judgment of 
them, which will then be in progress. Only the faithful 
will know, however,— only they will be "accounted 
worthy to stand before the Son of Man" in that judgment 
—all found unworthy shall "stumble." "The 
wicked [and slothful servants] shall not stand in the 
assembling of the righteous." (See Psa. 1:5.) It is 
of this period of his presence, and this feature of his 
work, that the world is to be in total ignorance, and 
"not know," until, having finished reckoning with his 
servants, and having glorified the faithful, the judgment 
of the world shall begin with "a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation." That trouble 
is symbolically pictured as a fire, and we are told 
by the Apostle that our Lord shall be revealed (apokalupto 
—uncovered, disclosed, made manifest) in flaming 
fire (judgments), taking vengeance. 

All who are Watchers, all who have taken heed 
to "the more sure word of prophecy," including the 
Master's description of the events of "the days of the 
Son of Man," can readily discern that the world would 
not go on in its usual routine— eating, drinking, planting, 
building, marrying, etc.— if they knew of the 
Lord's presence, and the progress of the "harvest" of 
the Gospel age. If they knew of the Lord's presence 
and that the reckoning with the servants had commenced, 
and that the next thing in order would be 
judgments upon themselves, they would change their 
usual order of affairs considerably: they would be in 
great trepidation; because only those who are in sympathy 
with the Lord and the righteous government 
which he is about to establish, when he shall lay judgment 



to the line and justice to the plummet— only these 
can in any degree be ready to welcome him: all others 
have the spirit of fear, and are under the blinding influences 
and misrepresentations of Satan. "The god 
of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not, lest the glorious light [of the gospel of 
Christ] should shine unto them." Because of ignorance, 
therefore, the world would be in great fear, if 
they knew the fact of the beginning of the day of the 
Lord, which is to be to them the "day of vengeance."* 
Very evidently, therefore, this reckoning with the 
Church and the reward of the faithful will precede our 
Lord's epiphania or apokalupsis. To use one of his own 
figures, we might say that his day or time of presence 
—"the day of the Lord"— will come as a thief in the 
night; and in this time he will gather his virgin Church 
discriminatingly, and take her as his Bride to himself, 
—changing her from earthly nature and conditions to 
spiritual or heavenly conditions, to be like him, see him 
as he is, and share his glory. And since the saints 
have always been "the salt of the earth," we may readily 
discern that the taking away of the salt of the earth 
would leave mankind in a very deplorable condition, 
in which corruption would spread rapidly: and this is 
exactly what the Scriptures indicate. 

We are not, however, to understand that the Lord 
will take the Church away to heaven, and then come 
back again, and make his epiphania or apokalupsis, for 
that would be a third advent, which is nowhere even 
hinted in Scripture. The "change" of the Church 
from earthly conditions and nature to heavenly, spirit 
conditions and nature will first be in order, and then 
they twain, the Bridegroom, Christ, and the Church, 
his bride, thus made one in nature and in heavenly or 
spirit power, will commence the work of putting down 
all rule and authority contrary to the divine rule,— 
bringing all things into subjection to the heavenly 
Kingdom, the Millennial Kingdom. Our Lord and his 
Church will not be absent from the earth during the 
period of the world's tribulation; but on the contrary 
will continue present, but invisible, bringing upon the 
world the tribulation, foretold in the Scriptures, which 
will result in the humbling of the hearts of mankind, 
that they may say eventually, "Come, let us go 
up to the mountain [Kingdom] of the house of the 
Lord, that he may teach us of his ways, that we may 
walk in his paths." 

This fact is abundantly proved by the Lord's statement 
of what shall be the reward to the overcomers, a 
part of which is, "He that overcometh, and keepeth 
my words to the end, to him will I give power over 
the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; 
as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken in pieces: 
even as I have received of my Father." (Rev. 2:26,27.) 
Again, the same matter is mentioned by the Prophet 
David, saying, "This honor have all his saints,— to execute 



the judgments written." It is manifest, therefore, 
that the Church, altho absent from the world during 
the period of the tribulations in the sense of being 
"changed" from human to divine nature, will be 
present in it with Christ, as associate executors of the 
divine justice, breaking to pieces the present order of 
affairs, and ready to heal the hearts of the world as 
soon as they shall be broken in their pride, and prepared 
for the "Balm of Gilead." 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., "The Day of Vengeance.' 
R2359 : page 265 

THE TIME OF THE PAROUSIA. 



It will doubtless surprise many to learn that there 
is much Scripture proof that we are already in the time 
of the presence (parousia) of the Son of Man,— that we 
are already living "in the days of the Son of Man." 
At first some will be inclined to say, "Where is the 
promise of his [parousia] presence, while all things continue 
as they were from the beginning?" Peter foretold 
that some would thus question and be surprised at 
this information, that we are living in the days of the 
Son of Man, while there is as yet no outward manifestation 
of his presence, but the affairs of the world continue 
in their ordinary channels. (2 Pet. 3:4.) The 
answer to the question is, as we have just pointed out, 
our Lord's own declaration that in his days of presence 
the world would be eating, drinking, planting and 
building, and know not. That is the promise of his 
presence, while all things continue as they were. Could 
it be more explicit? A totally different question, however, 



WHAT ARE THE PROOFS OF HIS PRESENCE? 



This is a reasonable inquiry. We would not be 
justified in believing that the Lord is present upon any 
slight evidence, even tho we know in advance that he 
is a spirit being, whose presence would be invisible 
without a miracle;— and even tho we know in advance, 
from the parables, that he will be present, but invisible, 
in the harvest time of this age, in the time of reckoning 
with his servants, preparatory to their glorification. 
We have a right to expect clear, reasonable 
ground for faith, before accepting any matter which 
implies so much. We are not, however, to ask or to 
expect evidences to natural sight: if we are of the 



Watchers, who have "the eyes of their understanding 
opened" to see wonderful things in the divine Word, 
then these eyes of our understanding must also be the 
eyes of our faith. Hence, the true Watchers are to 
expect reasonable, satisfactory evidence for faith, and 
not ocular demonstrations of an invisible parousia. 
As the Apostle explains, "We walk by faith, not by 
sight." 

To our understanding there are strong proofs that 
our Lord's parousia began in the Autumn of 1874. We 
have seen nothing with our natural eyes; only with the 
eyes of the understanding, only in the light of "the 
more sure word of prophecy," do we know this, which 
we sincerely believe and affirm, and which is important 
news to all who claim to be Watchers. The fact that 
any Watcher should have remained in ignorance of 
this important event for now twenty-four years would 
seem of itself to be an indication that he had not been 
properly awake to the use of his privileges and opportunities 
—that he had not been sufficiently watchful of 
the sure word of prophecy to which he was instructed 
to take heed; and that therefore he had been left at least 
partially ignorant of the important things transpiring 
throughout the world during these years. To this extent 
many of the Lord's people have been with the 
world and similarly ignorant: and yet we may reasonably 
assume that the Lord did not expect all of his 
watching servants to discern the matter at the same 
instant of time. True; those who saw early have had 
special blessing for the longer time; but, as we saw 
above, the preparation for the knowledge of the time 
lies largely in the right attitude of heart— in its humility 
and possession of the various graces of the spirit of 
Christ. 

Lest we should get a misapprehension respecting 
this matter of the discerning the Lord's parousia, we 
do well to take heed of the parable of the ten virgins, 
which evidently was given to throw special light upon 
this point. That parable shows a false announcement 
of the arrival of the Bridegroom in 1844, which brought 
to the subject considerable reproach, but which nevertheless 
was of great advantage, as stirring up the "virgin" 
class (the pure, the consecrated) to fresh trimming 
of the lamp of truth— investigating the sure word 
of prophecy. The parable shows, also, that the "virgins" 
in general fell asleep, yet, nevertheless, in due 
time all would be reawakened by the prophetic knocking, 
and the knocking of the signs of the times, which 
indicate the Bridegroom's presence. And the parable 
shows that the result will depend upon how much oil 
(holy spirit) the "virgins" may have in their vessels 
(in their own hearts), as well as in their lamps (the 
Scriptures). Applying this parable, then, we may reasonably 
suppose that some of the Lord's true people 
have temporarily fallen asleep on this subject of his 
second coming, and that the sleeping ones will include 



some who have his spirit in their hearts, and who will 

be fully ready to welcome the Master when they shall 

awake, and whose lamps will be duly trimmed and 

burning and ready to enable them to discern the signs 

of his parousia, when once their attention is brought 

to the subject. In harmony with this we find that 

many who get awake on this subject now come into the 

clear light of present truth much more rapidly than 

did some in the past: doubtless partly because present 

truth can now be presented to them more concretely 

than ever before through the printed page. It is in the 

interest of this true "virgin" class that we now write: 

we have no desire to awaken the worldly; this knocking 

of the prophecies announcing the Parousia is not 

for them— besides, the worldly are so soundly asleep 

that it will require the terrific crashing of present institutions 

and the earthquake shakings of social revolution 

to thoroughly awaken them to a realization of 

R2359 : page 266 

the presence of the great Judge— Immanuel. The true 
Watchers on the contrary, if they slumber at all, sleep 
lightly, being on the qui vive of expectancy and hope 
for the long-waited-for Bridegroom. We would merely 
whisper in the ears of this class the one word, "Parousia!" 
assured that all true Watchers (and the Lord 
alone knoweth them that are his) will be aroused by 
that word, and trim their lamps on the subject. 

Is the question asked,— What portions of the sure 
word of prophecy indicate that the presence of our Lord 
began in the Autumn of 1874? We answer that there 
are several lines of prophecy which interlace and corroborate 
each other in this testimony; but, as might be 
expected, since the entire matter was to be hidden from 
the world, and "none of the wicked," but only the 
"wise" are to understand (Dan. 12:10), and these wise 
only to understand when the due time would come,— 
for these reasons, it must be evident to all that these 
prophecies, while clear and forcible and positive, are 
nevertheless somewhat under cover. We cannot here 
attempt to give a complete and comprehensive statement 
of these prophecies; that has already been done 
in four volumes aggregating eighteen hundred pages.* 
Here we can only give a very brief resume, leaving it 
for the true Watchers to seek that they may find; to 
knock if they would have the door of divine revelation 
opened to them; to use the keys which God has provided, 
if they are interested in penetrating into "the 
deep things" of the divine Word, now due to be understood; 
to eat of the meat of present truth, "things new 
and old," if they hunger and thirst after righteousness 
and true knowledge. 

"IN THE DAYS OF THESE KINGS." 



(1) We have a number of general prophecies, indicating 
that we are living in about the time of the 
Master's second presence. We have already referred 
to Daniel's testimony respecting "the time of the end," 
in which many will run to and fro, and knowledge will be 
increased, and the wise understand, and which the time 
of trouble follows. Then we have the inspired dream of 
Nebuchadnezzar, and its inspired interpretation by 
Daniel, showing the earthly governments which would 
bear rule over the earth;— during the interim between 
the overthrow of the typical Kingdom of God, whose 
last king sitting upon the throne of David was Zedekiah, 
and the installation of the true King, Emanuel, 
in his Millennial Kingdom glory. These different 
governments of earth are here pictured as a great 
image; Nebuchadnezzar's government, the first universal 
empire of earth, being represented by the head 
of gold; the Medo-Persian Empire, which, according 
to history, was the second universal empire, is here 
shown as the breast and arms of silver; the Grecian 
empire, which overthrew the Persian, and became the 
third universal empire, is represented by the belly and 
thighs of brass; the Roman empire, which succeeded the 
Grecian, and constituted itself the fourth universal 
empire of earth, was represented in the image by the 
legs of iron— strong exceedingly; and the later development 
of the same Roman empire with the intermixture 
of papal influence is represented in the image 
by the feet, which were partly iron (civil government), 
and partly of clay (ecclesiastical government— Papacy). 
These were to constitute the sum total of Gentile 
dominion; and "in the days of these kings" (represented 
by the ten toes of the image), Jehovah God himself 
would establish his Kingdom— the very Kingdom 
for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come!" 

We are all witnesses that the heavenly Kingdom 
has not yet come,— that we are still under the dominion 
of "the prince of this world"— the prince of darkness. 
All the efforts to prove to us that the greedy 
and bloody governments of Christendom, so-called, are 
the Kingdom for which we prayed, and were taught 
to pray, could not prevail: we could never recognize 
these as Immanuel's Kingdom: they are only the kingdoms 
established by Antichrist, and recognized by Antichrist, 
and named by Antichrist "Christendom." The 
true Kingdom waits for establishment at the hands of 
him whose right it is; and he has promised that, when 
he sits upon his throne, all his faithful ones, the "little 
flock" of the Gospel age, shall sit in that throne with 
him, and be associates in the work and in the honor of 
blessing the world. 

The Church is not neglected in the picture of 
earthly dominion given to Nebuchadnezzar, and interpreted 
by the Prophet Daniel. She is shown therein 



as a stone taken out of the mountain without hands 
(by divine power). This stone represents God's 
Kingdom (Christ and the Church), and the inspired 
dream and explanation show that the disaster which 
shall come to the kingdoms of this world, represented 
in the image and in the toes of its feet, would come 
through the impact or smiting of the image by the 
stone. Daniel says: "A stone was cut out, which, 
without being in hands, smote the image upon his 
feet.... Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the 
silver and the gold broken to pieces together, and became 
like the chaff of the summer threshing floor, and 
the wind carried them away that no place was found 
for them: and the stone that smote the image became 
a great mountain [kingdom], and filled the whole 
earth." 

The explanation is that— "The great God hath 
made known to the king [and indirectly more particularly 
to the Watchers] what shall come to pass hereafter." 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I. -IV. 

R2359 : page 267 

"In the days of these kings shall the God of 

heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed, 

and the kingdom shall not be left to other 

people; [it shall have no successors, for the others will 

all be destroyed] it shall break in pieces and consume 

all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." Here 

is a prophecy which gives a full delineation of the empires 

of earth, to which God granted dominion during 

the interim between the removal of the typical crown 

from his typical kingdom, and the institution of the 

crown of righteousness and glory upon the true King 

in the inauguration of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

Even the surface evidences are that human empire 
has nearly run its course, and that heavenly empire is 
needed to deliver the world from its own selfishness. 
But the sure word of prophecy, if carefully scrutinized 
by the Watcher, reveals still more. It shows that the 
next universal empire will be the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son, and further the interesting fact that the 
total lease of power to the Gentiles, is in the Scriptures 
known as "the times of the Gentiles;" and that 
these "times" are seven times, and that each of the 
seven times is a period of three hundred and sixty 
years, and that consequently the complete period of 
the seven times is 2520 years. Hence the Watchers 
may reckon that Gentile rule will terminate and Immanuel's 
rule be fully set up in 2520 years from the 
time the Lord removed the diadem from Zedekiah, 
saying: "Oh thou profane and wicked prince,... 
take off the diadem, remove the crown; I will overturn, 



overturn, overturn it, until he comes whose right 
it is, and I will give it unto him." The period of 
overturning of the Lord's typical Kingdom and the 
removal of the crown must correspond to the period of 
the lease of empire to the Gentiles and be 2520 years. 
And measuring this period, we find that 2520 years 
will expire with the close of the year 1914, A.D. and 
consequently that by that time Gentile rule will be no 
more while God's Kingdom will then hold sway. 

But the scrutinizing Watcher will readily perceive 
that it is one thing to know the time when earthly 
dominion shall cease, and give place to the completed 
Kingdom of God, while it would be a totally different 
matter to know when the "stone" Kingdom would begin 
to smite the image upon its feet, preparatory to 
its destruction. This period of smiting of the image, 
which precedes its destruction, must also precede the 
full establishment of God's Kingdom to fill the whole 
earth. This smiting period is the period of the parousia; 
the period in which Christ is present, gathering 
his "jewels," his "elect," and in which he will smite 
the nations with the rod of iron and with the two-edged 
sword of his mouth, dashing them in pieces as a potter's 
vessel, and preparing mankind for the royal 
majesty of the heavens. Let the Watchers note critically 
the Prophet Daniel's explanation that it will be 
"in the days of these kings" (the kingdoms represented 
in the feet and toes of the image— the divisions of 
Papal Rome) that the God of heaven will set up his 
kingdom. God began the selection of his Kingdom 
class in the days of Civil Rome— represented by the 
legs of iron: he has continued the selection ever since, 
and the setting up or bringing of his Church (Kingdom) 
into power comes toward the close of Gentile 
power, but before it ends; for it is to be "in the days 
of these kings" and not after their days. Now note 
the similarity of the expressions "in the days of the 
Son of Man" and "in the days of these kings," and 
give both the same significance and remember that, 
as we have proven, they will be the same days— days 
before the lease of Gentile power expires, in which 
the Son of Man will be present to "set up" his Kingdom, 
which shall a little later destroy all these Gentile 
kingdoms. 

TYPICAL ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCES WERE PROPHETIC. 



(2) Take another line of prophecy, concealed, and 
yet very simple and easy of appreciation when once 
the mind grasps it. The Scriptures show us that the 
fleshly house of Israel and all of its institutions and 
affairs were typical foreshadowings of the spiritual 
house of Israel, and its higher institutions, better sacrifices, 
etc. It need not, therefore, surprise us to find 



that the length of the Jewish age— the length of the 
divine favor to fleshly Israel,— was typical also, and 
that it gives us the exact measurement of the Gospel 
age,— God's dealings with and favor toward spiritual 
Israel. 

Jacob's name was changed to Israel, which signifies 
"A Prince with God," and his descendants were 
therefore termed Israelites— the people of the Prince 
with God. But the antitype of Jacob is Christ, the 
true Prince with God, not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit; and his house is spiritual Israel. Jacob's 
twelve sons first inherited his name and blessing, and 
through them it descended to all the fleshly house of 
Israel: Christ's twelve Apostles inherited his name 
and blessing, and through them it has descended to all 
the spiritual house of Israel. As the typical house 
had a high priest, Aaron, so the antitypical house has 
a greater high priest, Christ Jesus our Lord, the high 
priest of our profession. As the fleshly house had a 
priesthood under Aaron, so the spiritual house has "a 
royal priesthood" under Christ, to whom the promise 
is made that they shall be kings and priests unto God, 
who shall reign on the earth, after their present time 
of sacrificing is ended. So we might proceed with 
everything that fleshly Israel had and find its duplicate 

R2359 : page 268 

on a higher plane, in spiritual Israel, but we will 
not go into details here: suffice it to notice further 
that the Jewish age or period of fleshly Israel's favor 
ended with a "harvest" period of forty years. This 
began with our Lord's baptism, lasted three and a 
half years, as a national test, and when that nation 
was rejected at the time of our Lord's crucifixion, the 
harvest work proper began— a separation of the wheat 
from the chaff— a time of gathering out of that rejected 
nation such as were "Israelites indeed," previous to 
the great time of trouble which came upon the nation 
and which utterly destroyed their national polity A.D. 
70. All of this is likened to a "harvest" season, and 
its first garnering of the wheat and subsequent burning 
of the chaff. And our Lord gives instructions to 
us (Matt. 13) that this Gospel age of spiritual Israel's 
favor will likewise end with a harvesting time, gathering 
the wheat together and ultimately destroying the 
tares. In the harvesting of the fleshly house our Lord, 
in the flesh, was the Chief-Reaper, and his Apostles 
were co-laborers: in the harvesting of the spiritual house 
our Lord, a spirit being, is to be present as the Chief-Reaper, 
and members of the spiritual house are to be 
also reapers. 

Now note the time correspondencies. The Jewish 
age, from the death of Jacob to the death of Christ, 
was 1845 years long— to the beginning of our Lord's 
ministry 1841-1/2 years long, and to the time of the utter 



destruction of their nation, in A.D. 70, 1881-1/2 years 

long. Notice how the Gospel age corresponds to this. 

The Gospel age did not begin with our Lord's birth: it 

began after our Lord's death and resurrection, when 

he commissioned his disciples to "preach the Gospel to 

every creature." (Our Lord's previous work during 

the three and a half years of his ministry was the offering 

of the Kingdom to the fleshly house, to test 

them, and to prove that they were unready to receive 

the true Kingdom.) Applying the foregoing measurements 

of the Jewish age to the Gospel age, beginning 

it at the time of our Lord's death and resurrection and 

the Pentecostal blessing, in the Spring of A.D. 33, we 

find that the period of 1841-1/2 years from the death of 

Jacob to the beginning of our Lord's ministry, 

would measure from the Spring of A.D. 33 to the 

Autumn of 1874; and the 1845 years of the Jewish 

age, from the death of Jacob to the rejection of 

fleshly Israel, applied here, measuring from the Spring of 

A.D. 33, would reach to the Spring of 1878; and the 

1881-1/2 years from the death of Jacob to the full destruction 

of Israel's polity in A.D. 70, finds its correspondence 

in this Gospel age, by measuring 1881-1/2 years from 

the Spring of A.D. 33, which would bring us exactly to 

(Autumn) 1914 A.D. —the very year and time shown 

us by Daniel's prophecy to be the full end and limit of 

the "Gentile times." Can this be accidental? Nay; 

it is design. What stronger testimony could be asked 

by the eye and ear of faith. Surely, anything plainer 

or clearer would be sight and leave no room for faith. 

THE JUBILEE PROPHECY. 



(3) Note another prophecy, similarly hidden in 
type in the Mosaic law,— Israel's Jubilee Year. No 
one is prepared to understand this line of prophecy who 
has not first learned that the second coming of our Lord 
is not for the purpose of destroying the world, but for 
the purpose of blessing it according to the promise made 
to Abraham, "in thy Seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed,"— with the favors lost in Adam. 
These will be offered to all and will be made perpetual 
to those who will accept them on the terms of the New 
Covenant. None can see any beauty or typical significance 
in Israel's Jubilee who have not learned that 
God has provided "times of restitution of all things" 
which are to begin in connection with the second advent 
of the Redeemer.— See Acts 3:19-23. 

We find that Israel's Jubilee years, in which every 
person and family had restored to them every lost possession 
and all personal liberties, was intended to be a 
type of the coming time of restitution, when a full opportunity 
for attaining freedom from sin and from Satan, 
and from the hereditary weaknesses of the flesh, 



shall be presented to all, and when the earth shall again 
revert to the human family in general, for whom it was 
created, and for whom it was redeemed by Christ, after 
being lost through Adam's transgression. We find 
that the Scriptures indicate, in connection with these 
jubilees, a system of counting by multiples; and that 
a Jubilee of Jubilees, or fifty times fifty years (2500 
years) constitutes a Great Jubilee cycle and that such 
a cycle began to count after fleshly Israel had observed 
her last typical Jubilee. We find from the Scriptures 
that Israel's nineteenth Jubilee year was her last, in 
the year B.C. 626. Knowing that the Jubilee was a 
part of the Law, and that no feature of that Law, not 
one jot or tittle, can pass away without reaching a 
fulfilment or antitype, we measure the cycle of the 
Great Jubilee 2500 years from the date when the last 
typical Jubilee was kept, 626 B.C., and find accordingly 
that the an ti typical Jubilee or Great Jubilee of 
Jubilees should have begun in October, 1874. Thus,— 
625 years B.C. plus 1875 years A.D. are 2500 years, 
which would include the Jubilee year: consequently, 
with the end of the year 1874, Jewish time, October, 
the an ti typical Jubilee of 1,000 years instead of one year 
was due to begin. 

Watchers will note carefully the correspondency 
of this date, and the character of the event to be expected, 
with the finding of our previous examinations 

R2359 : page 269 

(1 and 2), which showed us this very same date, 
October, 1874, was the time when the "harvest" of 
this age was due to begin, and when the Lord himself, 
as the Chief Reaper, was due to be present. The 
only thing necessary to connect this Jubilee prophecy 
with the others is the statement of the Apostle Peter 
in Acts 3:21, which shows that our Lord must be 
present (at his second advent) at the beginning of the 
times of restitution of all things, and as already seen, 
these restitution times are the Antitypical Jubilee times 
typified by Israel's Jubilees. Thus we have two very 
simple but clear and very important lines of Scripture 
testimony which indicate clearly that the parousia of 
our Lord was due to begin in October, 1874, and both 
show us the character of the work which we should 
expect would be in progress during the time of his 
presence, preceding his open manifestation to the 
world, his epiphania, his apokalupsis. 

THE DAYS OF WAITING ARE FULFILLED. 



(4) Take another line of prophecy: we find 
that the 1260 days, and the 1290 days, and the 1335 
days, so particularly set forth in Daniel's prophecy, 



and corroborated in Revelation, have had fulfilments, 
—the 1260 days ending in 1799, the 1290 days ending 
in 1829, and the 1335 days ending in 1874. Our 
friends known as "Second Adventists" were wont to 
use these "days of Daniel," and once applied them 
as we do here: but they abandoned them after 1874 
passed and they failed to see Jesus with their natural 
eyesight, in a body of flesh and with Calvary's scars. 
They have dropped these "days of Daniel" entirely 
because they find no way of applying them which 
would prolong them beyond 1874. The fault is not 
with the days nor with their application as above; but 
with the wrong things expected. They, in common 
with others who look for the Second Advent, err in 
expecting that the Gospel age which has been a spirit 
and faith epoch will end with a flesh and sight deterioration 
—in expecting that the spiritual kingdom of 
Satan will be followed by a fleshly kingdom of Christ. 
But the Watchers amongst the Adventists as well as 
in other denominations, are getting the eyes of their 
understanding opened by the anointing of the promised 
eyesalve.— Rev. 3:18. 

It was concerning this last period that the angel 
declared to the Prophet, "Oh, the blessedness of him 
that waiteth, and cometh to the 1335 days. ...Thou 
shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the 
days." What blessedness? We answer, a joy of 
heart and rejoicing to the Watchers is what is here 
intimated. It is since this date, October, 1874, where 
Daniel's 1335 days intimated that a great blessing 
would begin, where the Jubilee types indicated that the 
restitution of all things would begin, (which implies 
the second presence of the great Restorer), and where 
the parallelism of the two houses of Israel shows that 
the second presence of our Lord as the Great Reaper is 
due,— from this date a great blessing has come to the 
Watchers. Since then the Word of God has opened 
before us in a most marvelous manner. Since then the 
sure word of prophecy as a lamp to our feet has shown 
us many evidences that we are in the end of the age. 
Since then the day-star has been rising in the hearts of 
the Watchers, and has illuminated our minds, releasing 
us from the terrible nightmare of error respecting 
eternal torment, revealing to us the true character of 
our Heavenly Father, making plain to us the necessity 
of the great atonement for sin, and showing us distinctly 
the object of the permission of evil and revealing, 
one by one, various features of the divine plan,— the 
high calling of the Church to the divine nature, and to 
joint-heirship with Christ in his Millennial Kingdom; 
and the resulting blessing of restitution to human perfection 
for the world of mankind in general. Ah yes! 
all who have been brought "out of darkness into this 
marvelous light" can appreciate the words of the angel, 
and heartily say, Blessed are our ears, for they hear, 
and our eyes, for they see, for many prophets and many 



righteous persons have desired to know these things, 
and have not known them. 

(5) We might refer to other prophecies and types 
in the Scriptures, which show that we are living in the 
"harvest" time of this age, in the parousia of the Son 
of Man, but our space forbids. The fact that this world, 
as he predicted, continues in its usual course, eating, 
drinking, planting and building, etc., and knows not of 
his presence, so far from being an evidence against these 
prophetic testimonies, quite to the contrary, shows us 
that the fulfilment is coming, just as the Master predicted: 
that the day of the Lord, the day of his presence, 
has come upon the world as a thief in the night, 
secretly, quietly, stealthily, unknown;— the only ones 
favored with a knowledge of events transpiring on the 
other side of the vail being the Watchers who, if they 
have slumbered at all, have nevertheless maintained a 
waiting attitude of readiness for the announcement,— 

"BEHOLD THE BRIDEGROOM!" 



This is the announcement which we are now giving 
—Not, Behold, the Bridegroom cometh, but "Behold 
the Bridegroom!" already here, present, knocking 
gently with the prophecies to arouse the Virgins, but 
not to arouse the world. (Rev. 3:20.) This is the reading 
of the oldest Greek Manuscripts, which omit "cometh." 
Our Lord says, "If any man hear my voice 
[knock] and open the door, I will come in to him and 
sup with him." This message to the present Laodicean 

R2359 : page 270 

phase of the Church, intimates very clearly 

(1) that the "knock" and "voice" will be inaudible to 

natural ears, and heard only by the ears of the understanding, 

the hearing of faith; (2) that it will not be a 

denominational knock or call (as to Adventists, Presbyterians, 

etc.), but (3) that it will be a knock that 

must be heard individually and responded to individually 

—"any man" who hears the "knock" or "voice," 

if he so wills, may exercise faith and open the door of 

his understanding and realize his Lord's second 

presence. 

The man who never hears the "knock" is not 
counted worthy to hear it. But those who hear are 
evidently not compelled to respond and to accept the 
present, knocking King: hence he says, if the hearing 
one open the door, I will come in. However, only those 
who recognize the "knock" and who respond and by 
faith open to the Lord and receive him as their present 
King— only these are to have the great blessing of 
spiritual nourishment— the feast of "meat in due season," 
"things new and old," which the Master promised 



to provide at that time, to strengthen the faithful for 
the judgments, trials, testings and sittings which must 
"begin with the house of God." "I will come in to 
him and sup with him and he with me."— Compare 
Rev. 3:20, and Luke 12:37. 

As therefore we softly whisper— "Behold the Bridegroom!" 
it is not with any hope of arousing the world 
to faith in the Lord's presence, etc. They are not 
worthy to know and would only misuse the knowledge 
now. By and by, in the Lord's due time, they shall 
know— in the period of the epiphania and apokalupsis 
of the Son of Man. They will be awakened by the 
great crash of the day of trouble. We do, however, 
promulgate the message, "Behold the Bridegroom 
[present] ! " with the confident expectation that all 
who are of the "Virgin" class (the pure, the justified 
and consecrated), will be permitted to hear the message, 
will be aroused by it, and will trim their lamps 
(examine the Scriptures, investigate the subject), and 
find the message true, before the "door is shut" and 
the great trouble begun. We well know, however, 
from the Lord's prophetic parable, that among those 
who will be aroused to investigation, there will be two 
classes, because there are both wise and foolish "Virgins." 
The wise are those who have not only consecrated 
their all to the Lord, but who are living accordingly, 
—not unto sin, nor unto self, nor unto sectarianism, 
but unto the Lord: these, as intimated in the parable, 
will find no difficulty in trimming their lamps and 
recognizing the presence of the Bridegroom. But 
the foolish Virgins, overcharged with the cares of this 
life, or the deceitfulness of riches (wealth, reputation, 
influence, etc.), will not have within themselves ("in 
their vessels") a sufficiency of the oil (holy spirit); 
and consequently they will be unable to get the light 
in time to go in with the wise virgins before the elect 
number shall be completed, and the door of opportunity 
to become part of the Bride of Christ, shall forever 
close. True, they will later obtain the oil, as is shown 
in the parable, but too late to be of the "little flock" 
who shall be accounted worthy to share the Kingdom 
and to escape the great time of trouble coming upon 
the world: the foolish virgins will be obliged to pass 
through the trouble with the world, and will share thus 
in its distress, represented in the parable by the words, 
"wailing and gnashing of teeth." 

PAROUSIA IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The word parousia occurs in the following texts 
of the New Testament, in each of which it should be 
properly translated "presence:"— 

"What shall be the sign of thy presence?"— 
Matt. 24:3. 



"So shall also the presence of the Son of Man be." 
-Matt. 24:27,37,39. 
"They that are Christ's at his presence."— 

1 Cor. 15:23. 

"What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? 
Are not even ye, presented before our Lord Jesus 
Christ at his presence?"— 1 Thes. 2:19. 

That "he may establish your hearts unblamable 
in holiness before the Lord, even our Father, at the 
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ."— 1 Thes. 3:13. 

"We which are alive and remain unto the presence 
of the Lord shall not hinder them which are asleep." 
-1 Thes. 4:15. 

"Be preserved blameless unto the presence of our 
Lord Jesus Christ."— 1 Thes. 5:23. 

"Now we beseech you, brethren, by the presence 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together 
unto him."— 2 Thes. 2:1. 

"Be patient, therefore, brethren, unto the presence 
of the Lord."— James 5:7. 

"Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the 
presence of the Lord draweth nigh."— James 5:8. 

"There shall come in the last days scoffers [in the 
Church] walking after their own lusts [desires], and 
saying, Where is the promise of his presence?"— 

2 Pet. 3:3,4. 

The word parousia is properly translated ("presence") 
in 2 Cor. 10:10, and Phil. 2:12. 

EPIPHANIA IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The Greek word epiphania signifies bright shining 
or manifestation. It is rendered "appearing" and 
"brightness," and occurs as follows:— 

"Keep this commandment without spot unrebukable 

R2359 : page 271 

until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which 
in his times he shall show who is the blessed and only 
potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords."— 

1 Tim. 6:14,15. 

"I charge thee, therefore, before God and the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the 
dead at his appearing and his Kingdom."— 2 Tim. 4:1. 

"There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness 
which he shall give me at that day: and not to me only, 
but unto all them also that love his appearing."— 

2 Tim. 4:8. 

"Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious 
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus 
Christ."-Titus2:13. 

"Then shall that Wicked One be exposed, whom 
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, 



and shall destroy with the brightness [epiphania— bright 
shining] of his coming [parousia— presence]."— 
2Thes. 2:8. 

APOKALUPSIS IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The Greek words apokalupsis and apokalupto signify 
revealment, uncovering, unveiling (as of a thing 
previously present but hidden). The name of the last 
book of the Bible is from the same root— Apocalypse 
or Revelation. Apokalupsis is rendered revealed, revelation, 
appearing, coming and manifestation, in the following 
texts which relate to the Lord's second presence 
and power and glory, as these shall be made known,— 
uncovered or revealed to the world. Many of these 
texts also show that when he shall thus be revealed, 
his Church will be with the Lord and be revealed or 
manifested at the same time and in the same manner. 

"The sufferings of this present time are not worthy 
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed 
in us."— Rom. 8:18. 

"Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings; that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may 
be glad also with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 4:13. 

"An inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and 
that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who 
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation 
ready to be revealed in the last time."— 
1 Pet. 1:4,5. 

"A partaker of the glory that shall be revealed." 
-1 Pet. 5:1. 

"Every man's work shall be made manifest: for 
the day shall declare it, for it shall be revealed by fire." 
(1 Cor. 3:13.) Here the reference evidently is to 
the testings of the Lord's people during the period of 
his presence in the end of the age. The Apostle's 
words thus agree with our Lord's prophecy of the same 
testings, saying that "there is nothing covered that 
shall not be revealed"— uncovered.— Luke 12:2. 

"Hope to the end for the grace that is to be 
brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ." 
-1 Pet. 1:13. 

"The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven in 
flaming fire [judgments against all unrighteousness], 
taking vengeance."— 2 Thes. 1:7,8. 

"So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for 
the coming [apokalupsis— revealment] of our Lord 
Jesus Christ."— 1 Cor. 1:7. [The Lord's people will 
need to keep active, watching and waiting for the great 
blessing until the manifestation or revealment of the 
Lord; but if Watchers, they shall be made aware of 
his presence (parousia) and the work of "harvest" 
beforehand and share in the revealment.] 

"That the trial of your faith. ..might be found 



unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing [apokalupsis 
— revealment] of Jesus Christ."— 1 Pet. 1:7. 

"For the earnest expectation of the creature 
[mankind] waiteth for the manifestation [apokalupsis 
—revealing] of the sons of God [the Church]."— 
Rom. 8:19. 

"The same day that Lot went out of Sodom it 
rained fire and brimstone out of heaven, and destroyed 
them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the 
Son of Man is revealed." (Luke 17:29,30.) That is 
to say, the judgments of the coming "time of trouble" 
as predicted will begin as soon as the "salt of the 
earth," the saints, have all been changed; and thus 
the Son of Man will be revealed a present Judge, who 
already had for some time been present sealing and 
gathering his "elect." 

PRESENCE GRADUALLY REVEALED. 



Foregoing we drew the line of distinction between 
the parousia and the epiphania or apokalupsis of our 
Lord quite sharply, to assist the reader in noting their 
difference of signification. As a matter of fact, however, 
the bright shining of the present One is due to begin 
shortly after the parousia begins; and again as at 
the first advent it will be true that "the Light shineth 
in the darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it 
not." The revealing of the Lord's presence begins 
with the faithful of the Church speedily, and gradually 
extends to the world in general. Up to the time when 
the strength of the trouble breaks forth, only the faithful 
Watchers discern the parousia, and only by them 
can the bright-shining of the Lord's presence be appreciated. 
To these the bright-shining of the Lord's 
presence, the increased brilliancy of the light of truth 
respecting the Word and character and plan of God is 
an ever increasing joy and pleasure: thus it is that "ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness," respecting the events 
of the day of the Lord, but know in advance that its 
tribulation will come upon the world as travail upon a 
woman.— 1 Thes. 5:3,4. 

R2359 : page 272 

While the revealment of our Lord's presence thus 
illuminates the hearts of his faithful ones as the Day-star 
(2 Pet. 1:19) and causes them to understand, and 
not be in darkness with the world in respect to his 
plans, present and future, the bright-shining of the 
Lord's presence shall affect nominal Christians, and 
the civilized world in general also, but in a totally 
different manner, for the character of Christ's "harvest" 
work, during this period of his presence, is such 
as to cause a general opening of eyes along the lines 



of justice and injustice, righteousness and sin, the 
rights of mankind and the wrongs of mankind. The 
light which has been shining out for the past twenty 
years, is awakening the world to a realization of its 
rights and its wrongs, to a realization that the earth 
belongs to mankind in general and not exclusively to 
a few who have seized it and fenced it. This same 
light is exposing the corruption and falsity of many 
long-venerated theories and institutions, monarchical, 
religious, political and financial. It was in reference 
to this light of his presence at the second advent that 
our Lord declared that this day of his presence would 
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make 
manifest the secret counsels of the heart,— for there is 
nothing hidden that shall not be uncovered. (Luke 8:17.) 
And in this connection let it not be overlooked 
that the Apostle declares that Satan's power to deceive 
the world through Antichrist is to be consumed 
by "the bright-shining [epiphania] of his presence 
[parousia]."— 2 Thes. 2:8. 

Thus seen, the bright-shining of the present One 
is causing great joy to the hearts of the faithful, who 
wait patiently for him and the deliverance which he 
has promised, but the bright-shining, as it affects the 
worldly, has the effect of quickening their selfish propensities, 
producing discontent, and is thus preparing 
the world for the great climax of catastrophe, predicted 
in the Word of the Lord, as the consummation 
of this age;— the overthrow of all the governments 
and institutions of this present order of things in anarchy, 
—"a time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation." 

We noticed that it was predicted 2500 years ago, 
through the Prophet Daniel that "in the days of these 
kings" the representatives of the fourth universal empire, 
Rome, ecclesiastically conglomerated, shown in 
the feet and toes of the image, the God of heaven 
would cause the Kingdom of God to smite the image 
upon its feet, to utterly crush it; and that it would be 
after smiting the image that God's Kingdom, represented 
by the stone, would wax great and fill the 
whole earth. As we have just shown, we are now in 
this time in which the Kingdom of God is exerting 
its force against the kingdoms of this world: the King 
himself is present, must be present before he could 
destroy present kingdoms and take their power; he is 
already exerting the influences which will eventuate 
in their destruction; and he is prepared, backed by all 
the power of God, to quickly establish upon their 
ruins his own glorious Kingdom, consisting of himself 
the King, and his faithful ones of the Gospel Church 
as his Bride and joint-heir. 

The influence exerted by our present Lord, the 
Light, the Truth, is already breaking the power of 
ignorance and superstition, which for long centuries 
has held the masses of mankind in subserviency to 



Papacy; and the same bright-shining is likewise dissolving 
the lighter shackles of ignorance and error 
forged for their faithful by the various sects of Protestantism. 
Ultimately all superstition and false reverence 
will be dissolved, and false institutions will 
fall, and then will be manifest the fact that error and 
falsehood and fear never truly sanctify the heartl- 
and the world of mankind being released from its servility 
to fear will speedily manifest its true character 
of selfishness and ungodliness, and will speedily precipitate 
the great trouble predicted. 

But it would be a mistake to suppose that the 
parousia of our Lord is merely or chiefly in connection 
with the world and its preparation for the chaos of 
the present order of things. On the contrary, the 
chief work of the Lord during this period of his 
parousia is for and in connection with his Church. 
As we saw above, he foretold that on his return he 
will first reckon with his servants, to whom he entrusted 
the pounds and talents, before manifesting 
his wrath against evil-doers in the trouble of this "day 
of vengeance,"— in the slaughter of all who would 
not have him to reign over them. That slaughter 
time, in which all who will not accept the reign of 
righteousness will be destroyed from among the people 
(Acts 3:23), begins with the burning of the 
"tares" in the end of this age, when there shall be 
great trouble "weeping and gnashing of teeth;" and 
to some extent it will continue throughout the Millennial 
Age for all the way to the very last (Isa. 65:20; 
Acts 3:23; Rev. 20:8,9) all who wilfully oppose the 
Lord will perish. 

The Kingdom which we are expecting, and which 
we believe is now in process of establishment, and is 
soon to smite the kingdoms of this world and to supplant 
them, is not an earthly kingdom, but a heavenly 
one, not a fleshly kingdom, but a spiritual one, not a 
kingdom which will be visible to the natural eye, but 
an invisible yet powerful kingdom. We find nothing 
in the Scriptures to corroborate the thought entertained 
by some that this Gospel age having begun in 
the spirit is to culminate in a reign of Christ and his 

R2359 : page 273 

Church in the flesh with an earthly throne, etc. 
Quite to the contrary, the King and his joint-heirs, 
the Church, as spirit beings, will have a spiritual empire, 
tho their subjects to whom they will offer the 
blessings of the restitution purchased at Calvary will 
be men in the flesh, whose highest hope and ambition 
will be restitution to the grand perfection of the human 
nature lost in Eden, redeemed at Calvary,— an earthly 
image of the Heavenly Father. We hold that Christ 
and his saints during the Millennial Age will be no 
more visible to mankind than is the Prince of this 



world, Satan, whose associates in the misrule of the 
present evil world, the fallen angels, are likewise 
invisible. 

"THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN COMETH NOT WITH 
OBSERVATION." 



The Pharisees at the first advent made the mistake 
of supposing that the Kingdom, which Christ 
proclaimed, would be a visible kingdom, composed of 
himself and his followers in the flesh: and seeing no 
army or other evidences of temporal power for the establishment 
of an earthly kingdom, they thought to 
expose the hollowness of our Lord's claims before his 
followers, by asking him the question,— When will 
your Kingdom of God appear— when will we see it? 
Mark well our Lord's reply, which, if the Pharisees 
had understood it, might have been a great revelation 
to them. He answered, "The Kingdom of God cometh 
not with observation." How strange they must 
have thought this answer! The Kingdom of God, 
then, would be a Kingdom which could not be observed 
or seen;— an invisible kingdom. But our Lord 
continued the explanation and increased their perplexity 
by adding, "Neither shall ye say, Lo here, or, Lo 
there." Then our Lord gave the key to the matter 
by adding, "Because the Kingdom of Heaven is [to 
be] in the midst of you." That is to say, when the 
Kingdom of Heaven shall come it will be amongst 
mankind, everywhere present but wholly invisible; so 
that they cannot observe it with the natural eye, nor 
can they point it out or locate it, altho it will be 
everywhere present amongst men, an omnipresent and 
omnipotent rule or reign of righteousness. In our 
Common Version the true thought is obscured by the 
words "within you," which would better be "among 
you." Anyone, however, can see that it could not 
have been our Lord's intention to say that the Kingdom 
of God was then or ever would be within the 
hearts of the class addressed, and which elsewhere he 
styled "hypocrites, whited walls and sepulchers, full 
of all manner of corruption." 

"THAT WHICH IS BORN OF THE SPIRIT IS SPIRIT." 



We call to mind also our Lord's explanation of spiritual 
things to Nicodemus, in which he declared plainly 
that only those who are born again can either enter into 
or see the Kingdom of God. (John 3:3,6.) Nor does 
this merely refer to the begetting of the spirit, as at 
consecration; it includes also the birth of the spirit in 
resurrection— "born from the dead." The Apostle 



Paul gives the same assurance, saying, "Flesh and 
blood [human nature] cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God." Hence he informs us that all those who 
shall be sharers of that heavenly Kingdom must be 
"changed" from human or flesh conditions to spirit 
conditions, from weakness to power, from animal to 
spiritual conditions.— 1 Cor. 15:42-44. 

One matter which more than any other seems to 
hinder the Lord's people from grasping this subject 
clearly is the prevalent but mistaken view which is 
entertained respecting the resurrection of the dead. 
We shall not attempt to discuss this subject at length 
here, and we shall omit entirely reference to the world's 
resurrection, which will be the human conditions, nature, 
etc.; but it is necessary that we notice something 
respecting "the first [chief, best, highest] resurrection, 
which appertains only to Christ Jesus and the Church 
which is his body— the Kingdom class. These all are 
sacrificers, who "present their bodies living sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable to God." In view of this sacrifice 
of the human nature, the gift of God to these in exchange 
is a spiritual nature, and hence they are termed 
"new creatures." Their exaltation in nature is very 
high: lifted out of the human nature, which is a little 
lower than that of angels (the lowest order of spirit beings) 
they are to be exalted to the nature and likeness 
of their Lord, "far above angels, principalities and 
powers," and to be made partakers of the highest form 
of the spirit nature, namely, the divine nature, with its 
wonderful peculiarity, namely, immortality, or inherent 
life. *-2 Pet. 1:4. 

The one point which more than any other seems 
to confuse the student of this subject is our Lord's resurrection. 
They note the fact that he appeared in a 
body of flesh and bones, after his resurrection, and they 
therefore conclude that he still has a body of flesh and 
bones bearing all the scars of Calvary; hence, in thinking 
of his second advent they invariably expect it to be 
another advent as a human being (in flesh and bones), 
"a little lower than the angels." These expectations 
are wrong, as we shall show from the Scriptures. Our 
Lord after his resurrection was a spirit being, and his 
manifestations of himself to his disciples in various 
fleshly bodies, then, were similar exactly to manifestations 
made before he became the man Christ Jesus, while 
he still possessed the glory which he had with the 
Father before the world was,— the glory of a spirit being. 
For instance, are we not particularly told that 



*Send for our tract, "The Hope of Immortality,"— samples 
free. 

R2359 : page 274 



the Lord and two angels appeared as men in bodies of 
flesh and blood and bones, and in ordinary human garb, 
to Abraham and Sarah? And the record is that "they 
did eat and talk with Abraham." On another occasion 
the Lord appeared to Moses, not in a body of flesh, but 
"as a flame of fire" in a bush which apparently burned, 
and from which he spoke to Moses. We contend 
that such a power to appear in any kind of a body 
is a power which in the past was considerably used in 
communicating the divine will to mankind, and that it 
is only discontinued now because the canon of divine 
revelation is complete, so that in it the man of God is 
thoroughly furnished unto every good word and work, 
and needs no special message or revelations.— 
2 Tim. 3:17. 

In reading the narrative of our Lord's appearance 
to his disciples after his resurrection, the fact seems 
generally to be overlooked that he appeared only a few 
times, in all, and that these visits were always brief, 
and that between these visits, after the day of his resurrection, 
there were long periods of days and weeks 
in which the disciples saw nothing of him. It is generally 
overlooked, also, that he appeared in various 
forms, one of which was identical with the body that 
was crucified, because Thomas had said he would not 
believe unless he could have such a demonstration. 
Even then our Lord rather upbraided Thomas, assuring 
him that there was a still greater blessing in store for 
those who ask not for such ocular demonstration. It 
is generally forgotten that none of the world ever saw 
our Lord after his resurrection, but merely his disciples, 
to whom, it is said, he "showed himself." This 
was in harmony with his statement made before his 
death, "Yet a little while and the world seeth me no 
more."— John 14:19. 

The change of nature which our Lord experienced 
in his resurrection was no less a step upward from the 
earthly to the heavenly condition than was the change 
of nature which he experienced at his birth a step 
downward from the heavenly to the earthly condition, 
called "humbling himself," laying aside his glory. As 
he laid aside the glory of his spirit being to become a 
man, so he in turn laid aside his humanity in death in 
order to assume the glory and dignity of the divine 
nature, "far above." Concerning the change which 
he experienced at his resurrection, the Apostle declares, 
"God hath highly exalted him." It should be manifest 
to all that, since our Lord left his rich condition as a 
spirit being, and humbled himself and became comparatively 
poor in the taking of the human nature, that 
this was for some particular reason and object, and 
that, when that object would be accomplished, the 
riches of the spiritual condition would be fully restored 
to him. But instead, the general thought is that our 
Lord Jesus not only is encumbered in heaven with a 
body of flesh, wholly unsuitable to heavenly conditions, 



but that in addition to this that body of flesh has all 
the marks of mental and physical suffering which it 
received through contact with sin and sinners as our 
ransom price. 

Such a view is dishonoring to the Heavenly Father, 
for it should not be supposed that he would tolerate a 
loss to all eternity on the part of his well beloved One, 
because of his faithfulness and obedience to the divine 
will. The Scripture declaration is to the contrary, 
namely, that our Lord was "made flesh," took upon 
him our nature "for the suffering of death;" and not 
for to be encumbered with fleshly conditions to all 
eternity. Besides, if our Lord must bear the scars of 
his wounds to all eternity, the implication would be 
that his people would also bear all their blemishes and 
scars to all eternity. Surely, if such were the divine 
arrangement, that which is perfect would never come, 
for we should be encumbered with the imperfect forever. 
-1 Cor. 13:10. 

When we get the correct view of this matter, every 
difficulty and objection ceases. As the Scriptures 
declare, so it was, "He was put to death in flesh, he 
was quickened in spirit." "Tho we have known Christ 
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no 
more [so]." (2 Cor. 5:16) It was at his resurrection 
that he became the second Adam— "the last Adam, a 
quickening spirit." (1 Cor. 15:45.) "Now the Lord 
is that spirit." (2 Cor. 3:17.) After appearing to his 
disciples under various peculiar conditions after his resurrection, 
in various bodies, the Lord invariably vanished, 
—as soon as he had communicated to them the 
appropriate lessons, causing, as they declared, their 
hearts to burn within them. He appeared in these various 
forms for two reasons:— 

(1) They could best receive his instructions under 
such conditions, whereas, if he had appeared to them 
in the glory of his spirit being, and had performed a 
miracle upon their eyes by which they could have discerned 
his spiritual glory, they would have been too 

much affrighted to have benefited by what he would 
have said. 

(2) They were still natural men, not fully begotten 
of the holy spirit, because Pentecost was not yet 
come (John 7:39), and hence they were unprepared to 
understand spiritual things; "for the natural man receiveth 
not the things of the spirit of God, neither can 

he know [appreciate] them, because they are spiritually 
discerned." 

The Apostle Paul was the only one of the disciples 
who saw the Lord "as he is." He tells us that 
the Lord's real spiritual presence, so far from being 
fleshly or human-like, shone with a brightness "above 

R2359 : page 275 

the brightness of the sun at noonday." The effect 



upon Paul's eyes was serious, and, we may readily believe 
the effects remained with him to his dying day, 
notwithstanding the miraculous removal of the callous 
scales, which permitted him to see, tho indistinctly. 
Very evidently our Lord's design was to educate his 
apostles up to the thought of his resurrection, and also 
to the thought of his resurrection being not to former 
conditions, limited by the flesh, but to new conditions, 
in which he (as he had already explained to Nicodemus) 
could come and go like the wind, and none could 
know whence he came nor whither he went; he could 
appear in one body or in another body, or be present 
with them without their being aware of it, just as "the 
angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that 
fear him," yet is invisible to them, because a spirit 
being. 

"WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM, FOR WE SHALL SEE HIM 
AS HE IS." 



When the right conception of our Lord, in his glorified 
condition, is gained, and when the Apostle's 
statement is remembered, that his Church shall be like 
him, and "see him as he is," it is comparatively easy 
to understand that the entire glorified Church will be 
as invisible to the world as the Heavenly Father is, 
and as our Lord Jesus was after his resurrection; and 
when it is remembered that this Church constitutes the 
Kingdom of God, the "royal priesthood," which is to 
rule and bless the world during the Millennial age, our 
Lord's words to the Pharisees are quite intelligible,— 
"The Kingdom of God cometh not with observation— 
neither shall ye say, Lo here! or, Lo there! for behold, 
the Kingdom of God is in the midst of you"— a present 
but invisible authority, government, rule of 
righteousness. 

THEY KNEW NOT THE TIME OF THEIR VISITATION. 
-LUKE 19:44.- 



Our Lord reproved the teachers of Israel because 
they did not discern the signs of the times, because 
they "knew not the time of their visitation." His 
words imply that their ignorance was a mark of carelessness 
and unworthiness, and of divine disfavor. 
He said: "Ye can discern the face of the sky; how is 
it that ye cannot discern the signs of the times?" 
There was a reason, and the realization of that reason 
might have meant, to some at least, a correction of 
it— a drawing near to God to be taught of him. So 
now in the time of our Lord's second presence we find 
the world largely increasing in wisdom along the various 



lines, and many hearts in perplexity and wonderment 

looking for those things which are coming upon 

the world, their hearts failing them for fear of the 

impending dissolution of the social structure in anarchy, 

and yet none are so blind respecting the times 

in which we live and the great changes impending, as 

the leaders of religious thought. 

They are blinded by their false theories. They 
have declared that the Lord's commission to his 
Church is that she should convert the world into a 
Kingdom of God, and thus bring about the reign of 
righteousness; and they are so determined that their 
theories must not fail that they cannot see what is 
rapidly becoming apparent even to the worldly, namely, 
that the numbers even nominally converted every 
year are increasing far less, proportionately, than the 
natural increase of the world's population: so that if 
they had millions of years before them the conversion 
could never be hoped for, but in the end of millions 
of years true Christianity could not expect to claim as 
large a percentage as at present. Their theory also 
blinds them to the fact that much of the increase of 
Church membership in civilized lands is merely for 
popularity's sake, and for the sake of worldly prosperity, 
social standing, etc., and not the result of love for 
God and righteousness, nor significant of a consecration 
to walk in the "narrow way" of self-denial, self-sacrifice, 
etc. 

The worldly, therefore, are really in a better condition 
to discern the signs of the times than many 
prejudiced nominal Christians. But none can see 
these things from the true standpoint except as they 
take that standpoint, and it is only granted to those 
who are fully consecrated to the Lord and who hearken 
to his Word. These shall not be in darkness, the 
Lord will not hide from them either his good purposes 
as respects the blessing of the Church and subsequently 
of the world, or his purposes respecting the chastisement 
of the world in a great time of trouble, preparatory 
to its blessing, after it has been humbled. 

"THE DEAD IN CHRIST SHALL RISE FIRST." 



The chief work of our Lord during this "harvest" 
time, and especially in the forepart of it (when he 
calls his faithful servants of the Gospel age and 
reckons with them and rewards them), respects his 
Church as a whole, and not merely its living members. 
And here we should note the Apostle's statement respecting 
this time and work. He informs us that the 
Lord's dealings during this harvest will be first with 
"the dead in Christ," saying, "We which are alive 
and remain to the coming [presence] of the Lord shall 
not prevent [precede] them which are asleep [those of 



the Church already dead],... for the dead in Christ 
shall rise first." Taking this statement in connection 
with our Lord's parable, it means that the faithful 
sleeping in death will be reckoned with, rewarded, 
resurrected, before the reckoning with and rewarding 
of the living members of the Church begins. Accordingly, 
if it be true, as we have briefly presented it, 
foregoing,— that we are now living "in the days of 
the Son of Man," and that his presence began in the 
Autumn of 1874, then we should also believe that the 
resurrection of the saints which "were asleep" was 
due and took place at some period not long after our 
Lord's parousia began. And we are able to fix upon 
a date for this with comparative certainty, altho the 
entire matter is invisible to natural eyes and can be 
discerned only with the eye of faith and by the light 
of our lamp, the Scriptures. 

Our lamp, as we have already seen, shows us that 
the Jewish age was in every particular a pattern or 
illustration of this Gospel age; and keeping this in 
mind, we can judge something respecting the order of 
the divine arrangement in the "harvest" of this age, 
from the order of the divine arrangement in the "harvest" 
of the Jewish age. Observing the Jewish age, 
we find that the first three and a half years of their 

R2359 : page 276 

"harvest" were devoted to the simple announcement 

of the Master's presence, and an offer to the nominal 

Church then living, and that they ended by the rejection 

of the nominal Church at the time of our Lord's 

death; and that afterward while their nominal system 

or Church was ignored, the Israelites indeed were 

called out of it into fellowship with the Lord, through 

his spirit. We note also, that it was at the very time 

of the rejection of the Jewish house that our Lord assumed 

before them typically his office of King, and 

rode upon the ass as the King of the Jews: and looking 

for the time when our Lord, in the end of the age, 

should assume his full regal power and authority as 

the King of kings, we find it should be at the corresponding 

date in this "harvest," namely, in the Spring 

of 1878. And as the first work of our Lord, after 

taking the kingly office, in the typical "harvest," 

was to reject the nominal house of Israel, that he 

might begin the work of gathering out of it the Israelites 

indeed, so we understand that in the present 

harvest time the first work of our King is the rejection 

of the nominal Gospel house of sons,— to the intent 

that he may gather out of it the "wheat," his 

"elect," from one end of the ecclesiastical heavens to 

the other. (Matt. 24:31.) This rejection of the 

nominal Church, and the call to his people to "Come 

out of her," we understand to be symbolically styled 

the fall of Babylon, and the spewing out of Laodicea. 



See Rev. 3:16-20-22; 18:2-4. 

Here, then, we have an indication of the time 
when the judgment of the Lord's servants was due to 
begin, represented in the parable by the king calling 
to himself his own servants to hear their reports; and 
in the light of the Apostle's statement just noticed, 
namely, that the living will not precede those that are 
asleep, it is clear that at that time, and before the 
reckoning with the living began, "them that sleep," 
"the dead in Christ," were awakened, granted a part 
in the first resurrection— raised in glory, honor, power, 
spiritual bodies, invisible to mankind. Nor would 
the resurrection of the spirit bodies necessitate any 
disturbance of graveyards or tombstones, or anything 
earthly. "That which is born of the spirit is spirit," 
and as our Lord after his resurrection was invisible to 
the world, and invisible also to his Church (except as 
he miraculously manifested himself), so with these: 
they are invisible, nor is there any necessity for miraculous 
manifestation, nor has any been made, neither 
is any expected. "We walk by faith, and not by 
sight." 

To all who understand the necessity for the sleep 
of the saints (namely, that it was because the call of 
the Church took place before the time divinely arranged 
for the establishment of the Kingdom), it will 
seem eminently proper that the King should, immediately 
on taking office as King, liberate from the prisonhouse 
of death his faithful followers, who during 
his absence manifested their faithfulness, and for 
whom have been set aside crowns of righteousness, to 
be given them at his return in power and great glory. 
It would be unreasonable indeed to suppose any prolonged 
delay of their resurrection, after our Lord takes 
to himself his great power and begins his reign. We 
hold, therefore, that the resurrection of the dead in 
Christ was due to take place in the Spring of 1878. 

Furthermore, we note a beautiful analogy here; 
for, thus considered, our Lord's resurrection a few 
days after his taking of office as King in typical Israel 
corresponds to or parallels the resurrection of the 
Church, "the body of Christ" a few days after his 
taking to himself honor and glory and power as the 
King of nations in the Spring of 1878. Not only so, 
but the Book of Revelation, in a scene which belongs 
to that particular time and description of the 
opening of the "harvest" of this Gospel age, shows 
"one like unto the Son of Man, having on his head a 
golden crown and in his hand a sharp sickle," beginning 
the work of reaping the harvest of this age: and 
there we find the significant statement, "Blessed are 
the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, 
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, 
for their works follow them."— Rev. 14:13,16. 

This text has been so frequently misapplied by 
theologians that its true significance will be apt to 



elude all who have not their senses exercised by reason 
of use, and who do not closely discriminate. It signifies 
that from the time of the beginning of the reaping 
of the "harvest" of this age by the crowned reaper 
(the Spring of 1878) there will be a wonderful 
blessing not previously possible, upon the certain class 
described. From this particular date onward those 
of this particular class who die will be favored or 
blessed in a manner in which none of the preceding 
members of this same class were blessed; namely, in 
that their death will not interrupt their works, which 
will continue right along, the labor and weariness 
alone ceasing, the work itself continuing under more 
glorious and more favorable conditions. 

This means that since 1878 the fully consecrated 
of the Lord's people, those who are completely "dead 
with him," will not sleep in death, as has been necessary 
with all the preceding members of the body of 
Christ throughout the Gospel age: it means that from 
1878 onward the dead who die in the Lord will in 
the moment of dying experience their "change," or 
share in the first resurrection— in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, pass from mortality to immortality, 
from weakness to power, from dishonor to glory, 
from natural to spiritual condition. 

It is to this that the Apostle referred when he 
said, "Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all 
sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump." To our understanding 
the last trump, the seventh of the series 
of symbolical trumpets, began in 1874, just before our 
Lord took to himself his great power and began its 
exercise— began his reign: its sound is to continue 
until the close of the Millennial Age, a thousand years. 
This "change" in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye, that is to occur to the living members of the body 
of Christ will indeed be a momentary change as respects 
each individual after he shall have rendered his 
accounts before the great King, and been accepted of 
him as a joint-heir in the Kingdom; but it does not 
imply that all of these will be changed in a moment. 
Quite to the contrary, the judging of the living members 
of the Church, the going in of the wise virgins in 
the end of this age, will be a gradual work, and has 
already been in progress for twenty years, and is not 
yet finished. It will include the rejection of the 

R2359 : page 277 

"foolish virgins," and the utter casting out of any 
who may take off the "wedding garment" of Christ's 
righteousness, as shown in one of the parables. 

Thus we see that immediately after this taking of 
the crown in the Spring of 1878, our Lord gathered to 
himself those of his saints, "his jewels," who had already 
been polished and fitted and prepared, and who 



slept, awaiting the time for the establishment of the 
Kingdom; and that since then, one by one, his faithful 
saints of the same class of "jewels" are being gathered 
to himself, as they finish their course. But as it was 
necessary that our Redeemer should not only consecrate 
his life to death, but that he should actually die, 
so it is necessary that every member of the body of Christ 
shall not only consecrate himself to be dead with him, 
but that each also shall actually die. They are already 
reckoned dead, but this is not sufficient; our 
Lord's words are, "Be thou faithful unto death, and 
I will give thee a crown of life," and again, "Blessed 
are the dead in the Lord [reckonedly dead, consecrated 
unto death], dying from henceforth." So also it 
had been foretold in other Scriptures, that all who 
would be of the body of Christ must, like the Head, 
pass through the portals of death; thus it is written, 
"I have said, Ye are gods [mighty ones], all of you 
sons of the Most High; ye shall ALL DIE like men, and 
fall like one of the princes." The two princes of our 
race were Adam and Christ Jesus. Adam went into 
death because of disobedience; Christ as a sacrifice for 
the sins of others, entered death in obedience; and the 
Church, the body of Christ, his "brethren," being justified 
out of the Adamic death by faith in his sacrifice, 
are reckoned as joint-sacrificers with him in his death 
of obedience, that they may be accounted also sharers 
in "his resurrection"— the first resurrection, to the divine 
nature and glory and joint-heirship.— Psa. 82:6; 
Rom. 5:12,17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

We have given here only the briefest possible summary 
of the Scriptural evidences that we are living in 
the parousia, the presence, "the days of the Son of 
Man," in the "harvest" time of this age, and that the 
work which he, directly and through his apostles, instructed 
us to expect is now in progress, namely, the 
"sealing" of the saints of the Most High God in their 
foreheads (Eph. 1:13,14), and giving them a mental 
appreciation of the divine plan and its times and seasons, 
together with a judgment or testing of all who 
have covenanted themselves to be the Lord's and 
to lay down their lives in his service. And all who 
refuse to live up to their covenant, even tho sealed and 
blessed, and enlightened with present truth, will, we 
understand, be rejected from it, and cast again "into 
outer darkness" with the world, to share in the 
great time of trouble coming upon it. We understand 
also that the elect number will soon be completed, and 
the last one of the class who shall be blessed by the 
glorious "change" from mortality to immortality, in 
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, shall soon obtain 
that blessing, and that then the great time of trouble 
will fully burst upon the world, and speedily bring 
down the high, the lofty and the proud, and prepare 
the world for the reign of the Prince of Peace. 

Here we have consistency, at least, and harmony 



of Scriptures which have never been harmonized in 
the past, and which cannot now be harmonized from 
any other standpoint or with any other interpretation. 
Here we have the spiritual Kingdom of Messiah, with 
all power, displacing the spiritual kingdom of Satan, 
and establishing order and righteousness through earthly 
agents of its own, and overthrowing the earthly 
agents of the prince of darkness, many of whom are 
his servants merely because "the god of this world 
[age] has blinded the minds of them that believe not." 

"THEY WITHOUT US SHALL NOT BE MADE PERFECT.' 
-HEB. 11:40.- 



We remark incidentally that following the gathering 
of the Church to glory, as above outlined, will 
come the resurrection of the holy ones of the past,— 
"Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the holy prophets," 
whose resurrection will be to perfect earthly conditions, 
and who shall be the "princes in all the earth," 
seen of men, and representatives of the invisible but 
all-powerful spiritual Kingdom— the glorified Christ. 
Thus, chosen representatives of fleshly Israel will 
indeed rule the world, and bless it, as the representatives 
and agencies of the Spiritual Israel, and to the 
standard of the Lord thus set up the nation of Israel 
will be first to respond.— Psa. 45:16; Rom. 11:25-31; 
Zech. 12:10. 

Our Lord's parousia (presence in the world) begun 
in 1 874, will continue till the end of the Millennial 
age. The word is not applicable merely to a little period 
of presence at the beginning of the Millennial age: 
Christ's parousia and that of his Church will continue 
throughout the age. Nor will the epiphania and apokalupsis 
be a sudden burst of glorious light; nor do 
these words signify a visible showing to mankind of 
the Lord's person, or of the persons of his Church. 
Let us remember his words, "Yet a little while, and 
the world seeth me no more." Let us remember also 
that, as his Church is to be in his likeness, so his 
likeness is declared to be an "express image of the 
Father's person;" it is written that he is the King 
eternal, immortal, invisible. (1 Tim. 1:17.) Nor 
will it be any more necessary that the world should 
see with their natural eyes the Lord and his glorified 
ones, than that they should see the Heavenly 
Father: the world will see the earthly representatives 
of God and of Christ and of the Church, when 
they "see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and all the holy 
prophets," for they will be samples of perfect manhood, 
which is the earthly image of the invisible God. 

Our Lord's epiphania (bright shining) and his 
apokalupsis (unveiling) began shortly after his parousia 
began; the bright shining of his presence is now visible 



to those who are walking "in the light"— to those who 

"are not in darkness with the world." It is a mental 

illumination, an illumination to the eyes of our understandings, 

and not to our natural eyes. The eyes of 

our understanding have been opened to see him that is 

invisible to the natural sight. The epiphania of our 

Lord is already affecting the world also, tho not through 

the eyes of the understanding, for they have no eyes 

for such spiritual things: nevertheless, the bright shining 

of the Lord's presence is influencing and affecting 

the whole course of the world, through an increase of 

knowledge on every subject— specially noticeable since 

1878. Eventually all the blinded shall have opened 

eyes of understanding and 

R2359 : page 278 

"EVERY EYE SHALL SEE HIM." 



Many even who are not of the Watchers are noting 
the signs of our times and are startled, and led to 
exclaim, What do these things mean?— This remarkable 
latter-day advance in science, art and mechanical 
invention?— This latter-day discontent in the midst of 
plenty and luxury?— This latter-day growth of millionaires 
and paupers?— This growth of giant corporations 
of world-wide power and influence?— Why are 
national policies and public men and their utterances 
and doings criticized (judged) by the masses as never 
before?— And what means it that with an apparent 
growth in wealth and numbers in all denominations of 
Christians there is a growing dissatisfaction, discontent 
in them all: a growing tendency to criticise the creeds 
and the preaching and everything?— How comes it 
that nine-tenths of the preachers in all denominations 
know that their hearers desire a change, and would 
gladly "move on," if they knew how to better themselves 
even at smaller salaries? 

The Scriptural answer is, The hour of God's judgment 
is come; the time when "Christendom," political, 
financial, social and ecclesiastical is being judged— being 
tried in the divine balances. And the Scriptures 
declare that she will be found wanting, and will be adjudged 
unworthy to further administer the affairs of 
earth, which will be turned over to the elect "little 
flock," according to the divine promise.— Luke 12:32. 

The secret of the matter now is the same as in the 
Jewish "harvest," which John explained, saying, 

"THERE STANDETH ONE AMONG YOU WHOM YOU 
KNOW NOT. "-JOHN 1:26. 



"Mine eyes can see the glory of the presence of the Lord; 
He is trampling out the winepress where the grapes of wrath 

are stored; 
I see the flaming tempest of his swift descending sword; 
Our King is marching on. 

"I can see his coming judgments, as they circle all the earth 
The signs and groanings promised, to precede a second birth; 
I read his righteous sentence, in the crumbling thrones of 
earth: 

Our King is marching on. 

"The 'Gentile Times' are closing, for their kings have had 

their day; 
And with them sin and sorrow will forever pass away; 
For the tribe of Judah's Lion now comes to hold the sway: 
Our King is marching on." 



"Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man 
hear my voice [knock], and open the door, I will come in 
to him and sup with him, and he with me."— Rev. 3:20. 



R2359 : page 278 

ISRAEL'S OVERTHROW AND ITS CAUSE. 
SEPT. 18.-2 KINGS 17:9-18. 



AS AMOS gave a prophecy of Israel's fall, and 

some of the reasons therefore, so this lesson, 

from the historical book of the Kings, gives a record 

of its fall and of its cause. In previous lessons we 

have seen Israel's tendency to copy after the nations 

round about. The people recognized the fact that 

God had chosen them to be his special and peculiar 

people: they were quite willing to be his special people, 

and to have his special favor, but seemingly they 

did not wish to be his peculiar people. They were 

willing to be peculiar, in the sense of having a peculiar 

deliverance from Egypt, and peculiar manifestations 

of divine favor, subduing their enemies before them, 

and bringing them into the land of promise, and dividing 

the land amongst them tribally, and so long as 

they were inspired with the hope that God would continue 

thus marvelously and miraculously to lead them, 

as his people, so long they were satisfied with their 

condition. They did not realize that the people who 

would be fit to be used of the Lord as his Kingdom, 

and through whom he would operate to bring the blessings 

of the Abrahamic Covenant to all the families of 



the earth, must be not only peculiarly dealt with by 
divine Providence, but must also be peculiarly responsive 
to those providences. 

When, therefore, they came to find that as God's 
people they were restricted and restrained, and that 
deviation from the divine program was punished, this 
peculiarity, this difference from the world, they did not 
relish. They rebelled against it; and in their desire 
for an excuse for rebellion they became skeptical, 
doubting that their experiences were in any sense or 
degree of or from the Lord. Their evil hearts of unbelief 
looked out upon the nations around them, and 
beheld greater national prosperity than their own 
amongst those who worshiped other gods, and for 
whom Jehovah had not declared special care. They 
came to feel that there were different gods, and that 
the God who had charge of them as a people or nation, 
and who commanded their obedience, and who punished 
them for disobedience, must indeed be respected 
and placated; nevertheless, they hoped, evidently, to 
gain something of national greatness by the worship 
of the heathen deities, which they believed blessed 
other nations, with Jehovah, whose blessings upon their 
nation were thus far largely promises, yet to be 
fulfilled. 

First they were dissatisfied with the divine arrangement 
respecting their government. True, they had 
liberty, more than the other nations surrounding them, 
but the very fact that this liberty was not common or 
general, but rather unusual, caused them to desire 
that they might have a king like the nations round 
about them. (1 Sam. 8:5.) God pointed out to them 

R2359 : page 279 

the advantages of their peculiar condition, under which 
he had placed them, yet nevertheless granted their request, 
and gave them kings, and with the kings, as 
we have seen, came in a spirit of "broadmindedness," 
or "public policy," on the part of King Solomon. And 
his desire to be popular with neighboring kings, and 
to be considered broadminded in a religious way, led 
him first to establish, for the benefit of the foreigners 
at his court, and for his foreign wives, the religious 
customs and ceremonies common to foreign nations. 
This, as we have seen, spread amongst the people, and 
led to a laxity of views respecting the worship of the 
true God: it led to the thought that everyone should 
have some kind of a religion, but that each should be 
at liberty to choose for himself, or to blend elements 
of the various religions. We saw how, for political 
reasons, Jeroboam (after the ten tribes had split off 
from Judah, the kingly tribe, and had chosen Jeroboam 
to be its king, and form a new dynasty) took advantage 
of the "liberal" religious views to thoroughly 
engraft upon the people a false worship. And this 



false worship is stated by the Lord in the lesson before 
us to have been the cause of Israel's further decline, 
and ultimate fall, as a nation. 

The lesson states (vs. 9) that Israel favored the 
false religions, and practiced them secretly: by that 
we understand that they hypocritically built the altars 
of sacrifice to the false gods, and established the false 
worship in all their cities and villages, under the pretence 
that they were doing this in the service of the 
true God. They were claiming, and probably to some 
extent deceiving themselves with the thought, that 
they were becoming more religious, more zealous, 
more holy, and that the evidences of this increase of 
religious zeal were to be found in these various altars 
of worship in every city, whereas formerly only the 
one city of Jerusalem had been the place set apart for 
divine worship, where the sinofferings and sacrifices 
for sin should be made, and to which they were to 
come at least once a year. 

How this suggestion of Israel's secretly or hypocritically 
introducing a false worship corresponds with 
the tendency of the human heart to-day! How many 
there are to-day in Christendom who persuade themselves 
that in multiplying forms and ceremonies, in 
building of elegant churches, and in the engagement 
of finer choirs, and grander organs, and in the multiplying 
of meetings, and in publicly showing an outward 
display, they are increasing in godliness, holiness, 
and becoming more religious. How important 
that we should learn the lesson that "obedience is better 
than sacrifice"— that not by multiplying forms and 
ceremonies and emblems of holy things are we brought 
near to the Lord our God, but by taking strict heed 
unto his Word. Indeed, all these various efforts on 
the part of humanity to add to the divine plan are so 
many blemishes, so many injuries, so many things 
that are an offence to the Lord, instead of a thing of 
sweet odor. Moreover, every step taken contrary to 
the divine leading is a step away from the Lord, no 
matter how we may deceive ourselves or others with 
reference to the matter by sophistical arguments. 

Israel's service of idols finds its counterpart at the 
present time, too, for altho we are not sunken to that 
degree of ignorance that would lead us to worship images, 
Christendom nevertheless is full of idols— every 
city, every village. The idols of the present time are 
known by different names, also, from those of olden 
times. One of the idols most worshiped to-day is 
"Popularity," another is "Wealth," another "Fame," 
another "Self," another "Our Denomination." Few, 
very few indeed, have no other gods than the one true 
God. 

As the Lord dealt with Israel, sending them repeated 
warnings and reproofs, through Elijah, Elisha, 
Amos and others, so to us he has spoken by a still 
higher authority, and in still more forceful language, 



"For God hath in these last days spoken unto us by 
his Son." Nevertheless, just as many who heard the 
prophets of old were careless, so to-day many are careless 
of the voice of the Son of God, and of his special 
messengers, the Apostles, and are failing to receive 
the blessing now due, failing to make their calling and 
election sure, as Israelites indeed, called under the 
New Covenant. 

The particular seductions which hindered natural 
Israel from receiving the divine instructions are 
enumerated in verses 15-17. They sold themselves to 
do evil, that is to say, they loved the reward of unrighteousness, 
held out in the immediate present, more 
than they loved the reward of righteousness held out 
as a promise for the future. They sold themselves to 
do evil, in the sense of seeking and accepting the rewards 
of evil doing; as for instance, king Ahab was 
pleased to receive the vineyard of Naboth, altho it 
came to him as the result of dishonesty and murder. 
To him the Prophet Elijah said, "Thou hast sold thyself 
to do evil." He got temporarily the thing he desired, 
but it brought with it a curse which rested not 
only upon himself but upon his throne. And so with 
the humbler Israelites, there seems to have been a general 
desire to gratify self— self-will; and this self-gratification, 
with its unsatisfactory fruits, caused them the 
loss of divine favor. Further, they used divination 
and enchantments, we are told: they held intercourse 
with the fallen angels, operating through mediums, 
witches, wizards, necromancers, who affected to personate 
the dead, and to reveal the secrets of the future. 

R2359 : page 280 

A disposition of wilfulness and dissatisfaction with 
the divine arrangements naturally leads people into 
these delusions— to seek to know of the future from 
some other quarter, to the intent that they might 
frustrate, if possible, the operations of divine Providence, 
so as to the more thoroughly accomplish their own 
self-will. This same spirit is not lacking to-day, and 
in many instances is leading people in the same direction, 
to consult the same fallen angels, demons, who 
now, as then, attempt to personate the dead, through 

R2360 : page 280 

Spiritualist mediums. The result now, as then, is 
that those who are thus seeking in a wrong direction 
for light and leading, and because discontented with divine 
Providence and arrangements, are in danger of being 
led further and further away from the only true 
revelation, and the true prophets thereof. 

In the fervency of their religious zeal, the Israelites, 
we are informed (vs. 17) caused their sons and 
daughters to pass through the fire of Moloch— as sacrifices. 



Not that they were devoid of parental love, 
but that they esteemed it a part of duty to make such 
"religious sacrifices." And so to-day, many, misled 
by false teachings, and by mixtures of paganism with 
the divine revelation, have gotten to the place where 
they have similarly perverted ideas respecting the Lord 
and the sacrifice which would be pleasing to him. They 
have come to think of the Almighty as a ferocious deity, 
who would take pleasure in the everlasting torture 
of the children of men. 

The modern Moloch, ignorantly worshiped by 
many professed spiritual Israelites to-day, is far more 
terrible than was the Moloch of olden times, for the 
children who were then burned did have an end of 
tortures, while, according to the theories now advocated 
by many in spiritual Israel, they worship a Moloch 
who will hopelessly torture his victims to all 
eternity. As such a worship of Moloch in olden times 
tended to degradation of the feelings and conduct- 
tended toward brutality and heartlessness, so the tendency 
of the modern Moloch worship is in the same 
direction. He whose idea of God is that of injustice 
and terrible ferocity cannot well have a life and feelings 
of his own directly the opposite of this. The tendency 
of all is to copy after the character and disposition 
of their ideal God. Hence, the fact that people 
of civilized lands are becoming more and more tender-hearted 
and merciful can only be accounted for by supposing 
that the Moloch-teaching called "Orthodoxy" 
is losing its power— superstition and priest-craft are 
losing their power. And altho the Bible is losing its 
power also, with many, under the influence of Satanic 
"higher criticism," nevertheless, the spirit of its teachings 
—mercy, forgiveness, love— is recognized by its 
foes as well as by its friends. 

The statement of verse 15 is particularly noteworthy, 
as indicating how Israel got into all these other 
extremes; viz., (1) they rejected God's statutes- 
God's law, God's Word; (2) they lost sight of and neglected 
the covenant which he made with their fathers 
—they lost faith in the promises of God; (3) they lost 
sight of the testimony which he gave them respecting 
what would be the result of forsaking his counsel; 
(4) they followed vanity (foolishness,— they did not 
take the wise course) and became vain (foolish) and 
went after the heathen that were round them (copied 
after others, desiring to be not peculiar, but popular) 
concerning whom the Lord had charged them that 
they should not do like them. 

Applying these various points to antitypical nominal 
Israel of to-day, we find that to the extent she has 
gone from the Lord, in theory and in practice, it has 
been very generally as the result of (1) not heeding 
the Lord's Word; (2) of being negligent of the promises 
which were set before spiritual Israel, the high 
calling, etc.; (3) of becoming foolish, in attempting 



to serve God, and to be his "peculiar people," and at 
the same time attempting to please and to copy the 
world, and to be popular therewith. The disposition 
to "do like them," to do like the world in general, is 
the seductive point at which the great Adversary would 
switch us off from being the Lord's peculiar people, 
Israelites indeed, heirs of the promises. Let us remember, 
in this connection, the Master's words, "If 
ye were of the world, the world would love its own, 
but now ye are not of the world, for I have chosen 
you out of the world; therefore the world hateth you." 
Our course in life, as new creatures in Christ Jesus, is 
to be along wholly different lines from the course of 
the world, and we must be prepared from the outstart 
to know that the world's pathway and the pathway of 
elect Israel are different paths, as surely as they have 
different terminations. 

The fall of the Ten Tribes of Israel for the above 
reasons reminds us of the fall of Papacy for similar 
reasons. As the faithful Israelites were sifted out and 
gathered into Judah, so the faithful of God's people 
were very generally gathered out of Papacy into Protestantism. 
But as Judah subsequently became similarly 
idolatrous and instituted Moloch worship, so Protestantism 
has failed of faithfulness to God and is to 
fall as Judah fell. The testing and sifting will go on 
to the full end of this age, for the Lord seeks individually 
the Israelites indeed and not by nations nor by denominations. 
Eventually he will gather in glory the 
"elect" out of all nations, peoples and tongues to be 
his glorious Israel— his holy nation, his peculiar people, 
his royal priesthood— to bless all the families of 
the earth as the true Seed of Abraham.— Gal. 3:16,29. 



page 281 