They Can Help You to Preach
WHEN Jesus told his disciples to go preach, they likely had no idea of the full significance of what he was directing them to do. (Matthew 10:7) Obediently, they followed his example and went from “city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the kingdom of God.” (Luke 8:1) That was the small beginning of a preaching effort that has grown until it has brought the good news of the Kingdom to the attention of people earth wide.
In the early days of the Christian congregation, the preaching was basically by word of mouth. Christ’s disciples talked to anyone who would listen. “Every day in the temple and from house to house they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.”​—Acts 5:42.
Divine backing was apparent in that they were able to perform signs. (Acts 14:3) Many people were healed physically and then stayed to listen to words of spiritual healing. As a result, “believers in the Lord kept on being added.”​—Acts 5:14-16.
Spreading the Good News Today
With the death of the apostles, the gifts of healing and tongues ceased to exist. But did this in any way change the commission that Jesus had given to his disciples? No! He had told them to “make disciples of people of all the nations,” and as they did so, he would be with them “all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matthew 28:19, 20) Today, Scriptural evidence is clear that we are living at the conclusion of the system of things. Has Jesus fulfilled his promise that he would be with his disciples in the disciple-making work? The evidence says yes!
To reach the billions of earth’s inhabitants simply by word of mouth would be a humanly impossible task. Hence, help has been provided in the form of Bible literature that people can read in their own homes. For example, in 1879 when a group of earnest Bible students wanted to get the message of God’s Kingdom to others, they began to produce literature, such as the Bible magazine now known as The Watchtower, as well as tracts dealing with Bible subjects. At first they used commercial printers to produce the literature. By 1920 they had their own printing press in a rented building, and by 1927 they had built their own factory to print Bibles, books, booklets, magazines, and tracts for use by any who wanted to assist in carrying out the commission Jesus gave to his disciples.
Undaunted by opposers who said that this printing venture would be a failure, the Watch Tower Society has come to operate printing plants in lands around the globe. Last year alone, they produced over 63,000,000 Bibles, books, and booklets and over 582,000,000 magazines in more than 200 languages.
The literature they have published has been invaluable in filling the spiritual needs of people. Books have been printed that are designed to reach people having particular viewpoints and beliefs. Millions of youth have appreciated My Book of Bible Stories and Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It. Making Your Family Life Happy has been of great value in strengthening family ties and teaching husbands and wives to show greater love for each other. An aid for new ones who want to make the truth their own has been United in Worship of the Only True God. Persons reading this book have found that they are made to think and reason more deeply about their relationship with God.
The book that was often referred to as the “blue bombshell,” The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, has had an extraordinary effect upon the lives of millions. How many others may yet be moved to serve God as a result of the Bible truths they learn from this book remains to be seen.
Presently, those working in preaching the good news under the direction of Jesus are being aided by the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Bible studies are being conducted with millions, many of whom are bringing their lives into harmony with Bible standards.
For instance, a 68-year-old man in New York State was contacted by his brother in Colorado, who sent Watch Tower literature for him to read. The man promptly read all the books sent and was delighted to begin a study in the Live Forever book when a Witness called at his home. Over his lifetime, this man had assembled a collection of valuable historical firearms, but when he read that those serving Jehovah would learn war no more, he promptly sold his firearms at a great financial loss. (Isaiah 2:4) Moreover, after having smoked heavily for 53 years, he quit as soon as he read that this displeased Jehovah. (2 Corinthians 7:1) When he learned through studying that he should share the good news with others, he nervously prepared to visit his son and daughter-in-law to talk to them and to his grandchildren. Upon entering the guest bedroom, he was delighted to see the Live Forever book on a table. His daughter-in-law was studying it but had been unsure about how to bring up the subject to him. Both have made excellent spiritual progress.
In Spain, a meeting place of Jehovah’s Witnesses was built next to a Catholic church. The priest was furious. He said that if he had known the Witnesses were going to build a meeting place there, he would have bought the land to prevent them from using it. This Kingdom Hall has a window with the Live Forever book on display. Each day a member of the congregation turned one page. Townspeople would stop by and read the new page. As a result, many people showed interest, and Bible studies were started. Yes, the book proved to be a silent but effective witness.
Magazines’ Part in Spreading the Good News
When the first issue of The Watchtower was published in July 1879, only 6,000 copies were printed. Still, the small group who read them eagerly told others of their contents. Today, over 3,500,000 of Jehovah’s Witnesses make use of the 13,000,000 copies printed each issue to proclaim God’s Kingdom as the only hope of mankind.
The magazine has been of great assistance in explaining different Scriptural subjects. An ongoing series in The Watchtower has featured Jesus’ life and ministry. This has helped millions to visualize and better understand important accounts in the Gospels.
Special series in both The Watchtower and Awake! are designed to reach the hearts of younger people. The series “God’s Word Is Alive” taught many principles and clarified many issues in the minds of people. The series “Young People Ask . . ” has dealt with real-life questions, then offered practical answers backed by scriptures to guide the thinking and actions of youths in these troublesome days. When Jehovah’s Witnesses have featured these articles in offering the magazines, the response has been most favorable.
But in addition to the articles on special subjects, the real meat of The Watchtower has been the main articles, which strengthen the faith and conviction of all true Christians. These Scripturally based articles provide convincing proof of the nearness of the end of this system of things, discuss the fulfillment of Bible prophecies, and offer heart-searching counsel on how Christians should live their lives in view of the times. Filled with this knowledge, Christians are determined to use in the preaching activity the things they have learned.
How much longer this preaching work will go on before the end of this system of things comes, we do not know. Yet, we may be sure that the publications printed and distributed by Jehovah’s Witnesses will continue to be of much help to Christians as they follow the commission of their Leader, Jesus.

