R547 : page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER, 1883. NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



page 1 

SEND us the addresses of all the moral 
and religious Swedes and Norwegians 
you can gather; for samples of the 
Swedish paper. 



THE safest way to send money is by 
"POSTAL MONEY ORDER." The rates 
have recently been reduced. "POSTAL 
NOTES" are no safer than money. 



R547 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The Swedish tract fund reached such 
a sum as to justify the publishing of a 
sample copy of the TOWER in the Swedish 
language, to be used as a tract, 
among the Swedish and Norwegian 



Christians, here and in Sweden. The 
notice in our last issue, that we were 
ready for lists of addresses of religious 
Swedes and Norwegians, brought to us 
many responses, and we will be mailing 
sample copies to the same, about the 
time you receive this paper. Whether 
there will be in the future, a regular 
edition of the TOWER in Swedish, will 
depend upon the interest awakened 
amongst that people by these sample 
copies and upon the supply of needful 
means for the additional expense involved. 
It is in the Lords hands and 
we cannot doubt that He will overrule 
it to his own glory and the blessing of 
His Swedish Saints. 

It cannot fail to give pleasure to each 
one who has contributed even "two 
mites" to the fund which published 
these sample copies, that they have 
helped to preach the "glad tidings of 
great joy" among over 20,000 Swedish 
brethren and sisters. All who appreciate 
the "good tidings," seem to feel 
as did the early church, that it is a thing 
so precious, so good, that they cannot 
refrain from declaring it. 

Though our Father is rich and will 
not permit a single one of his saints to 
go hungry for the bread of life through 
the unfaithfulness of any of us, yet if we do 
not improve the privilege granted us, of 
ministering to the saints, the loss will 
be ours. While we rejoice to see that 
some of the consecrated are growing in 
grace by the exercise of this talent of 
distributing to the (spiritual or temporal) 
necessities of others, we fear that 
some are depriving themselves of this 
blessed privilege and means of growth 
in grace. We have no disposition, nor 
do we intend this as fault-finding. We 
mention it as an aid to self-examination. 
May the Lord help us all, to faithfully 
judge ourselves, regarding the fulfillment 



of our covenant. 

We shall not beg for Jehovah for he 
is rich; he says, "The silver is mine, 
and the gold is mine," "and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills." "Hag. 2:8 V ; 
v Psa. 50:10\ Yet while so rich, he has 
deposited a little here and there, more 
or less, with us; giving us the control of 
it. Then he leaves his own work, the 
very things in which he is interested 
most, measurably dependent on us, in 
order that we might have the privilege 
of using the means intrusted to us in 
ministering to the necessities of the 
saints and being thus co-workers with 
God. 

Are we not right in saying that this 
is a great privilege? Are we not right 
too, in supposing that few appreciate 
highly enough their stewardship? Do 
we always remember Jesus words? 
"He that receiveth you receiveth me, 
...and whosoever shall give to 
one of these a cup of cold water only, 
shall in no wise lose his reward. "Matt. 10:40-42\ 
Do we always remember 
that the Lord as represented by every 
saint who is a member of His body, is 
still to be found, still to be ministered 
to? Let us remember too, that the 
real members will seldom ask, except 
of the Father, because they possess the 
spirit of their head-the spirit of trust 
which looks to their heavenly Father 
for whatsoever he sees best, to send, 
and by whomsoever he sees fit to send 
it. But how great is the privilege of 
being fit and used in Jehovahs service. 

If it is a privilege to feed and clothe 
the "earthen vessel," how much more 
blessed is the privilege of feeding the 
spiritually hungry with "the bread of 
life," and clothing them with the "wedding 
garment" of Christs righteousness, 
by scattering the truth. God has 
so ordered matters-inventions, etc., 



that to-day the greatest influence and 
the most forcible preaching, is done 
through the medium of the printing 
press. Thus, for instance, each copy 
of the TOWER contains about eight 
sermons, and these are brought before 
an average of about 20,000 readers at 
each issue, the majority of whom have 
"an ear to hear," which is not the case 
with the ordinary congregations of nominal 
Christians. Thus the TOWER under 
the Lords blessing, is able to spread 
the truth more widely than 200 traveling 
preachers could do. 

We call your attention to this matter 
so that you may appreciate more fully, 
the lever of power within your own 
grasp, for the spread of truth. Some, are 
recognizing and improving these latter 
day advantages in one way and some in 
another. Some call together companies 
of their friends and neighbors and read 
them a discourse; others write to us for 
sample copies, which they loan to such 
as seem to have an "ear." Others, endeavor 
to introduce the TOWER among 
Christians, as a regular preacher. 

R548 : page 1 

The present issue of the Swedish 
paper, will we hope, help to open the 
Lords storehouse, to the hungry of that 
people. This is well, but let us not 
stop, while others are crying for 
"bread." Our German brethren and 
sisters are still in want, because of the 
famine fAmos 8: IT) and it is our 
happy privilege to be among Jehovahs 
agencies in answering their prayer- 
"Give us this day our daily bread." Let 
us give the "meat in due season." Freely 
we received, let us freely give to 
others the heavenly food-manna. 
"Blessed is that servant whom his Lord 
when he cometh shall find so doing." 



"Matt. 24:46\ 

To this end, we propose that while 
we shall still remember the regular Tract 
Fund and the Swedish Fund, we shall 
give some special attention to the German 
Fund. It will be remembered that 
this fund was started some time ago and 
then permitted to rest until the Swedish 
Tract-paper should be issued. Now we 
are ready, so far as in us lies to preach 
the glad tidings to our German brethren 
and sisters also. The German Fund 
contains about $25. When it grows to 
about $300. we shall begin to make a 
start, in this direction. 

Though it is right enough that those 
who preach the gospel should live by it 
--or be supported by it, fl Cor. 9:1 1-15",) 
we are glad, that the "Chief Shepherd" 
has so arranged for us that we 
are not thus supported. Rather, we 
labor working with our own hands, 
that we might not be chargeable to any, 
but might have the privilege of helping, 
together with all saints, in supplying the 
lack, both temporal and spiritual, of 
others, fl Cor. 4:12\) 

For this reason we may freely speak 
to you of this privilege, with the less 
danger of being misunderstood. And 
yet we realize that many of our readers 
will feel, if they do not express it, a wish 
that the TOWER would confine itself to 
teaching "The love of God," "Restitution," 
etc., and occasionally touch upon 
and condemn profanity, or intemperance 
and not talk so much, of entire consecration, 
sacrifice, and self-denial. To this 
we reply, that the mission of the TOWER 
is specially to the "little flock"-to aid 
those who are consecrated, to sacrifice. 
To those of its readers who are fully consecrated, 
its words of counsel, reproof, 
and exhortation are directed. Of those 
who are not consecrated, and who are 
therefore not running for the prize of 



the "high calling," we should not expect 
so much, though such, if they give 
even a cup of cold water, shall in no 
wise lose their reward, when the time 
for rewarding comes. ("Matt. 10:42\) 

With the Lord, it is not His poverty, 
but his desire to give us an opportunity 
of being co-workers with him, that is the 
cause of the seeming poverty of many 
of his saints and of his treasury. So, we 
can heartily say to you, that our interest 
in this question of your sacrifice, is a 
desire to see the truth spread and saints 
fed, but chiefly, for YOU WHO HAVE 
CONSECRATED; lest you should fail to 
perform your sacrifice. We even fear 
that a false modesty on our part, has 
been an injury to the flock over which 
our Lord hath made us to some extent 
"overseers." We have for some time, 
seen the necessity of sacrifice on the 
part of all who would win the great 
prize, and though we have repeatedly 
set forth the necessity of entire sanctification 
of mind and body; our time, reputation 
and money-all: That this death to 
earthly things as symbolized in our 
water baptism is absolutely essential to 
our becoming joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord. ("Rom. 8:17\) Yet 
we have realized all along that selfishness 
-love of self, its ease, honors, etc., 
so powerfully counteracted the clear 
teachings of the Word, that it had but 
slight practical effect. 

We desire to do our duty and to 
warn the flock against selfishness, our 
most iminent danger-our greatest 
enemy. ("Ezek. 33:6,7".) Each one 
who is running the race for the great 
"prize of our high calling" should look the 
issue fairly in the face, and ask himself 
the question, What am I sacrificing? 
I have time, money and influence, some 
of each: am I so arranging my affairs 
that as large a proportion as possible of 



these, is used directly in the Masters 
service? How much of my influence 
have I sacrificed, in an attempt to honor 
and advance the truth? How much 
sacrifice-- self-denial, have I made, in 
ministering to the saints and others, 
either the earthly or the heavenly food 
and clothing? How much of my time 
has been sacrificed from self and spent 
for the good of others-doing good 
unto all men as I have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith? 

We must not attempt to excuse ourselves, 
by saying that we know of none 
of the saints that are starving or naked, 
else we would help them; and if the 
Lords treasury should become bankrupt, 
we would then come forward, and contribute. 
This is an old excuse and evasion 
suggested by our adversary. Let 
us remember that if we wait for such opportunities 
we will never find them. 
God will never allow his treasury to be 
bankrupt; He will never allow his saints 
to starve. Our experience in this matter 
corroborates that of David fPsa. 37:25, 26\) 
"Yet have I never seen the righteous 
(saints) forsaken, nor his seed begging 
bread. He is ever merciful and 
lendeth; and his seed is blessed." The 
Lords children, and work will get along 
without us; but alas what a loss of opportunity 
and blessing, we should sustain. 
"Take heed that no man take thy 
crown." If we fail to use our privileges, 
some more worthy will enjoy them and 
receive the reward. 

To be a sacrifice at all, it must be a 
willing offering and not one forced from 
us by extraordinary circumstances. Let 
no man who thus gives time, money, or 
influence, consider that he offers a 
sacrifice. 

But some one who has considerable, 
willing to justify himself, may inquire, 
How much should I give, of my time, 



money and influence? Possibly you 
made a mistake-a common one however 
-for if you are running for the 
high calling, you should rather have 
asked, "How much may I use for myself?" 
If you gave yourself and all, to 
God, then none of the things you have 
are yours but Gods; and you are his 
agent or steward, to spend all as you 
understand to be His will, regardless 
of your own preferences for self. 

How much you ought to spend, on 
yourself and family, how much you 
should spend on the poorer, and how 
much you should spend in spreading the 
truth, are weighty and important questions, 
which we must leave each steward 
to decide for himself; merely suggesting 
Pauls advice, that in all these matters 
your aim should be to provide 
things "decent." You should attempt 
to do for the poor so as to have them 
"decent;" yourself and family should be 
"decent;" and the cause of truth should 
be supported on the plane of decency; 
but on none of these have you a right to 
waste the Lords goods, by 
extravagance. 

R548 : page 2 

The warp in our "earthen vessels" is 
such, that do the best we may, we shall 
probably find self, more and better provided 
for than our poorer brother, or 
the work of our Father. Knowing this 
to be our disposition, and seeing how it 
differs from that of our Father as displayed 
by our Elder Brother, who, 
though he was rich, yet for our sakes 
became poor, that we through his 
poverty might become rich f2 Cor. 8:9 V ), 
we should be constantly on our guard; 
and while beholding his image (his disposition) 
as in a mirror we should see 
to it that we are being changed, daily 



and hourly to the same image, from 
glory to glory-by the spirit of the 
Lord. ("2 Cor. 3:1 8".) 

But does another say, "I have nothing 
to give!" Alas my brother, then you 
are indeed in a bad condition. If you 
have nothing to give, then you cannot 
sacrifice anything. Then you may as 
well reckon yourself out of the present 
race for the great prize, for all who 
attain that goal are sacrificers, and have 
something to offer. OHeb. 13:15,16" 
and "1 Peter 2:5\) 

But are you sure- very sure, you 
have nothing? search carefully for none 
were "called" to this honor, to whom 
one talent or more, had not been given. 
If you have hidden yours, so that neither 
you nor others can see it, we urge you 
to dig it up quickly and make the more 
active use of it, lest the King should 
speedily finish his reckoning with the 
servants, and instead of saying "Well 
done, thou good and faithful servant" 
to thee, should say "wicked and slothful 
servant." 

No saint has so little, that he has 
nothing to spend, for the glory and 
honor of Him who did so much for us. 
And, in this connection it is well that 
we should remember, that the less 
we have, proportionately greater is the 
sacrifice when we give. Jesus showed 
his appreciation of amount and motive, 
for when the rich were casting into the 
Temple treasury, He saw a poor widow 
cast in two mites and said that she had 
sacrificed more, than all the others. 
("Luke 21:3".) The two mites principle 
applies to influence and time as well as 
to money. Be assured that if you have 
been led of the Lord to consecrate your 
all, you surely have a way before you 
to perform, for it is written: "It is God 
that worketh in you both to will and to 
do of His good pleasure." ("Phil. 2:13".) 



The true principle of sacrifice, seeks 
not the poorest and leanest part of our 
sacrifice to offer before the Lord, but 
the fat-the freshest hours, the choicest 
talents. Let us learn more and more 
to economize time and money, so that 
much of it may be directly used for His 
glory. 

Now, with an exhortation that you 
shall read carefully Pauls words to the 
saints at Corinth-" 2 Cor. 8" the chapter 
and especially the ninth chapter"; marking 
carefully Verses six to twelve"; we feel 
that we have discharged a duty toward 
you and shall leave the matter with you, 
praying that the Word of God which is 
sharper than any two-edged sword, may 

R549 : page 2 

in this as in all things, be toward you 
living and powerful; piercing even to 
the dividing asunder of the soul (the 
human nature) and the spirit (the new 
nature): Thus enabling you to separate 
and judge even the thoughts and intents 
of your own hearts. fHeb. 4:12,13\) 
And, the very God of peace 
shall work in you, both to will and to 
do, of his good pleasure, while you let 
the same mind be in you, which was 
also in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

For your joy and encouragement, we 
present below some— 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING 
LETTERS: 

page 2 

Coon Rapids, Iowa. 
MR. RUSSELL:-Dear Bro.:-I enclose 
pay for the "Variorum Testament, 
the balance is for the Tract Fund. It is 
only a trifle, but I will have to be content 
with sending a little at a time, and 



hope that it may be more the next. But 
I can never hope to pay for what you 
have sent to me. It was through these 
publications that I was brought to know 
of the priceless prize, that it is even my 
privilege to run for. It found me a poor, 
overburdened, discouraged woman, although 
loving my Lord, still afraid to 
trust him. But I was looking and longing 
for His coming, and praying for 
light, and it came through your tract 
"Food for thinking Christians." God sent 
it. I always receive these papers as 
from him. I have tried to interest others 
in them, but have found none in sympathy 
with me, not even my husband 
and children; and I have so longed for 
them to enjoy these things with me. 
But still I find even here a great joy; 
my Master was alone; did he not long 
for those he loved to understand and 
sympathize with him? I pray for my 
loved ones as he did for his. I am trying 
to sacrifice my life and all I have to 
Him, but find it a daily struggle to overcome. 
THE TOWER always sends me to 
my Bible, and, O what wonders, what 
comfort, what joy I find. Idontget 
time to read anything else. Excuse me 
for writing so long a letter, but it tells so 
little. My love and prayers are with 
you. . 

Ellisville, Mo. 
DEAR FRIENDS:-As a humble servant 
I am still trying to distribute and 
promote the truth, and am oftentimes 
refreshed by meeting from a very unexpected 
direction those who seem fully 
prepared to receive the good news. I 
had the pleasure of meeting some such 
the other evening and we were so much 
interested in the glorious subject, that 
we were surprised to find it near midnight 
when we finished. But I more often 
meet those who seem both deaf and 



blind to such blessed truths; this, formerly 
was very discouraging, but with increasing 
light and a more correct understanding 
of Gods plan, I can but sympathize 
with and pity them, and am often 
reminded of our Saviours prayer on 
the cross, for with their minds thus darkened 
they know not what they reject, 
or in so doing what they are losing. I 
have been thinking of forming a Bible 
Class, for searching the Scriptures in 
connection with the WATCH TOWER, as a 
help to the few who are willing to receive 
the light. It is a cheering thought to 
me, that I am entering my spiritual work, 
at about the same mature age as did my 
Saviour, and may I ever prove a vigilant 
and faithful servant is the continuous 
prayer of my heart. 

Please send me anything you have on 
hand for distribution, as I think I see 
some new chances for doing good. You 
will find enclosed something for the 
Tract Fund-hope I can send more the 
next time. Yours in faith, 



R549 : page 2 

Chicago, Ills. 
DEAR SIR:-You will permit me, 
though a stranger, to say that I have received 
knowledge for both head and 
heart that years of searching had failed 
to accomplish, and so with the hope of 
seeing others freed from sectarian darkness, 
I, too, will be glad to be counted 
among those who are helping to distribute 
the meat in due season. I know 
whom I trust now, thanks be to God. 
The "Food", came just when I had lost 
hold, because there was nothing to hold 
me in the churches-for I searched Baptist, 
Methodist, Free Methodist, Congregational 
and Presbyterian denominations 
till I became satisfied that the Lord had 



something better for me to find: Then 
"Food" came-it seemed accidentally- - 
but now I see it was providentially. Let 
me heartily thank you-or rather thank 
God for giving you the ability to open 
the way to the light. Great is the surrounding 
darkness and we are desirous 
to have others see their way clearly. If 
you can send us some reading matter, we 
can drop it into good soil. A dear old 
child of God left our house in great sorrow 
and perplexity of mind last Sunday 
evening. He has been a deacon in the 
Baptist church for thirty years. Said he, 
"O, I have studied these matters until I 
just find, that the more I give my mind 
to these things the less I know; and now 
I just know nothing and have made up 
my mind to let it go, for God will bring 
it out all right; and what can I do but 
wait Gods own good time. When we 
get over there, we will see face to face." 
I endeavored to persuade him to expect 
the mystery to be explained. Said he: 
"O bring me anything. I want the best 
the Lord gives. I know God is love 
and I hate this "Hell doctrine!" The 
minister in a little church here, is in a 
quandary: he is a thinking man, only he 
is in the "iron bedstead." Please send 
reading matter, if possible,-these two 
at least feel their need. 
Yours in Christ, 

and wife. 

Hamilton, Scotland. 
DEAR BROTHER IN JESUS:-Since 
writing you on the 26th ult. I have received 
"Food for Thinking Christians," 
and I beg to say that I never in all my 
life read any book with the same relish. 
"Praise God from whom all blessings 
flow." I have got such a blessing from 
it that it is like a new conversion to me. 
I cannot tell you, how it has filled my 
soul with rapture and thanksgiving to 



God. I am sure it will bless all who 
read it. It contains much I have not 
been in the habit of hearing or seeing, 
before, and still the same was in the 
Scriptures before me for my searching 
out, as you have done. There is a great 
depth of truth through the whole book, 
and it is written in a way that even those 
who have not studied their Bible much 
will be able to grasp the most of its precious 
teaching, and also, I trust, make 
them, as it has done with me, fall down 
on their knees and thank God. I wish you 
to send me the TOWER regularly. I am 
only a poor man in this worlds wealth, 
but I have faith in God. I cannot in my 
present circumstances, say how much I 
will be able to give towards the Lords 
work during the year, but you shall receive 
according as he prospers me: 
However, I enclose my small mite for 
the present. Trusting you will be enabled 
to still carry on the good work 
you are in, by our Heavenly Father 
moving the hearts of those who have 
plenty, to give of their abundance, also 
those who have less, to give in proportion. 
I see from your paper, and the 
book I have referred to, that I will be 
more able in the future to preach the 
Gospel than I have done in the past; 
and also to correct some things wherein 
I can now see plainly from Scripture 
that I was wrong in. But I taught according 
to the light I had. 
Your brother in the Gospel, 



page 2 

Ozark, Ark. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-"Food for 
Thinking Christians" received and read; 
it is now going the rounds of the village 
as a great curiosity. Some denounce 
it as the work of the devil, as 



did the Jews the miracles of Christ; 
others say its dangerous doctrine, it 
antagonizes their Church creeds; others 
rejoice that the "glad tidings of great 
joy" can be made so plain. To me I 
believe it a great blessing, for I now 
read the Bible ten times more than ever 
before; partly to see if these things are 
true, partly to see what more can be 
found with this new light; and because 
the more I know of God and his Word, 
the more I love him. 

To say that I heartily thank you for 
this little book is but a feeble expression 
of my gratitude, and while I do 
not yet endorse all of your teachings, 
I am anxious to know what more you 
have to say in harmony with them, and 
take this opportunity to ask you to send 
me the "Tabernacle Pamphlet." 

May God assist you in reflecting the 
true light. Yours in the love and 
search of the truth, . 

Farland, Kans. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Allow me to 
call you Bro. and thank you for your 
kindness in sending me a copy of "Food 
for Thinking Christians," and two copies 
of the WATCH TOWER. Your favor is 
greatly appreciated. The pamphlet I 
have studied, and read to others, and 
talked the subject over with still others, 
with varying results. Some, with myself, 
value it highly as supplying a want 
long felt. It treats on subjects which I 
have long thought about, and desired 
to understand. It is more valuable to 
me than its weight in gold. A dear old 
mother in Israel, a confirmed invalid 
and not far from the river, with her 
son who is an Elder in our church and 
his wife and mine (five persons), delight 
to meet together to read it and converse 
about it. Another Elder and his wife 
say I have got hold of a dangerous doctrine; 



yet they are good people, but the 
Food is too strong for them. Others 
cannot understand its teachings at all, 
but cling to hell-fire and brimstone. 

But oh, what a glorious subject it is to 
those who can appreciate it, and the 
more we study it the more interested 
we become. I have been talking with 
some of the brethren and I see that I 
can form a class of interested inquirers 
after the truth. 

I have started a spirit of inquiry. 
Please send another copy of Food for 
Thinking Christians for the dear old 
mother before mentioned, she has my 
copy and can hardly allow it to leave 
her. We should dearly love to hear 
preaching on the subject. We belong 
to the Christian or Campbellite church, 
but at present are without preaching, 
our pastor having left for more profitable 
pastures. 

Yours in Christ, . 



R549 : page 2 
BURDENS. 

In the last chapter of the Epistle to 
the v Galatians v are these two sentences: 
"Bear ye one anothers burdens, and 
so fulfill the law of Christ," and "Every 
man shall bear his own burden." 

It is a burdened world. Every shoulder 
has its load, the carrying of which 
often becomes exceedingly tiresome. 
This is so far true as to make the invitation 
of Jesus, "Come unto Me, all ye 
that are heavy-laden," a universal 
invitation. 

There are real loads, and there are 
fictitious burdens. There are some 
things which a man ought no more refuse 
to bear than a ship should refuse to 



carry its freight. He was made to 
carry just such burdens. It is unmanly 
to strive to shirk them. But, sometimes, 
people take on themselves that which 
there is no need for them to bear: and 
then they make great complaints against 
fate, or God, or whatsoever or whomsoever 
they suppose to be at the head of 
universal affairs. 

A little study of the two sentences 
we have quoted above, which occur very 
near one another in the same chapter, 
may be of assistance to us. 

Their contiguity exposes them to the 
suspicion of being contradictory. In 
one breath the Apostle teaches us to 
bear one another s burdens, and in the 
next breath tells us that every man 
shall bear his own burden. 

There are two things to be noticed 
here. One is, that whereas we have 
the same English word in both sentences, 
in the Greek there are two different 
words. In the first quotation the 
word translated "burden" means that 
which tires; in the second, it means 
that which loads. Whatever makes a 
man grow weaker and weaker is the 
first kind of burden. Whatever is needful 
to carry-- such as a soldiers kit, or 
a ships freight-it is the meaning of the 
second kind of burden. 

Moreover, we are to consider the occasion 
of the employment of these 
phrases. A Christian man is overtaken 
in a fault, through some infirmity of 
character or temperament. He is not 
to be thrown away, therefore, any more 
than a brave soldier who has not the 
strength to carry his heavy knapsack and 
gun must be thrown out of the ranks, 
simply because, for the reason, he is too 
weak to bear his burden. His comrades 
must come up and restore such a one, 
in the spirit of meekness; for that comrade, 
spiritual as he is, and strong now, 



may sometime hereafter become tired, 
by either an increase of what he was 
carrying, or a decrease of his strength. 
Now the stronger comrade must assist 
the infirmities of the weaker comrade, 
and so fulfill the law of Christ. 

Those who are spiritual ought to be 
considering their Christian brethren all 
around them, to see how they can help 
the weak; but every Christian man 
ought, as far as possible, to bear his 
own burdens and discharge his own 
duties so as to throw nothing on his 
brother. The burden ought to be 
sought by the stronger; it ought not to 
be shirked by the weaker. If there be 
burdens which I cannot bear, and have 
no neighbor to assist me, then I 
have a comfort which is afforded me in 
"Psalm 55:22\~Dr. C. F. Deems. 



R549 : page 3 

LET US GO FORTH. 

"HEB. 13:13". 

Silent, like men in solemn haste, 
Girded wayfarers of the waste, 
We pass out at the worlds wide gate, 
Turning our back on all its state; 
We press along the narrow road 
That leads to life, to bliss, to God. 

We cannot and we would not stay; 
We dread the snares that throng the way, 
We fling aside the weight and sin, 
Resolved the victory to win; 
We know the peril, but our eyes 
Rest on the splendor of the prize. 

No idling now, no wasteful sleep, 
From Christian toil our limbs to keep; 
No shrinking from the desperate fight, 



No thought of yielding or of flight; 
No love of present gain or ease, 
No seeking man or self to please. 

No sorrow for the loss of fame, 
No dread of scandal on our name; 
No terror for the worlds sharp scorn, 
No wish that taunting to return; 
No hatred can to hatred move, 
And enmity but kindles love. 

No sigh for laughter left behind, 
Or pleasures scattered to the wind; 
No looking back on Sodoms plains, 
No listening still to Babels strains; 
No tears for Egypts song and smile, 
No thirsting for its flowing Nile. 

What though with weariness oppressed? 
Tis but a little and we rest. 
This throbbing heart and burning brain 
Will soon be calm and cool again; 
Night is far spent and morn is near- 
Morn of the cloudless and the clear. 

Tis but a little and we come 
To our reward, our crown, our home! 
Another year, or more, or less, 
And we have crossed the wilderness; 
Finished the toil, the rest begun, 
The battle fought, the triumph won! 

We grudge not, then, the toil, the way; 
Its ending is the endless day! 
We shrink not from these tempests keen, 
With little of the calm between; 
We welcome each descending sun, 
Ere morn our joy may be begun! 
-Horatius Bonar. 



R549 : page 3 

FULL PROOF OF HIS MINISTRY. 



After our Lords resurrection and ascension, 
the little company of a hundred 
and twenty disciples, according to 
the Masters command, were together 
awaiting the descent of power from on 
high-the Holy Spirit. While waiting 
they very properly spent the time in 
prayer and in searching of the Scriptures, 
and while thus engaged ("Acts 1:13-26") 
Peter found that passage in 
Davids prophecy which mentions the 
appointment of another to the office of 
Judas the betrayer of our Lord; and 
calling the attention of the company to 
it he said: "Men and brethren, this 
Scripture must needs have been fulfilled 
...which David spoke concerning Judas 
who was guide to them that took Jesus, 
for he was numbered with us, and had 
obtained part of this ministry.... 
It is written in the book of Psalms, 
"Let his habitation be desolate and let 
no man dwell therein, and his bishopric 
let another take." 

R550 : page 3 

Commenting on this, Peter urged that 
it was their duty to select one of their 
number to be a successor to Judas, saying, 
"Wherefore of these men which 
have companied with us all the time 
that the Lord Jesus went in and out 
among us, beginning from the baptism 
of John unto that same day that he was 
taken up from us, must one be ordained 
to be a witness with us of his resurrection. 
Peters counsel seemed good to 
all the disciples, and accordingly they 
appointed two whom they esteemed the 
most proper persons, and asked the 
Lord to make a choice between them, 
agreeing to cast lots, and to accept the 
one on whom the lot should fall as the 
Lords choice of an apostle to fill the 
place of Judas. 



Now, though Peter and the rest of the 
disciples were very zealous and anxious 
to do the Lords will, they evidently 
made a great mistake. In the first place, 
all that they were told to do was to 
tarry, to wait at Jerusalem until they 
should be endued with power from on 
high. In the second place, their human 
judgment was unwittingly attempting to 
direct the Lord, even before they were 
baptized with the Spirit; and not only 
so, but to limit his choice to one of two 
disciples. It was just like impetuous 
though zealous Peter to make such a 
proposition, and the erring human judgment 
of the balance of the disciples to 
approve and accept it. But the Lord, 
knowing their hearts, simply ignored 
their error, and let time prove to them 
that he was abundantly able, without 
their assistance, to make his own choice 
and to direct his own work. 

Of Matthias, on whom the lot fell to 
be an Apostle, we never hear afterward. 
He was with them at Pentecost, and 
was one of the hundred and twenty who 
received the baptism of the Holy Spirit, 
but his record ends there. The special 
mission of the Apostles is clearly defined 
in "Acts 1:8" -our Lords last 
words before his ascension: "Ye shall 
receive power after that the Holy Spirit 
is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses 
unto me both in Jerusalem and in 
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the 
uttermost part of the earth." 

While this, in a general sense, applied 
to the whole company of those early 
disciples, and while in fact by their faith 
and example, as a company who had 
actually seen the Lord both before and 
after his resurrection, they have been 
witnesses to all the world; yet in the 
strictest sense, it applied to those specially 
chosen as public teachers and 
witnesses; and those same twelve Apostles 



still speak through their writings, 
and shall continue to do so until the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth. 

Since to be an Apostle was to be a 
witness of the Lords resurrection, none 
could be Apostles except those who had 
seen Jesus after his resurrection, hence 
the eleven felt confident that the one for 
Judas place should be chosen from the 
company present, but Jehovah had another 
plan and was preparing an instrument 
of his own choosing in the person 
of Saul of Tarsus. Saul of Tarsus? 
The disciples would never have thought 
of him. He was the most noted and 
dreaded persecutor of the church known 
to them, not only in Jerusalem, but pursuing 
them even unto strange cities; 
neither had he seen the Lord after his 
resurrection. Nevertheless Saul of Tarsus 
was a chosen vessel of the Lord, to 
bear his name before the Gentiles, and 
kings and the children of Israel; fActs 9:15") 
and his after course gave full 
proof of his Apostleship. Though Saul 
was not among those who saw our Lord 
as he appeared-in the flesh-after his 
resurrection, this was no barrier to 
Gods plan under which he was "chosen 
from his mothers womb" to be an Apostle. 
Hence we read, "Last of all he 
was seen of (by) me also." fl Cor. 15:8\) 
While the other Apostles saw Jesus 
as he appeared after his resurrection, in 
various human bodies, Saul saw him as 
he is-a glorious spiritual body shining 
above the brightness of the noon-day 
sun. The effect of the personal glory 
of the Lord as seen by Paul, was to 
strike him blind, and only by a miracle 
was his sight restored. 

As Paul saw Jesus-a glorious spiritual 
being- so all the little flock shall 
see him when born of the Spirit— in the 
resurrection. As at their conversion 



and consecration, they are begotten of 
the Spirit, in the resurrection they are 
born of the Spirit. When we see him 
"as he is," it will not have the effect on 
us that it had on Paul, for he saw him 
"as one born out of due time" (more 
properly before the time); but we (and 
Paul also at that time) shall see him as 
he IS, for we shall be changed and be 
spiritual and glorious beings like him, 
being fashioned like unto his glorious 
body. 

In view of the benefit to be derived 
from such an example as Paul, it would 
be well to note in what a marked way 
the Lord gave proof of his calling. 
Some at the present day, in looking 
back to the early church, appear to 
think that they, unlike the church of 
to-day, moved along very smoothly, 
and that because they had actually seen 
the Lord and heard from his own lips, 
there was little or no trial of faith, and 
no differences of opinion among them; 
that having the Apostles directly appointed 
of the Lord and present with 
them, their teachings were all received 
without doubt or questioning; and, in 
short, that all was harmony, save the 
trials that came from the outside world, 
from those who did not profess to love 
or follow the Lord Jesus. 

But this we find is far from the facts 
in the case. Immediately after the baptism 
of the Spirit at Pentecost, all were 
of one mind and full of hope and joy- 
"And the word of God increased, and 
the number of the disciples multiplied 
in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company 
of the priests were obedient to 
the faith." fActs 6:7\) And many 
gladly received the word and were baptized 
--as many as three thousand in 
one day. These were genuine conversions 
too, and not the result of excitement 
and impulse, for they continued 



steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and 
fellowship, and gave evidence of a 
spirit of sacrifice. Such were added to 
the Church daily. fActs 2:41-47\) 

While rejoicing in the truth, the fierce 
persecutions from without, only served 
to more firmly unite them in love and 
sympathy, and in defense of the truth 
against a common foe. But soon difficulties 
arose among themselves. Some 
began to "depart from the faith once 
delivered to the saints," to be "corrupted 
from the simplicity that is in 
Christ," and their evil influence was 
great. 

It was in the very beginning of the 
outcropping s of error, that Pauls clear 
teachings and manifest leadings of the 
Spirit marked him as the very chief of 
the Apostles, a teacher of teachers, the 
special mouth-piece of the Lord. 

Immediately after his conversion, Paul 
began to preach the Gospel, traveling 
from city to city, principally among the 
Gentiles, preaching the remission of sins 
through the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus, to all that believe on him both 
Jew and Gentile. As a result of his 
labors, little companies of believers 
were gathered in almost every place he 
visited. For a time he was encouraged 
by their faith and zeal, but the time of 
trial came to every one of them, testing 
every saints fidelity to his consecration. 
The trial came not only to the Church 
in general, but to the Apostles also, and 
here we see Pauls clear faith and bold 
self-sacrificing zeal defending the entire 
Church against the assaults of error. 

In his preaching, as was characteristic 
of him, without fear, neither soliciting 
the favor of men, he presented the truth 
in clear and unmistakable terms. It was 
clean cut and pointed so that all understood 
just what he meant. He taught 
that all, both Jew and Gentile, might be 



justified simply and only by faith in 
Christ; that the sacrifice of Christ as a 
substitute for us, fully met all the claims 
of the law of God against us, and that 
therefore we have life through him; that 
since Christ had thus made a full end of 
the claims of the law against us, there 
is now to believers no condemnation and 
no necessity for observing the ceremonies 
of the law heretofore enjoined 
upon Israel, and that in fact to longer 
observe those typical ceremonies by 
which Israelites had vainly thought to 
justify themselves, would now be wrong, 
and would indicate a lack of full faith 
in the ransom through Christ Jesus. 

The other Apostles at Jerusalem as 
yet did not seem to see this matter so 
clearly, for they and the church at Jerusalem 
still adhered to some of the law 
ceremonies-circumcision, etc. -and 
when the Gospel went to the Gentiles 
they at first thought that they should be 
circumcised. Neither did they for some 
time seem to realize the force of their 
commission that the Gospel should go 
"to the uttermost part of the earth"- 
to the Gentiles. They had grown in 
grace and knowledge less rapidly than 
had Paul, being more or less retarded 
by the force of their surroundings and 
of old ideas. 

After a time certain persons went out 
from Jerusalem to the various Gentile 
churches, teaching contrary to Paul, 
that they should be circumcised and 
obey the law of Moses, while Paul had 
taught them that they were justified by 
faith in Christ "without the works of 
the Law." To counteract Pauls teachings, 
these Judaizing teachers evidently 
sought to cast discredit on his authority 
as an Apostle, claiming that he was not 
really an Apostle, that the real Apostles 
who were appointed by the Lord were 
all up at Jerusalem. 



On account of this difference of opinion 
the churches were more or less unsettled 
in their faith. Some evidently 
began to say, We dont know after all 
whether this Paul is any authority; it 
seems that he was not one of the twelve 
of the Lords appointment, and we dont 
know that he has any right to teach differently 
from all the other Apostles at 
Jerusalem, that we ought not to obey 
the Law of Moses. 

As this error began to spread among 
the churches, Paul began to find it necessary 
for the truths sake to not only 

R551 : page 3 

oppose the error and re-affirm and 
prove the truth, but also to prove to 
the Church that he was as much an 
Apostle, chosen of the Lord, as were 
the others. 

To the church of Galatia he wrote: 
"I marvel that ye are so soon removed 
from him (Paul) that called you into 
the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel: 
which is not another; but there be 
some that trouble you and would pervert 
the Gospel of Christ." But now let me 
tell you; "Though we (Paul and his 
associates) or an angel from heaven 
preach any other Gospel unto you than 
that we have preached,. ..and 
ye have received, let him be accursed." 
CGal. l:6-9\) 

And let me say further, brethren, 
that the Gospel which was preached 
of me, is not after man, for I neither received 
it of man, neither was I taught 
it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. 
fvs. 11,12".) I Paul am an Apostle, not 
of men, neither by mans appointment, 
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father 
who raised him from the dead. ("vs. 1\) 
You heard of me in times past how I 
persecuted the Church of God and how 



I wasted it and how zealous I was for 
the tradition of my fathers, ("vs. 13,14\) 
[And he verily thought he did Gods 
service. "Acts 26:9\] But when it 
pleased God who from my birth called 
me by his grace, to reveal his Son in 
me; immediately I conferred not with 
flesh and blood, but went forth at once 
to preach the faith which once I persecuted. 
Cvs. 15,16,23"). 

To prove to you that I received my 
commission and authority direct from 
the Lord and not from them which were 
Apostles before me, let me tell you that 
I did not go up to Jerusalem until three 
years after my conversion; and then I 
went to see Peter, and abode with him 
fifteen days; but other of the Apostles 
saw I none save James, the Lords 
brother, fvs. 17-19".) Then fourteen 
years after, I went up again to Jerusalem 
with Barnabas, and took Titus with 
me also. And I went up by revelation 
--the Lord sent me-not to learn of 
them, but to communicate unto them 
that Gospel which I preach among the 
Gentiles. ("Gal. 2:1-2".) The other Apostles, 
fettered in a measure by the Judaizing 
influences around them, and not 
making sufficient progress in the knowledge 
of the truth, Paul was sent by the 
Lord to strengthen and assist them. 
But to show that he did not go about it 
boastfully he says, I communicated 
"privately to them which were of reputation, 
lest by any means I should run 
in vain ("v. 2"), lest I should fail to 
have them see the depth and fulness of 
the Gospel revealed to me." 

When Paul went to Jerusalem he was 
cordially received of the Apostles and 
elders and the church at Jerusalem. 
Though they had one of their own 
choosing to fill the place of Judas, and 
though they did not seem to understand 
his selection and peculiar course 



in preaching to the Gentiles, yet recognizing 
in him the spirit of the Master, 
and hearing how he had been owned 
and blessed, and of his devotion, zeal, 
and self-sacrifice, they had enough of 
the spirit of Christ in them to accept 
and receive him gladly, and they soon 
began to realize that he was the Lords 
choice. They saw that the Gospel of 
the uncircumcision was committed unto 
Paul, as the Gospel of the circumcision 
was committed unto Peter, (for he that 
wrought effectually in Peter to the 
Apostleship of the circumcision, the 
same was mighty in Paul toward the 
Gentiles) and when James, Cephas and 
John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived 
the grace that was given unto Paul, 

R551 : page 4 

they gave to him and Barnabas the 
right hand of fellowship. Cvs. 7-9\) 

After his private interview with the 
various Apostles referred to in v ver. 2\ we 
read of the public conference of the 
Apostles and elders and the church at 
Jerusalem. ("Acts 15\) Peters speech 
Cvs. 7-1 T) shows how he was convinced 
that not only should the Gospel continue 
to be preached to the Gentiles, but also 
that faith in Christ the Redeemer, without 
the works of the Law, was all that 
was necessary for justification either for 
Jew or Gentile, reminding them of the 
fact that God had given the Holy Spirit 
to the uncircumcision as to the circumcision, 
making no difference. 

James speech Cvs. 13-2T) was to the 
same effect. And the result of the conference 
was expressed by letter to the 
various churches Cvs. 22-29 v ) commending 
to them their beloved brother Paul 
and the truth he had been preaching. 

But to return to Pauls experience in 
withstanding error and proving his 



apostleship, he shows that he was soon 

met with a new difficulty. Doubtless 

his visit to Jerusalem and the harmony 

of spirit and of faith greatly comforted 

and cheered him, but it seems that notwithstanding 

the decision of the Jerusalem 

church as a whole in this matter, 

there were a few who were determined 

to hold on to the error and to exert 

their influence in advancing it; and their 

influence was felt in retarding the progress 

of truth even among the Apostles 

at Jerusalem. After a time Peter came 

to Antioch, and at first he very properly 

treated the Gentile Christians there as 

brethren, on equal footing with Jews; 

but afterwards when some of these 

came down from Jerusalem, not wishing 

to offend them, he separated himself 

from the Gentiles and ate with those 

who still adhered to their Jewish customs, 

for under the law a Jew might 

not eat with Gentiles. Very soon Peters 

example had its effect on Barnabas and 

other Jews in the church at Antioch, 

who before that, had been led to see 

that there is no difference between Jew 

and Gentile, but that all are one in 

Christ Jesus. 

This aroused Pauls righteous indignation, 
and he withstood Peter to the 
face, because he was to be blamed for 
thus acting deceitfully, and he says- 
right before them all, I exposed his 
deception and let them know that he 
had eaten with the Gentiles before they 
came, and that though he now wanted 
to appear to be in harmony with their 
ideas, he had been acting to the contrary 
by living as do the Gentiles- 
eating with them, etc. CGal. 2:11-21\) 

Thus, he says, I had to contend for 
the faith in Antioch, and now fchap. 3 V ) 
"O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched 
you that ye should not obey the 
truth? This only would I learn of you, 



Received ye the Spirit by the works of 
the law or by the hearing of faith? Are 
ye so foolish? having begun in the 
spirit are ye now made perfect by the 
flesh? f vs. l-3\) As many as are of 
the works of the law are under the 
curse; for it is written, cursed is every 
one that continueth not in ALL THINGS 
which are written in the book of the 
law to do them." But that no man is 
justified by the law in the sight of God 
is evident. Our only hope then, is in 
that Christ hath redeemed us from the 
curse of the law, being made a curse 
for us-our substitute. Cvs. 10-13".) 

Thus with much reasoning did Paul 
seek to re-establish the faith of the Galatian 
church, in the breadth and efficacy 
of the ransom, and in the reliability 
of his teaching as an Apostle truly 
called of God to minister unto them. 
He then exhorted them to stand fast in 
the liberty wherewith Christ had made 
them free, and not be again entangled 
with a yoke of bondage. 

But these difficulties did not end with 
the Galatian church. Paul also found 
that the Corinthian church had been 
beset by these false teachers, and that 
as a consequence their faith in his Apostleship 
and teaching was somewhat 
shaken. He therefore found it necessary 
to write to them; for, said he, I 
fear lest by any means your minds 
should be corrupted from the simplicity 
that is in Christ. Q2 Cor. 11:3".) Now 
if he that cometh preacheth another 
Jesus whom we have not preached, or if 
ye receive another spirit which ye have 
not received, or, in short, if they present 
another entirely different Gospel, better 
than that you have received, ye might 
do well to hear them fv. 4 V ); but these 
do not pretend to bring you a different 
and a better Gospel, but rather to pervert 
the Gospel ye had received of us. 



"Such are false Apostles, deceitful 
workers, transforming themselves into 
the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel; 
for Satan himself is transformed into an 
angel of light (as a messenger of truth). 
Therefore it is no great thing if his 
ministers also be transformed as the 
ministers of righteousness, whose end 
shall be according to their works." 
Ovs. 13,15\) 

Now as to my Apostleship, I reckon 
that I was not a whit behind the very 
chiefest Apostle. But though I be unpolished 
in speech, yet not in knowledge, 
as you have had opportunity to 
know. fvs. 5,6\) Truly the signs of an 
Apostle were wrought among you. 
Cchap. 12:12\) 

In further proof of his Apostleship, 
Paul speaks of the special revelations 
he received which the other Apostles 
had not received. One very notable one 
is referred to in v chapter 12:2-4\ He 
was caught away to the third heaven- 
Paradise-the new Millennial epoch- 
and saw things so vividly, that he could 
not tell whether physically, or merely 
mentally, absent from surroundings. This 
vision showed him more of the length 
and depth of Gods loving plans for his 
creatures than he had ever before 
known; in fact more than was then DUE 
to be known, and for this cause said to 
be "unlawful to utter;" i.e., the vision 
was for his own personal instruction 
and not to be made known to the 
Church in general, because not yet due 
time. 

It seems evident that Paul saw clearly 
the very same things shown to John in 
symbolic visions-called Revelations- 
the present unfolding of which (because 
now due time) is shedding such an effulgence 
of light upon the entire word 
and plan of our Father. 

But though not permitted to tell or 



utter the deep things seen, it yet proved 
a blessing to the Church, for Pauls 
mind being thereby clearly and strongly 
guided into truth, he was enabled to 
write so powerfully and so clearly on 
every point of Christian doctrine, that 
his letters are the tribunals before which 
all error is uncovered and reproved. 
The glories of that great revelation or 
vision doubtless tinged and guided the 

R552 : page 4 

expressions of every letter and every 
discourse, and are now helpful in the 
understanding of the opening symbols 
of the "Revelation" by John. 

Truly, as Paul said, he was "not a 
whit behind the very chiefest of the 
Apostles," for he had more abundant 
revelations of Gods plan than they all. 
But of these he did not boast, though 
he referred to them as special proofs of 
his calling, and for the strengthening of 
their faith. Neither did he boast of the 
greater work he had accomplished over 
and above the others in making converts, 
and in establishing churches. 
But, he says, "Most gladly rather will I 
glory in my infirmities, that the power 
of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore 
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, 
in necessities, in persecutions, 
in distresses for Christs sake." 
CChap. 12:9,10\) 

But, he says, you Corinthians have 
thought me a fool for glorying in these 
things, but you ought to have commended 
me, for in nothing am I behind 
the very chiefest Apostles, though I be 
nothing; (it is Christ in me.) fv. IT.) You 
doubtless, thought I sacrificed the dignity 
of the office of an Apostle by the 
things which I suffered for your sake. 
"Have I committed an offence in humbling 
myself that ye might be exalted, 



because I have preached to you the 
Gospel of Christ freely?" I have taken 
wages of other churches to do you service. 
OChap. 10:7,8\) (He also labored 
with his own hands rather than be 
chargeable to those who had not yet 
come to appreciate the value of the 
Gospel and its ambassador, 
fl Cor. 4: 12\) 

"Seeing that many glory after the 
flesh, I will glory also," but I will glory 
in the things I have suffered. "In labors 
I have been more abundant, (than the 
other Apostles) in stripes above measure, 
in prisons more frequent, in deaths 
oft. Of the Jews five times received I 
forty stripes save one; thrice was I 
beaten with rods; once was I stoned; 
thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and 
a day I have been in the deep. In 
journeyings often, in perils of waters, in 
perils of robbers, in perils by mine own 
countrymen, in perils by the heathen, 
in perils in the city, in perils in the 
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils 
among false brethren; in weariness and 
painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger 
and thirst, in fastings often, in cold 
and nakedness. Beside those things 
that are without, that which cometh 
upon me daily, the care of all the 
churches. Who is weak and I am not 
weak? who is offended and I burn not? 
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ which is blessed forevermore 
knoweth that I lie not. f 10: 18-3 T.) 

Surely Paul gave full proof of his 
ministry and Apostleship, which consisted 
not only in proclaiming the glad 
tidings, but also in defending the truth 
against the assaults of the adversary to 
overturn it. We find him also exhorting 
Timothy to preach the word without 
fear of men, to be instant in season and 
out of season, (when it suited his convenience 
and when it did not,) to reprove, 



rebuke and exhort with all long-suffering 
and doctrine," telling him also that in 
his own first endeavor to withstand false 
doctrine, no man stood with him, but all 
forsook him. "Notwithstanding," he 
says, "The Lord stood with me and 
strengthened me, that by me the preaching 
might be fully known, and that all 
the Gentiles might hear." He also 
warns Timothy against Alexander the 
coppersmith, saying, "He did me much 
harm, of whom be thou aware also, for 
he hath greatly withstood our words." 
02 Tim. 4:2;14-17\) As we thus view 
his record, from his conversion to the 
end of his life, we must say that Paul 
was not only the greatest Apostle, but, 
next to our Lord, he is the most perfect 
model of a self-sacrificing spirit that 
shines on the sacred records. Without 
doubt his great usefulness, as well as his 
knowledge of Gods plan, was due to 
the fact that with such persevering effort, 
he carried out the consecration he had 
made. 

While, as we have seen, the other 
Apostles did not grow so rapidly in 
grace and in knowledge, because more 
or less fettered by former ideas, and because 
at first they did not have an eye 
so entirely single to the glory of God 
as did Paul, yet we would not be understood 
as underrating in the least, the 
authority of their writings, which beyond 
all doubt were divinely inspired, and 
probably frequently beyond their own 
understanding. Neither would we desire 
to under- value the piety and zeal of 
any of the Apostles. Impulsive Peter 
seemed to gain more self-control, and 
later we find him boldly and freely endorsing 
the teaching and course of his 
"beloved brother Paul." Q2 Pet. 3:15\) 
We find him also afterward warning the 
Church against false teachers who would 
privately endeavor to subvert the fundamentals 



of the Gospel, even denying 

that the Lord bought them, bringing 

upon themselves swift destruction, saying 

that many would follow their pernicious 

ways, by reason of whom, the way 

of truth would be evil spoken of. 

02Pet.2:l,2\) 

We also find John writing to one of 
the churches and to the "beloved Gaius," 
warning them against the evil influence 
of Diotrephes, who, "loving to have the 
pre-eminence among them," received 
not the Apostles, speaking against them 
with malicious words; and having gained 
influence over the church in that 
place, cast out those who received the 
Apostles. 03 John 9: 10\) 

We also find Jude writing to the 
churches warning them against certain 
men who had crept in unawares, turning 
the grace of God into self-exaltation, 
taking advantage of the spread of truth 
to add to their own influence and apparent 
wisdom, and introduce their own 
false teaching. He wrote to put them 
in remembrance of things which they 
already knew, but from which they were 
in danger of being turned aside by these 
false teachers, exhorting them to "contend 
earnestly for the faith once delivered 
to the saints;" and while he would 
have them shun the evil influence of 
these he exhorts the Church to make a 
difference between these wilful enemies 
of the truth, and those weak saints who 
had been partially overcome by them- 
"pulling them out of the fire" (destruction) 
to which their course was tending. 

Though all the Apostles were not so 
prompt in self-sacrifice as was Paul, time 
and discipline proved and polished 
them, and enduring hardness as good 
soldiers, they are ensamples as well as 
Apostles to the flock. May all the dear 
flock consider well the examples and 
divinely inspired teaching left us, that 



we also may war a good warfare, and so 
run as to obtain that to which we also 
have been called. Let us learn from 
these examples, that those who most 
thoroughly lose sight of self and become 
lost in Christ, and in the seeking and 
doing of his will, will be most clearly 
taught and most abundantly used of the 
Master. Paul was the chief of the 
Apostles because he sacrificed more, 
and with greater promptness than the 
others: "Whosoever of you will be 
the chiefest, shall be servant of all." 



R552 : page 4 
TURNED INTO HELL. 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all 
the nations that forget God."- v Psa. 9:17\ 

This statement of the Lord recorded 
by the Psalmist, we find without any 
qualification whatever, and we must 
accept it as a positive fact. If the 
claims of "Orthodoxy" were true this 
would be indeed a fearful thought. 
Hell, to them, means a place of unmitigated 
woe, where untold millions of 
human beings writhe in anguish, tortured 
by literal fire or the gnawing of conscience, 
which, say some, is even worse. 
Under this fearful sentence they see the 
vast majority of mankind hastening, as 
they believe, to their dreadful doom; 
yet feeble indeed are the efforts put 
forth to rescue them. Babylon still has 
plenty of time for social enjoyment and 
festivity, which according to their belief 
should be spent in an almost frenzied 
endeavor to save the perishing. And 
she still has plenty of money to spend 
in gratifying the pride of life and the 
lust of the eye which might be applied 



to the same purpose; but instead, witness 
her costly temples of fashion, her 
grand organs, her costly apparel, her 
contempt of the poor, her greed of 
gain and strife for worldly honors. 

But let us look at the true meaning of 
the word hell, into which God says he 
will turn the wicked and forgetful 
nations. We find that it is the translation 
of the Hebrew word sheol, which 
simply means the state or condition of 
death. There is not in it the remotest 
idea of either life or torment; and no 
scholar can by any manner of twisting 
or turning make it to mean anything 
else. Suffering of any kind would be 
impossible where there is no consciousness, 
no life. The Psalmist says, "In 
death there is no remembrance of thee: 
in the grave (sheol) who shall give thee 
thanks?" f6:5\) And again it is written: 
"Whatever thy hand findeth to 
do, do it with thy might; for there is 
no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom in the grave (sheol) whither 
thou goest." fEccl. 9:10\) The corresponding 
Greek word is hades, which 
also means the state or condition of 
death, and no other can properly be 
attached to either. Every minister, 
unless he be very ignorant indeed, 
knows that this is true: and ignorance 
on this subject is in no wise excusable in 
these days when books are so plentiful 
and so cheap. But still they go on 
preaching this false idea of hell, which 
is nothing short of a slander against the 
character of God, as though they were 
still enveloped in the ignorance of the 
dark ages. This very text which we 
are now considering, is quoted and 
preached from over and over again by 
men who ought to know, and many of 
whom do know the true meaning of the 
Hebrew word sheol, and who nevertheless 
in their attempt to uphold the 



R552 : page 5 

frightful doctrine of eternal torture, 
knowingly pervert this Scripture. 

R553 : page 5 

Well, you inquire, How, then, did this 
idea first originate, and then obtain such 
universal acceptance? We answer, that 
it originated with Papacy, and was a 
part of her scheme for raising money 
from her ignorant and deluded subjects. 
Papacy taught that this place of torment 
was prepared for all who did not seek 
the protection of THE (Papal) Church. 
All heretics were sure to go there; 
while those of THE Church not counted 
worthy of heaven, were permitted to 
tarry in purgatory, there to suffer reformatory 
punishment, which might be 
shortened and relieved by the liberality 
of their friends in securing the prayers 
of the priests. 

No other doctrine of the Romish 
Church ever did so much towards holding 
her captives in the bondage of fear, 
and increasing her revenues. The 
Protestant Churches in emerging from 
Romanism, rejected the doctrine of 
purgatory, but retained the worse doctrine 
of eternal torture in hell. Though 
the increase and spread of knowledge 
has proved it to be false, yet like 
Papacy, finding it to be such a powerful 
agent in binding her subjects, and exacting 
her revenues, she is loathe to part 
with it; and since reasoning and enlightened 
minds are beginning to question 
this dogma, her policy now is, to 
put the brakes on reason, and to hurl 
her anathemas against investigation. If 
this bondage of fear were once broken, 
and Gods children relied entirely on 
His Word, these great systems of Babylon 



would soon dissolve. 

If we substitute the true meaning of 
the word sheol, our text will read: 
"The wicked shall be turned into the 
condition of death, and all the nations 
that forget God." This we believe; 
but who are the wicked? In one 
sense all men are wicked, in that all are 
violators of Gods law, but in its fullest 
sense the wicked are those who, with 
full knowledge of the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin and the remedy provided for 
their recovery, wilfully persist in sin and 
refuse the remedy. 

As yet few, only consecrated believers, 
have come to a knowledge of God; the 
world knows him not and the nations 
cannot forget God until they are first 
brought to a knowledge of him. The 
consecrated have been enlightened, led 
of the Spirit through faith, to understand 
the deep and hidden things of 
God, which, though expressed in his 
Word, appear only as an idle tale and 
foolishness to the world, but which to 
the consecrated believer reveal the 
glory of Gods character. 

But, as we have hitherto seen, it will 
not be so in the age to come, for then 
"The earth shall be full of the knowledge 
of the Lord as the waters cover 
the sea." flsa. 11:9".) Much that we 
now receive by faith will then be demonstrated 
to the world by sight. When 
he who has ransomed man from the 
power of the grave fHos. 13:14") begins 
to gather his purchased possession 
back from the prison-house of death 
flsa. 61:1".); when the sleepers are 
awakened under the genial rays of the 
Sun of Righteousness, they will not be 
slow to realize the truth of the hitherto 
seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus Christ, 
by the grace of God, tasted death for 
every man." 

We have also seen by previous investigation, 



that the gradual ascent of 
the Kings Highway of Holiness in that 
age will be easy and possible to all, 
when all the stones-stumbling blocks- 
shall have been gathered out, and 
straight paths made for their feet. It 
is in that age that this text applies. 
Those who ignore the favoring circumstances 
of that age, and will not be 
obedient to the righteous Judge or 
Ruler-Christ-will truly be the wicked. 
And every loyal subject of the kingdom 
of God will approve the righteous judgment 
which turns such a one again into 
sheol-the condition of death. Such a 
one would be unworthy of life, and were 
he permitted to live, his life would be a 
curse to himself and to the rest of mankind, 
and a blemish on the work of 
God. 

This will be the SECOND DEATH, from 
which there shall be no resurrection. 
Having been ransomed from the first or 
Adamic death (sheol) by the sacrifice 
of Christ, if they die again on account 
of their own sin, "there remaineth no 
more sacrifice for sins." fHeb. 10:26\) 
"Christ dieth no more; death hath no 
more dominion over him." fRom. 6:9\) 
This second death should be dreaded 
and shunned by all, since it is to be the 
final end of existence to all those 
deemed unworthy of life. But in it 
there can be no suffering. Like the 
first death, it is the extinction of life: 
in fact it would not be called a second, if 
it were not like the first. The work of 
Christ is to destroy the Adamic death. 

It is because mankind had, through 
sin, become subject to death (sheol, 
hades) that Christ Jesus came to deliver 
us and save us from death. For this 
purpose Christ was manifested, that he 
might destroy death, fl John 3:8 V ; 
v Heb. 2:14\) Death is a cessation of 
existence, the absence of LIFE. There 



is no difference between the condition in 
the first and second deaths, but there is 
hope of a release from the first, while 
from the second there will be no release, 
no return to life. The first death 
sentence passed upon all on account of 
Adams sin, while the second death can 
be incurred only by wilful, individual 
sin, and can come only upon those who 
have first been released from the first 
death- -either reckoned or actually 
released. 

That this last proposition is true is 
evident, since a man cannot lose his life 
(die) twice, without having it restored 
once in the interim. The world will 
in the next age have existence actually 
restored to them by resurrection, and 
then, unless obedient to the favorable 
arrangements of that time, will merit 
and receive the second death, or death 
a second time. (Compare "Ezek. 18:2-4" 
and "Jer. 31:29,30".) During this age 
only those can be liable to the second 
death, who first by faith in Christ have 
been justified and reckoned as free from 
the Adamic death. These can become 
liable to the second death by sinning 
willfully, counting the blood of the 
covenant wherewith they were sanctified 
a common thing. ("Heb. 6:4-6" and 
"10:29".) 

But the application of our text belongs 
to the coming age, when all shall 
be set free from sheol or hades, for 
saints and sinners all go into sheol now, 
and this scripture indicates that, in the 
time when it applies, only the wicked 
shall go there. And the nations that 
forget God must be nations that have 
known him, else they could not forget 
him; and never yet have the nations 
been brought to that knowledge, nor 
will they until the coming time, when 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth, and none shall need to say 



unto his neighbor, "Know thou the 
Lord," for all shall know him from the 
least to the greatest of them. flsa. 1 1:9"; 
v Jer. 31:34\) Again, we find 
that the Hebrew word shub, which in 
our text is translated turned, signifies 
turned back, as to a place or condition 
where they once were. They once were 
in sheol, and were redeemed by the 
precious blood of Christ, and will be 
brought out of sheol; but if then they 
are wicked, they, and all who forget 
God, shall be turned back to sheol. 



R553 : page 5 

SELLING INDULGENCES. 

In the dark ages, when Papacy held 
control of mens consciences and few 
dared to think, one method which she 
practiced to supply herself with money 
was the sale of indulgences. The indulgence 
was a permission to sin and 
yet be free from its consequences. Like 
all great evils it came in gradually, and 
at first consisted in the forgiveness of 
sins and remission of the penalty to all 
who would fight the churchs battles- 
holy wars as they were called-waged 
against all within her reach whom she 
deemed "heretics" and infidels. Heretics 
included all classes of Christians 
who differed from and did not support 
Papacy. Infidels were those who disbelieved 
in Christianity, such as the 
Mohammedans. Against these she waged 
her wars, and those who engaged in 
them and died in battle were sure of 
heaven, no matter what their previous 
course of life had been. This cancellation 
of sins was offered on account, not 
of repentance and faith in the ransom, 
but for what they termed the "good 



work" of slaughtering the churchs 

enemies in the crusades, etc. Thus indulgences 

got under headway. 

Afterward succeeding Popes and 
councils became still more bold, and 
argued that if they had a right to remit 
sins for service to the church, they had 
also the right to remit them for money 
for the church, and, if right for the living, 
it was right also for the dead. By and 
by they went still further and concluded 
that if they had a right to remit past 
sins for money, they had the same right 
to remit, or excuse, or grant indulgence 
for sins of the future. 

We could not object to this course of 
reasoning if its premise or starting point 
were right. If Papacy had one of these 
rights, we must conclude that she had 
the others also. But what right has 
any man to consider any sin cancelled 
except upon the conditions God lays 
down-not works, not money, but faith 
in the redemption which is in Christ 
Jesus. 

Some of these indulgences expressly 
mentioned the very sins which might 
be committed. Some mentioned the 
number of years that the torments of 
Purgatory would be shortened to the 
indulged one. Of Pope John XII. it is 
recorded that he granted "ninety thousand 
years of pardons for deadly sins" 
for the devout repetition of three prayers 
written in a chapel in Rome. 

It was the sale of these future indulgences 
for money which awakened and 
aroused a few such honest souls as 
Luther and gave rise to the Reformation 
movement, called Protestant, because 
of their protests and objections 
to this and other evils recognized in 
Papacy. 

The crisis was reached when Julius 
I. and afterward Leo X. published indulgences 



R554 : page 5 

to those who should contribute 
money to the erection of the 
world-renowned St. Peters cathedral at 
Rome, commenced A.D., 1506. The 
collecting of these funds from the sale 
of indulgences was committed to monks 
of the "Order of St. Dominic," among 
whom was the notorious Tetzel. According 
to Luthers account they sold 
indulgences in the streets, market-places 
and taverns, teaching that every 
contributor, if he paid on his own account, 
opened to himself the gates of 
heaven, and, if on account of the dead, 
he instantly liberated a soul from 
purgatory. 

Tetzel traveled in state from town 
to town, bearing the official document 
or "bill" of Leo X. on a velvet cushion 
proclaiming to the credulous multitudes: 
"Indulgences are the most precious and 
sublime of Gods gifts; this red cross 
has as much efficacy as the cross of 
Jesus Christ. Draw near and I will 
give you letters duly sealed, by which 
even the sins you shall hereafter desire 
to commit, shall be all forgiven you. 
There is no sin so great that indulgence 
cannot remit. Pay, only pay largely, 
and you shall be forgiven. But more 
than all this, indulgences save not the 
living alone, they also save the dead. 
Ye priests, ye nobles, ye tradesmen, 
ye wives, ye maidens, ye young men, 
hearken to your departed parents and 
friends who call to you from the bottomless 
abyss:-We are enduring horrible 
torment; a small alms would deliver 
us, you can give it, will you not? 
The moment the money clinks in the 
bottom of the chest, the soul escapes 
from purgatory and flies to heaven. 
With ten groshen you can deliver your 
father from purgatory. Our Lord God 



no longer deals with us as God-he has 
given all power to the pope."* 

The following is the form of the indulgences, 
the blanks being filled to 
suit circumstances:- 

"Our Lord Jesus Christ have mercy 
on thee;... and absolve thee by the 
merits of his most holy sufferings. I, 
in virtue of the Apostolic power committed 
to me, absolve thee from all 
...excesses, sins and crimes, that 
thou mayest have committed, however 
great and enormous they may be, and 
of whatever kind.... I remit 
the pains thou wouldst have had to 
endure in purgatory. ...I restore 
thee to the innocence and purity 
of thy baptism, so that at the moment 
of death, the gates of the place of torment 
shall be shut against thee, and the 
gates of Paradise open to thee. And 
if thou shouldst live long, this grace 
[favor-indulgence] continue th unchangeable 
till the time of thy end. In 
the name of the Father and of the Son 
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. The 
brother John Tetzel, commissary, hath 
signed this with his own hand." 

A scale of prices was so fixed as to 
draw heavily from the rich and yet not 
overlook and miss the pennies of the 
poorer. For instance, the royal crime 
against the laws of the Church, of marriage 
with a first cousin cost $5,000, 
while the terrible sin of wife-murder or 
parricide cost only $20. 

The advantage of Papacy in the promulgation 
of the doctrine of eternal and 
purgatorial torture is here manifest, and 
truly they left no power of eloquence 
unused to prove those awful doctrines, 
one of which-the worst-Protestantism 
has resolutely held on to, and as a sweet 
morsel refuses to give it up, though 
found contrary to Gods character and 
Word. 



No wonder that such deep depravity 
brought its own overthrow, so that even 
the church of Rome subsequently found 
it necessary to condemn it at the council 
of Trent. But even yet the same principle 
is in force, though more carefully 
guarded. 

When Protestantism first stepped out 
it was upon the platform of "Justification 
by faith," and not by money, prayers 
or works. However, as we have seen 
heretofore, the lines of protest are gradually 
disappearing, and in many ways 
many of the sects are closely approaching 
a likeness of their mother. Even in 
this matter of "Indulgences" we find the 
spirit of the mother in the daughters. 
Not that they go to the same extent of 
depravity in the matter: that would be 
impossible, for the Father of lies is too 
crafty to attempt to deceive men in so 
open a manner in this enlightened nineteenth 
century, but it is, nevertheless, a 
fact that indulgences are sold for money 
in Protestant churches in very many 
localities. 

It is so changed now, that a membership 
in the so-called churches is reckoned 
a passport to heaven. And memberships 
may readily be gained by those 
who are far from being saints, if they bring 
influence and money into the church. 
And even though they be known to be 
guilty of crimes against their church 
creeds, or worse, against the laws of 
God and men; if they have money 
which can be drawn from to build or 
furnish a little "St. Peters," or to clear 
a church already built, of debt, they are 
unrebuked and continued in membership 
with all its implied rights of 
heavenly rest and happiness at the end. 

As the unblushing indulgences of Papacy 
aroused the indignation of unfettered 
minds three centuries ago, so this 
modern phase of indulgence is arousing 



the contempt of the saints and of the 
outside world. But here, as there, good 
is resulting, for men are coming to see 
that while a membership of the true 
church, "whose names are written in 
heaven," is a sure guarantee of eternal 
life, etc., membership in earthly institutions, 
called churches, is a totally different 
matter. 



^Words of Tetzel-by H. Guinness. 



R554 : page 5 

OUR LORDS PRESENCE. 

The question is coming up again, "Is 
he present?" 

Some are asking the question, while 
others are asserting that he is not present, 
that those who are teaching the 
presence of the Son of man are drawing 
largely upon their imagination; that 
there is no good ground for believing 
that Christ is now actually upon the 
scene of action among men. 

Prejudice is very strong, begotten of 
early teaching and strengthened with 
years of training; so we may not expect 
to apprehend the truth all at once, nor 
expect our friends will do so. To expect 
it would be to expect something 
different from the general experience of 

R554 : page 6 

mankind. So we must be patient and 
wait for the seed to grow and bear 
fruit. 

Then, as to whether he is or is not 
present, let us ask first, Is it time to expect 
him? That is, is the time for his 



second advent, toward which the prophecies 
point, fulfilled? Is it generally 
supposed by those who study Gods 
word closely and carefully, and have 
His spirit, (others could not understand,) 
that the time has arrived when he should 
be expected? Has there not been special 
inquiry and expectation regarding 
his second coming, similar to that which 
existed at his first coming? Has not 
the time toward which the prophecies 
were supposed to point arrived and 
passed? 

We think that not a few who would 
not like to follow out such an admission 
to its conclusion, would yet feel constrained 
to answer the above questions 
in the affirmative. (See "Times and 
Seasons," "The Jubilee Cycles and the 
Two Dispensations," in Day Dawn, [out 
of print]; also, "How will Christ Come?" 
in "Food for Thinking Christians"; 
and the forth-coming "Millennial Day 
Dawn.") 

For those who have read or shall 
read the articles referred to, and who 
yet are troubled with the words of the 
angel as recorded in "Acts 1:1 1\ we 
subjoin a few thoughts. 

When we say that Jesus presence is 
a spiritual and personal presence, though 
invisible, we are asked if he was not a 
spiritual being at the time when the 
men of Galilee stood "gazing up into 
heaven?" And we answer, yes; but it 
was not his spiritual nature which they 
saw, and whatever it was, whether the 
very same body that was nailed to the 
cross, or another that resembled it, 
though the former is probable, it was 
brought into service at this time simply 
to convey to their minds the evidence 
that he was alive and had power over 
death, having risen from the dead. That 
this was the case, and that they did not 
see his spiritual being, is evident from 



what Jesus said to the disciples fLuke 24:39"), 

"A spirit hath not flesh and 

bones as ye see me have; so it was the 

flesh and bones which they saw, and we 

think this is indisputable evidence that, 

as a spiritual being only, he would be 

invisible to natural eyes, and this is 

farther verified by the fact that he WAS 

invisible most of the time during his 

forty days stay upon earth after his 

resurrection. Why not doubt his presence 

then simply because he was 

invisible? 

Several times during that stay he became 
suddenly visible and again invisible 
in their presence. His object, then, 
in giving us evidence that he had risen 
from the dead, was at that time fully accomplished 
and is now no longer needed. 

We see that his occasional visible 
manifestations during his forty days stay 
were exceptions, and that as a rule he 
was invisible. There was a declaration 
that he would "so come in like manner" 
as they had seen him go, but there is no 
statement that he would be seen again 
in like manner, as in those exceptional 
cases. But, says one, If he come in like 
manner, why can he not be seen in like 
manner? Let us illustrate. Suppose 
your friend leaves his home at noon, 
riding in a carriage; he says I will return 
in like manner as you see me go. 
He returns in the early morning before 
it is light, and you are asleep, Has that 
any connection whatever with his manner 
of return? Certainly not; neither is 
it necessarily implied in this passage 
that he would be seen again in like 
manner. 

But what have we? We have the 
express declaration of Christ himself 
that "If any man shall say to you, Lo, 
here is Christ, or there; believe it not." 
Why? Because false Christs and false 
prophets will arise, and they will be 



visible and will deceive many. If he 
were to appear to the natural eye, surely 

R555 : page 6 

there would be no harm in believing it, 
and instead of warning us to not believe 
it, we should expect to be exhorted to 
believe it, and to give good heed to 
those who should announce, Lo, here is 
Christ. 

But his answer was in harmony with 
the question fverse v 3), "What shall be 
the SIGN of thy coming?" (parousia, 
presence. See E.D. and R.V. margin; 
also Rotherhams translation, which 
reads, "And what the sign of thine 
arrival and conclusion of the age.") 
What sign would be needed of Christs 
presence if he were visible? Surely the 
natural man could ask for no better 
evidence of his presence than to look 
upon him, but the child of God at this 
hour requires, and is furnished with 
better evidence than that, for modern 
science and invention can deceive our 
eyes, but the sign of his presence is 
such that Gods children can rest with unshaken 
faith in it, and the enemy cannot 
wipe it out. After narrating the course 
of events which were to precede his 
coming, he says: "Wherefore, if they 
shall say unto you, behold, he is in the 
desert; go not forth; behold, he is in the 
secret chamber (materialized), believe it 
not." After narrating events still farther, 
up to the time of his presence, he 
says C30th verse"), "And then shall appear 
(the glorified human body of the crucified 
Redeemer? No) the SIGN of the 
Son of man in heaven." Ah! then only 
those who can understand the SIGN 
would know of his presence; for it is 
not a sign that he is soon to come, but a 
sign of his PRESENCE. 

But, says one, it says, "Then shall all 



the tribes of the earth mourn, and they 
shall see the Son of man coming in the 
clouds of heaven." But it is not at the 
same time, nor it is the word idou, as in 
"Luke 17:23\ The root word is horao; 
to discern, i.e., they come to apprehend, 
to recognize the fact that he is indeed 
present; in no other way do we see how 
it can be made to harmonize with the 
preceding statements. 

Now, let us read: "Then shall appear 
the sign of the Son of man in heaven; 
and THEN (still farther on) shall all the 
tribes of the earth mourn, and they 
shall (finally) see (recognize) the Son 
of man coming in the clouds of heaven;" 
all of which was understood at the 
first by those who could read the sign. 

The troublous times cause them to 
mourn, and doubtless they discover that 
sin is the cause of all the trouble, and 
this would lead them to investigate, and 
thus finally they are led to desire as 
well as to recognize him. 

Now let us notice the concurrence of 
some of the events at the time of his 
presence. The good news will have 
been "preached in all the world for a 
witness, and then shall the end (of the 
age) come," (heko, be here.) Has that 
been done? If not, then the end of the 
age has not arrived, and Christ is not 
present. Let such as doubt look up 
the evidence and see if this was not 
accomplished some few years ago. 

There is an intimation given in the 
"48th verse" that an evil servant will be 
saying, "My Lord delayeth his coming." 
This would not be likely to be said 
until some one had said he had come, 
nor would it be delay until after he was 
due to come. Both of these statements 
are now being made by two parties. 
One party says he is present, another 
says he delayeth to come; and they 
who deny his presence, smite their 



fellow servants, because they declare his 
presence. 

In the v 50th verse" we are told 
that "the Lord of that servant shall 
come (heko, be here) in an hour that he 
is not aware of. In v 2 Peter 3:10" we 
read: "The day of the Lord will come 
(heko, be here) as a thief," and in v l Thess. 5:4 V 
it is said: "But ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness that that day should 
overtake you as a thief." Again in 
v 2 Peter 3:4 V we are told of a class 
who will be saying, "Where is the 
promise of his coming, (parousia, presence. 
See R.V. margin, E.D., also 
Rotherhams Translation and Youngs 
Concordance,) for since the fathers fell 
asleep, all things continue as they were 
from the beginning of the creation." 
You say Christ has come and is now 
present? Pooh! The idea! Simply 
ridiculous! Why, everything is just as 
it always has been! ! I dont see any 
difference. Dont the Bible say that he 
will come in the clouds of heaven with 
power and great glory? Yes; and dont 
it say that every eye shall see him? 
Nonsense, then, to say he has come when 
nobody has seen him! 

Thus men talk, and their aggregate 
sayings and doings are the fulfillment of 
the prophecies, and we think constitute 
the sign of the Son of man in heaven. 
(Government or rule.) 

The elements are already taking fire, 
the friction between the contending 
moral and social forces is so great. The 
morning of the day of the Lord is 
cloudy, and thick darkness vails the face 
of nature, and only those who have 
light can see, and not until high noon 
will every eye be able to see (perceive, 
understand) that he is present; and 
when "every eye" sees him every one 
will be holy, "without which no man 
shall see (horao, discern) the Lord." 



J. C. SUNDERLIN, 

Fort Edward, N.Y. 



R555 : page 6 

"FAITH COMETH BY HEARING." 

"Without faith it is impossible to please God." 
-"Heb. 11:6". 

"Faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the 
word of God."- Rom. 10:17\ 

A clearly defined understanding of 
faith will show the theory of Theologians, 
who assert that God is now trying 
to save the world, to be not only at 
variance with his word, but also totally 
opposed to his attributes-wisdom, power 
and love. All wise, his plans are arranged 
for the accomplishment of his 
purposes; all powerful, he knows no 
such feeble word as trying to save, but 
can do whatsoever he will, and his will 
is, love to mankind. "He so loved the 
world." Therefore, Jesus, his representative, 
"shall see of the travail of his 
soul and be satisfied." 

The word of God declares faith, a 
necessity to harmony with the mind of 
God; and its reasonableness will be apparent, 
when it is seen that it could not 
be other than impossible, to be at peace 
with God without it; and not only so, 
but it will then appear beautiful in its 
simplicity, as part of the grand plan of 
the ages, for the gathering together in 
one all things under Jesus. 

Faith in any creed or system of religious 
teaching, not wholly founded on 
Jesus, as the purchaser, or redeemer, and 
expression of God, is a delusion. Jesus 
is the way, the truth, and the life ("John 14:6"), 
therefore, there is no other way 
to God. "No man cometh to the 



Father, but by me"-Jesus; no other 

truth concerning him-- "He hath declared 

him;" no other through whom 

and by whom life is provided, "Neither 

is there salvation in any other-for 

there is no other name under heaven 

given among men whereby we must be 

saved." ("Acts 4:12\) "By grace (favor) 

are ye saved, through faith" in Jesus; 

-"faith toward (or in) our Lord 

Jesus Christ" fActs 20:2 1") is the unquestioning 

acceptance by belief in, and 

conformity of life to Gods plan for the 

redemption of the world, as revealed in 

Jesus. 

There is no merit in faith; it is not 
righteousness; nor does it justify us; but 
we are justified through faith, and it is 
"counted for righteousness." ("Romans 4:5\) 
It is "precious faith" to those 
who are the called according to his purpose, 
because it takes hold of and appropriates 
the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of his word to them, 
having obtained an "inheritance among 
them that are sanctified by faith that is 
in me"-Jesus. fActs 26:18\) These 
are the sons, or "children of God; and 
if children, then heirs of God, and joint 
heirs with Christ, (to the inheritance of 
a world,) if so be that we suffer with 
him, that we may be also glorified together 
f Rom. 8:17"); that we should 
be a kind of first-fruits of his creatures, 
f James 1:18"). But if the Church be a 
"first fruits," there must of necessity be 
a great ingathering after the Church- 
"the mystery of God, should be finished"; 
otherwise it is no first fruits, nor 
could it be said in any sense, "that we 
should be to the praise of his glory who 
first trusted in Christ, f Eph. 1:12"), if 
the world will not trust in him when the 
Church-"the body of Christ"-is completed. 
And not only so, but God hath 
for this very purpose "raised us up together 



and made us sit together in 
heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in 
the ages to come he might show the 
exceeding riches of his grace in his 
kindness toward us in Christ Jesus." 
fEph. 2:7\) All this comes within the 
range of "faith in Christ." To those 
who recognize this in Gods word, it 
becomes part of that faith, without the 
exercise of which, it is impossible to 
please God. 

Again, the purport of Jesus prayer 
for those who should believe and have 
faith on him in the Gospel dispensation, 
conveys the same idea: "Neither pray 
I for these (disciples) alone, but for 
them also which shall believe on me 
through their word, that they all may 
be one, as thou Father art in me, and I 
in thee, that they may be one in us; 
that [when they are made one] the world 
may believe [in the next dispensation,] 
that thou hast sent me." fJohn 17:20,21".) 
"For he hath purposed in himself 
that in the dispensation of the fulness 
of times he might gather together 
in one all things in Christ, both which 
are in heaven, and which are on earth. 
"Eph. 1:10\ 

The love of God was manifested in 
giving his Son, not to redeem a few, as 
Calvinism would have us believe, but to 
redeem a world; for he commendeth 

R556 : page 6 

his love towards us, in that, while we 

were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 

CRom. 5:8\) "He died for all." f2 Cor. 5:15\) 

He gave himself a ransom for 

all. ("1 Tim. 2:6\) "My flesh I (Jesus) 

give for the life of the world" lost in 

Adam; therefore there shall be a "resurrection 

of the just and of the unjust" 

--"the resurrection of judgment"— 

trial. 



"God so loved the world, that he 
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life." fJohn 3:16\) 
And we love him, because (we believe) 
he first loved us. fl John 4:19\) Nor 
could God recognize as children those 
who do not love him; and they cannot 
love him without faith, for it is not possible 
for a child to love a father in whose 
word he has no confidence; therefore, 
"without faith it is impossible to please 
God." Nor can any man ever come 
into harmony with the divine will without 
faith. 

Arminianism, in claiming that the 
heathen who have not heard the Gospel, 
are saved by the natural law of conscience, 
are in direct conflict with Gods 
word, which declares it "impossible." 
Will God save those who do not please 
him? By no means, and they cannot 
please him without faith. No man ever 
has, or ever can be saved, either by the 
law of nature-conscience-or by the 
written law. Paul declares he was chief 
of sinners in all good conscience, and if 
he could be the greatest of sinners in 
good conscience, how can there be hope 
for any by obedience to conscience? 

If man possessed the necessary ability 
to obey the law, and thus through the 
law become righteous, Jesus need not 
have died: "For if righteousness come 
by the law, then is Christ dead in vain, 
i.e., died to no purpose; but, instead of 
its being a means through which he 
could become righteous, it became, because 
of mans weakness and inability 
to fulfill it, a means whereby he could 
realize his helpless and hopeless 
condition in Gods sight. For what 
things soever the law saith, it saith to 
them (all the world except those in 
Christ) who are under the law, that 
every mouth may be stopped, and all 



the world may become guilty before 
God. Therefore, by the deeds of the 
law, there shall no flesh be justified in 
his sight; for by law is the knowledge 
of sin. ORom. 3:19,20\) 

It is apparent, that "all the world" 
includes not only those who have the 
written law, but also those who, not 
having the (written) law, are a law unto 
themselves:. ..their thoughts 
the meanwhile accusing or else excusing" 
them; ("Rom. 2:14,15^), thus 
making "all guilty." "There is none 
righteous, no not one." Jesus said: 
If a man loves me, he will keep my 
commandments. 

It is evident, therefore, that the billions 
of men who never heard "the 
truth" could not have faith in it, and 
could not rejoice in it, and consequently 
cannot have known God, and how could 
they love him? The carnal (depraved) 
mind is enmity against God, it is not 

R556 : page 7 

subject to the law of God, neither indeed 

can be; so then, they that are in 

the flesh (depraved) cannot please God." 

None are exempt from the condemnation 

of law. God hath concluded (shut 

up by law) them all in unbelief that he 

might have mercy on ALL. ("Rom. 11:12".) 

Not, however, by saving them in 

ignorance; provision has been made by 

Jesus ransom whereby God can be just 

and the justifier of him that believeth. 

But how can they believe on him of 

whom they have not heard? for faith 

cometh by hearing. ..the word of 

God. Because Jesus by the grace (favor) 

of God tasted death for every man CHeb. 2:9"), 

the "good tidings of great joy 

...shall be to ALL PEOPLE" 

("Luke 2:10") in order that they may 

have the requisite faith. 



Only a comparatively small portion 
of the race has heard the "tidings" in 
this life, and, if they do not hear, when 
raised from the dead, the promises of 
God never could be fulfilled, but we are 
assured he "will have all men to be 
saved (from the consequences of Adams 
sin- -death) and to come into a knowledge 
of the truth." fl Tim. 2:4\) In 
no other way can Gods word, and Gods 
dealings with mankind be reconciled. 
Think of the ignorance, of the "only 
name" in this enlightened day, as shown 
by the most recent statistics of the population 
of the globe, which we append, 
classified according to religious creeds: 

Roman Catholics 212,000,000 

Protestants 124,000,000 

Greek Church 84,000,000 

Israelites 7,000,000 

Mohammedans 200,000,000 

Brahmins 163,000,000 

Buddhists 423,000,000 

Hindoos 230,000,000 

The Protestant missionary societies 
claim that they are able to reach 100,000,000 
of this vast host of heathens, 
which would leave a balance of about 
900 millions who have never heard the 
name of Jesus. 

Think you, in view of these figures, 
that God is now saving the world by 
faith? If he be, this is a sad showing. 
Only one hundred and twenty-four 
million Protestants, of whom about 
twenty millions are said to be members 
of Protestant churches, which includes 
hypocrites and deceived persons. Truly 
the whole world is either apostate, 
Christian, Mohammedan, or heathen. 
If we accept the teaching called "orthodoxy," 
we must reject Gods character 
or word, but we are safe in concluding 
erroneous that which conflicts with 



Gods word, character, and our reason. 
In what contrast with this do we find 
the Bible doctrines, that the church is 
now being selected from among mankind, 
and, when made partakers of the 
"divine nature," shall be Gods instrumentality 
in causing "the knowledge of 
the Lord to fill the whole earth!" How 
sublime the thought- -how Godlike 
the provision for all his intelligent- 
that all may have a chance to come to 
knowledge of and harmony with Him. 
S. O. BLUNDIN. 



R556 : page 7 

ELIAS SHALL FIRST COME. 

The history of Elijah the prophet, 
called in the New Testament Elias, is 
one full of interest to us, not only because 
it is a history of a courageous and 
faithful servant of God, but because we 
believe that he was also a type, and that, 
through the medium of his life, God has 
given us illustrations of some of the deep 
things of His word. 

Before touching upon Elijah as a type 
we wish to call attention to the peculiar 
prophecy with which his name stands 
connected-the last words of the Old 
Testament: 

"Behold I will send you Elijah the 
prophet before the coming of the great 
and dreadful day of the Lord. And he 
shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the 
children, and the heart of the children 
to their fathers, lest I come and smite 
the earth with a curse." CMal. 4:5,6\) 

This was a prominent prophecy in 
the mind of the Jews, and they therefore 
expected that before Messiah should 
come, Elijah would first appear and prepare 
them. This matter was thrust at 



the early disciples who believed in Jesus, 
and truly Jesus answers gave them but 
little light on the real significance of the 
prophecy; probably because it was 
among the many things he had to tell 
them which they could not yet bear. 

Let us look at Jesus statements: 
He seems to apply this prophecy in 
some measure to John the Baptist. 

"His disciples asked him, saying, Why 
then say the Scribes that Elias [Elijah] 
must first come? And Jesus answered 
and said unto them, Elias truly SHALL 
FIRST COME and restore all things. But 
I say unto you that Elias is come already, 
and they knew him not, but have 
done unto him whatsoever they listed. 
Likewise shall also the Son of man 
suffer of them. Then the disciples understood 
that he spake unto them of 
John the Baptist." CMatt. 17:10-14\) 

But when in another place Jesus says 
of John: "IF ye will RECEIVE IT, this is 
Elias which was for to come," ("Matt. 11:14",) 
it causes us to consider: What had 
their receiving or rejecting of Johns 
work to do with the matter? Would not 
John the Baptist (great as he was) and 
his ministry of six to twelve short 
months, confined in influence to a very 
small part of little Judea, be a rather 
small fulfillment of the great work, etc., 
prophecied of Elijah? It surely would. 
Then, again, was it to be Elijah resurrected 
that the prophet meant? No; but 
we think the prophecy referred to the 
coming of another faithful reprover of 
sin, such as Elijah was in his day, one 
ready to denounce popular and respected 
sin and sinners, as Elijah did the 
priests of Baal in his day. With this 
thought, we see how John, indeed, exercised 
the same godly boldness in reproving 
sin in his day. Thus he 
rebuked the Scribes and Pharisees, 
the great religionists of his day, saying, 



"O generation of vipers, who hath warned 

you to flee from the wrath to come?" 

("Matt. 3:7\) And as part of Elijahs 

work was to point out the true and acceptable 

sacrifice of Jehovah, so it was a 

part of Johns work to point out the antitype 

of those sacrifices, saying, "Behold 

the Lamb of God which taketh 

away the sin of the world." ("John 1:29".) 

This begins to look more reasonable, 
but is it in harmony with the Scriptures? 
We answer, yes; thus it was foretold in 
the announcement of Johns birth: "He 
(John) shall go before him (Jesus) in 
the spirit and power of Elias... 
to make ready a people prepared for 
the Lord." ("Luke 1:17".) This, evidently, 
is the significance of this prophecy 
--that before the coming of the 

R557 : page 7 

great and dreadful day of the Lord 
some power or agency would be raised 
up, which would act as a bold teacher 
to arouse those in a proper condition. 

But still the question arises, Was 
Johns ministry sufficient to fulfill all 
the predictions concerning the Elias? 
Do not Jesus words: "Elias truly 
shall first come and restore all things," 
seem to indicate a greater work than 
John accomplished? What if John the 
Baptist stood for or represented a multitudinous 
Elijah, as Jesus stood for and 
represented a multitudinous Christ, of 
which he was the head and his church 
glorified the body? 

This, we believe, is the proper solution 
of the matter. We have seen heretofore 
that the Christ of power and 
glory, foretold in Scripture, is not only 
Jesus Christ, but all those, also, who being 
justified by his sacrifice have become 
joint-heirs with him, and fellow members 
of the same body, over which Jesus 



is the head, God blessed forever. fEph. 1:22"; 
"Rom. 9:5".) So it does not surprise 
us that as John, in the bold and 
noble spirit of Elijah, introduced and 
made ready the way of Jesus at the 
first advent, so a greater than John-a 
company whom he represented-in the 
same bold Elijah spirit, will prepare the 
way for the reception of the glorious 
and complete Christ. 

Then, the Elias (John) and the Christ 
(Jesus) failed of a full accomplishment 
of the restoring and reigning foretold 
of the Elias and the Christ; but the 
Elias and the Christ complete shall fulfill 
all the prophetic predictions. 

To be brief, we understand that Elijah 
and John represented the true and 
faithful witnesses of this Gospel age, 
whose testimony and labors, under the 
blessing of God, shall prepare the way 
for the reign of the glorified church and 
its glorious head, by making ready a 
people prepared (the "little flock") for 
the Lord. (See "Luke 1:17".) As John, 
in the spirit of Elias, in the end of the 
Jewish age called attention to Jesus, and 
thus prepared those who heard to receive 
Jesus and be exalted at Pentecost 
to the higher spiritual plane, so here, 
the Elijah class will in the end of this 
age call attention to the present Christ, 
that those prepared of the Lord to be 
exalted to glory may be made ready. 

But if we look backward and compare 
the life of Elijah with the history 
of the true church of overcomers, we 
shall see such a marvelous coincidence 
as will convince us of the correctness of 
our supposition that he was the type, 
and the church the real Elijah. That 
the comparison may be the more readily 
made, we place some of the leading 
points of similarity in the history of 
Elijah and the church in parallel 
columns. 



ELIJAH. 

I. 

Elijah persecuted for 
righteousness sake. 

II. 

His principal persecutor 
was Jezebel, the 
wicked Queen of Israel, 
who is mentioned by 
name as the type of the 
enemy of the saints. 
CRev. 2:20\) 

III. 

Jezebels persecuting 
power was exercised 
through her husband, 
Ahab, the king. 

IV. 

Elijah fled from Jezebel 
and Ahab, into the 
wilderness, to a place 
prepared of God, where 
he was nourished. Fed 
by the ravens and by 
the widow. (See 
"1 Kings 17:5,9\) 

V. 

Elijah was "three 
years and six months" 
in the wilderness, and 
during that time there 
was no rain, and a great 
famine was in the land. 
C James 5:17"; "1 Kings 17:7" 
and "18:2".) 

VI. 

When Elijah returned 
from the wilderness, 
the errors of Jezebels 



priests were manifested 

and the true God honored, 

followed by copious 

rains. 

CI Kings 18:41-45\) 

VII. 

The king and the 
people at first rejoice 
and Elijah and his God 
are honored, but the 
spirit of Jezebel is unchanged 
and she still 
sought Elijahs life, and 
he was again compelled 
to flee to the wilderness, 
fl Kings 1 8:40,45 ,46 v ; 
v 19:l-4\) 

VIII. 

Elijahs career ended 
by his being taken from 
the earth. 

THE CHURCH. 

I. 

The Saints suffer for 
the truth. 

II. 

Their principal persecutor 
was the apostate 
Church of Rome, which 
claims to be a "queen" 
and ruler over spiritual 
Israel. CRev. 18:7\) 

III. 

Papacys persecuting 
power was the Roman 
Empire, to which she 
was married. 

IV. 

The true Church fled 



into the symbolic wilderness 
--or condition of 
isolation-to her place, 
prepared of God, where 
she was miraculously 
sustained. "The earth 
helped the woman." 
(See^Rev. 12:6,16\) 

V. 

The church was three 
and a half symbolic 
years (a day for a year 
-1260 literal years) in 
the wilderness condition, 
during which there 
was a spiritual famine 
because of the lack of 
truth-the living water. 
(Comp/Rev. 12:6V 11:3 V ; 
v Amos8:ir.) 

VI. 

At the end of the 
1260 years the power of 
the truth and its witnesses 
was manifested 
(1798 A.D.), and since 
then the truth has flowed 
out and is deluging the 
world at the rate of 
millions of Bibles every 
year. 

VII. 

The teachings of the 
Bible have brought such 
blessings that the empires 
of earth recognize 
the Lords hand, yet 
they have almost gone 
back to the principles 
of Papacy (Jezebel), 
with so-called "Protestant" 
sects, and the saints 
are again compelled to 



flee for the preservation 
of their spiritual life, 
and are again in the 
wilderness condition. 

VIII. 

The saints will be 
changed from earthly to 
heavenly beings. 

These are striking coincidences, and 
we believe are not accidental, but with 
Jesus, we believe that to those who could 
"receive" Johns testimony, he to such 
filled the office or work of Elias, which 
the church more fully accomplishes. 

The expression, "turn the hearts of 
the fathers to the children, and the heart 
of the children to their fathers," is a 
peculiar one, and the sense of the 
Hebrew is even less clear; but we have 
it repeated by the angel as recorded by 
"Luke 1:16", in a manner which makes it 
plain-- "to turn the hearts of fathers to 
children, and the disobedient to the 
wisdom of the righteous." In a word, 
to restore harmony between Israel and 
"the fathers," (the patriarchs, etc.) and, 
in the fuller sense, the world whom 
Israel typified or represented, shall come 
into a condition of harmony and peace 
with God, similar to that of the "fathers." 

When in the foregoing prophecy it is 
said: "He shall turn the hearts... 
lest I come and smite the earth with a 
curse," fMal. 4:5, 6\) it apparently 
teaches that the mission of Elijah would 
be successful-that he would turn the 
hearts. But looking at the ministry of 
John the Baptist, and also at the 
ministry of the church, we find that 
neither SUCCEEDED in turning any considerable 
proportion of men to the Lord. 
This seeming discrepancy causes us 
to look again at the word of the Prophet, 
and looking more closely, we find that 



it is a CONDITIONAL statement. If Elias 
succeeds, the earth will not be smitten 
with a curse, but if he succeeds not, 
the curse will come. 

This harmonizes exactly. If John 
had been heeded in the Jewish church 
and had succeeded in turning that institution 
to the Lord, so that they had 
recognized the present Saviour, then 
that Jewish church would have received 
Him and He would have exalted it; 
but, on the contrary, they (as a church) 
rejected the teaching of Elias, rejected 
the greater one whom he announced, 
and, as a consequence, they as a people 
received THE CURSE mentioned by the 
prophet. Their polity was overturned 
in utter destruction. Now let us look 
at the larger fulfillment. Representatives 
of the Elijah class-the saints- 
have rebuked sin and censured sinners, 
and professing Scribes and Pharisees, 
and sought to turn the people, and 
finally announced the presence of 
Christ; but now as then, there are few 
turned so that they recognize the presence 
which they had expected so differently. 
And here, as in the Jewish prototype, 
the rejection of the Elijah message 
brings the curse mentioned by the 
prophet- the overthrow both of the 
church (nominal) and also of the civil 
powers to which she is wedded. This 
curse or wrath of the "Day of the Lord" 
has already been shown as commencing 
A.D., 1878, lasting 37 years, to 1914, 
A.D.-as the curse upon the nominal 
Jewish church was of 37 years duration, 
from A.D. 33, where Jesus gave them 
up and left their house desolate, till the 
utter destruction of their city and nation, 
A.D. 70. 

However, the work of Elias-the 
church glorified-will be successful. 
"He shall restore all things"; hence, 
while the curse comes and overturns 



much, it shall not be "utterly" cursed 
and forever destroyed, because the 
exalted Elijah-Christ- shall put down 
all opposition and then restore and 
bless. 

The two characters, Elijah and John, 
are both needed to fully illustrate the 
closing work of the saints. The circumstances 
of the close of Johns career, 
combined with those of Elijahs, seem to 
fill out the picture completely. According 
to Johns experience, we should expect 
that as his reproval of Herod for 
having an unlawful wife fLuke 3:19"), 
led to his imprisonment, so here, the 
reproval of the church and world for 
their unlawful union, provokes the displeasure 
of both and leads to the ostracizing 
(beheading) of the faithful 
reprovers. 

Then, too, John died, but Elijah was 
taken to heaven, and thus they two represent 
the last class of the saints. The 
moment of the death of the flesh, will be 
the moment of translation to the new 
nature. 

ELIJAHS SUCCESSOR-ELISHA. 

Before translating Elijah, the Lord 
arranged that he should prepare and 
instruct his successor, and sent him to 
Elisha as such, fl Kings 19: 16"). So, 
if we have found Elijah to represent the 
overcomers, the "Bride" or "Body" of 
Christ, we might reasonably infer that 
Elisha is the representative of those 
who shall succeed the overcomers, as 
the Lords mouth-piece on earth; hence 
our interest in his career. 

From the time of his call to be the 
successor, Elisha followed Elijah. The 
latter expected to be translated, and the 
former did not, but knew that Elijah was 
to be. On the route, Elijah went to 
various villages apparently expecting to 



be taken at each, and seemingly an effort 
was made to test the interest of 
Elisha by inviting him to tarry behind; 

R558 : page 8 

but he evidently represents a persevering 
and faithful company, for he would 
not be discouraged nor leave Elijah. 

There are some things which seem to 
indicate that these various stopping-places 
to which they went, but at none 
of which the desired translation occurred, 
represented or foreshadowed 
various points in the time-proofs where, 
with the then imperfect views of the 
plan, order, etc., it was thought the 
translation of the saints might be due. 
As these various stoppings were, doubtless, 
a test of the faith of Elijah and 
Elisha, so, doubtless, these time-points 
have served to test, and separate, and 
leave behind, all not properly belonging 
to the Elijah and Elisha classes. 

The translation took place when all 
those stopping-places were in the past, 
and at no definite or fixed point. "It 
came to pass, as they still WENT ON 
and talked, that, behold, there appeared 
a chariot of fire and horses of fire, and 
parted them both asunder: and Elijah 
went up by a whirlwind into heaven." 
f2 Kings 2: 1 T). So, also, it is now: 
all those time-points are in the past; 
none of them were times of translation, 
and we are going on without any definite 
points of expectancy, and the two 
classes are now communing together of 
the work, and now it is that we believe 
the change is taking place; that is, 
some are from time to time being 
"caught up"-"changed" from human 
to spiritual beings- with the Lord; as 
men dying, like John, as new creatures, 
translated the same instant to the 
heavenly or spiritual condition. fPsa. 82:6/T; 



v Rev. 14:13^). 

We have heretofore shown the Scriptural 
teaching that the overcomers, or 
Elijah class, will be a "little flock," and 
that there is also developed another 
class-"a great company"-and this 
last seems to be represented in part by 
Elisha. While Elijah remained, Elisha 
was merely a disciple and not a teacher, 
but in view of his work, as Elijahs successor, 
a double portion of Elijahs 
spirit-energy, force, power to teach, 
etc. "-was to be upon him, upon certain 
conditions, viz.: "If thou shalt see 
me taken from thee, it shall be so unto 
thee; but, if not, it shall not be so." 
f2 Kings 2:10\) And we are informed 
that, to see this, will be a "hard thing." 
The significance which we attach to 
this is, that it will be a very difficult 
matter, even for those expecting the 
event, to see [recognize] the change of 
the Elijah class. Since "ye (the saints, 
the Elijah class), shall all die LIKE men," 
it will be only by close affiliation and 
an opening of the eyes of the understanding, 
and the exercise of implicit 
faith in the promises, that these will be 
able to know of the glorious, spiritual 
rapture which occurs in the instant of 
death. In view of this fact, how transparently 
pure and faithful must be the 
life of each member of that Elijah class. 
Absolute perfection need not be expected 
while we have this treasure in 
imperfect earthen vessels, but perfection 
of purpose, aim and effort, should be 
manifest to those about us, that when 
we are taken they may know it. "He 
that hath this hope in him purifieth 
himself even as he is pure." 
01John3:3\) 

Only such as do recognize the change 
of the Elijah class, can fill the teaching 
position. The "sons of the prophets" 
(theologians) will disbelieve; but upon 



this class who shall see, a double portion 
of the Elijah spirit comes. No 
wonder if this class becomes awake to 
the grandeur and importance of their 
work, when they realize the establishment 
of the kingdom-the glorifying of 
the Elijah class. And this is shown in 
type. Elisha received the double portion 
of Elijahs spirit, and if he be, as 
we judge, a type of the second company, 
its career will be a grand and 
glorious one. 

Filled with the Spirit while mourning 
his loss, he returned, smiting the waters 
with Elijahs mantle in the name of "the 
Lord God of Elijah, so that even the 
sons of the prophets [nominal teachers] 
recognized his power, saying: "The 
spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha" 
--yet they believed not that Elijah was 
taken; thus illustrating how the world 
(including the nominal church) will be 
as ignorant of the glorification of the 
true church, the body, as it was of the 
glorification of our head at the commencement 
of this age. 

Thus far we have been merely fitting 
the testimony of Gods word with the 
records of the lives of these men; and 
the harmony is so great as to forbid 
our regarding them as anything less 
than designed types. But, should we 
look into the future and attempt to read 
the progress of the Elisha class, from 
his acts we would be upon less firm 
ground; hence, we merely suggest that 
possibly Elishas healing of the waters 
with salt in a new cruise cast into the 
spring, may mean that the channel 
(river) of truth will be cleansed and 
purified at its very fountain by new 
dispensational truth being cast into it, 
by the Elisha class. Q2 Kings 2:19-21\) 
The increase of the widows pot of oil 
until every available vessel was filled 
by which her sons were saved from 



bondage ("chap. 4:1-T), may represent 
the increase of the spirit so that every 
ready and emptied vessel shall be 
filled-the pouring out of the spirit 
upon all flesh. ("Joel 2:28\) The 
healing of the mess of pottage for the 
sons of the prophets, so that they ate 
of it unpoisoned, may represent a healing 
of the food of theologians and the 
putting of an antidote into their poisonous 
mess. ("2 Kings 4:38-41\) The increase 
of food for the people (" verses 42-44") 
may represent a feast of truth 
for the people. The healing of Naamans 
leprosy may represent the healing 
and restitution from the blight of sin of 
which leprosy is a symbol. To be 
made clean, will require not ordinary 
washing, but a seven-fold or perfect 
washing in the God-appointed place, 
and will require faith, as also saith the 
Scriptures. 

If our application be correct, we 
should understand the Elisha class to 
belong to the spiritually begotten family 
and not to the human, hence at their 
death the change from human to spiritual 
conditions would also take place. 
There seems to be an intimation of this 
in the record of Elishas death. ("2 Kings 2:12"; 
"13:14".) Of him the same 
words were uttered which he had used 
concerning Elijahs taking, viz.: "O, my 
father, my father, the chariot of Israel 
and the horsemen thereof." 

In view of the statement: -"No man 
hath ascended up to heaven, but he that 
came down from heaven, even the Son 
of man" ("John 3:13"), some have wondered 
in what sense Elijah "went up 
into heaven." In reply, we suggest 
that the atmosphere, the air, is sometimes 
called heaven: thus the expression 
-"fowls of the heavens." Into 
the air heavens Elijah certainly went: 
where, we are not told, and it would be 



useless to surmise-of his death we are 
not told; indeed, since we see him to 
be a type of the changed saints, it would 
have spoiled that type had his return to 
earth or his death, been recorded; 
and yet we are sure that "death passed 
upon all men," and hence had dominion 
over him, and he could not have been 
free entirely from its grasp anywhere, 
until Jesus had given the ransom price. 

Moreover, we may know that Elijah 
did not go to the heaven promised the 
saints, because not being begotten of the 
Spirit-not being a new creature-he 
was still a human being. [Jesus was 
the first begotten to the spiritual-new 
nature and the Leader and FORE-RUNNER 
of all who enter the heavenly or spiritual 
condition.] And as a human being, 
we cannot but suppose that Elijah 
would have been as uncomfortable out 
of, or away from this or some world, as a 
fish would be out of its element. 

And in harmony with this reasoning, 
from known Scriptural teaching, is the 
above statement: "No man hath ascended 
up to heaven but he that came 
down from heaven." In harmony with 
this thought also, are those other Scriptures: 
"No man hath seen God at any 
time," and "Whom no man hath seen 
nor can see." fl Tim. 6:16\) Only 
those who, during this Gospel age, 
change their nature from human to 
spiritual, shall see him as he is, because 
they shall be like him who is the express 
image of the Fathers person. 
Men can only see God as manifested 
through his works and revelation. 

R558 : page 8 

MOSES AND ELIAS. 

The transfiguration of Jesus in the 
presence of three of his disciples is a 



point of interest to many, not because 
they see its lesson and significance, but 
because they do not see them. We read 
that there "appeared" to the disciples, 
Moses and Elias talking with Jesus. 
("Matt. 17:1-9".) Jesus was transfigured 
[changed in appearance] --his face did 
shine as the sun and his raiment was 
white as the light. A bright cloud 
overshadowed and surrounded them, 
and a voice out of the cloud said: "This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased; hear ye him." "And when 
the disciples heard it they fell on their 
faces and were sore afraid. And Jesus 
came and touched them and said, 
Arise, be not afraid. And when they 
had lifted up their eyes they saw no 
man, save Jesus only." 

We might wonder and speculate about 
how Moses and Elijah came to be on 
that mountain, how the disciples, who 
never saw either of them, could know 
them, etc., etc., but all such speculation 
is set at rest by Jesus telling the disciples 
that they had seen a vision. "As 
they came down from the mountain, 
Jesus charged them, saying: "Tell the 
vision to no man, until the Son of man 
be risen again from the dead." ("Matt. 17:9".) 
To the disciples the vision 
seemed a reality, just as to John at 

R559 : page 8 

Patmos, the various visions recorded in 
Revelation were clear and distinct, but 
Jesus certainly knew all about it, and 
we will rest on his testimony that it was 
a vision. 

To think otherwise would involve the 
contradiction of sundry plain Bible 
statements; for instance, Jesus was not 
yet crucified, hence had not risen from 
the dead, and we know that he is the 
"first-born from the dead." But if 



Moses had been resurrected, then Jesus 
was not the first. The case of Lazarus 
and others brought back to a measure 
of life, we have heretofore shown is not 
called resurrection, because they were 
not entirely delivered from the power of 
death-but died again. 

But let us see, if we can, what lesson 
was taught or what important truth was 
illustrated by this transfiguration scene 
or vision. Doubtless in that way we 
shall see a reason for the presenting of 
Moses and Elijah in the vision. 

Peter, who was one of those present 
on the occasion, mentions it in his letter 
long afterward. He says: "We have 
not followed cunningly devised fables, 
when we made known unto you the 
power and coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, but were eye-witnesses of his 
MAJESTY. For he received from God 
the Father honor and glory, when there 
came such a voice to him from the excellent 
glory: "This is my beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased." And this 
voice we heard, when we were with him 
in the holy mount." f2 Pet. 1:16-18".) 

We understand Peter to tell us then, 
that the transfiguration vision was an 
illustration or presentation in vision of 
the "majesty" and "power" of his 
(parousia) presence, [here translated 
coming]. It is, then, to be understood 
as representing the establishment of The 
Kingdom at Jesus second presence. 
Therefore, from our standpoint, it is an 
illustration of the present time, in which 
Jesus is present and the kingdom being 
established. Moses, we have seen, represents 
the human element of the kingdom: 
("Moses, verily, was faithful in 
all his house as a servant." v Heb. 3:5\) 
while Elijah, as we have just been seeing, 
has stood for, or represented the 
entire Gospel Church-the spiritual- - 
the house of sons. Elsewhere we have 



seen that there will be these two classes 
in the kingdom-an earthly and a 
heavenly- -over all which and the 
orderer of both phases, will be Jesus; 
and this fits perfectly with the vision- 
Moses and Elias, with Jesus in the 
midst, transfigured and shining. 

So now, in his presence, we not only 
see the evidences of the spiritual kingdom 
in the harvesting and sifting of the 
wheat, but also preparation being made 
for the establishment of the earthly or 
perfect human phase of the kingdom. 
This is no cunningly devised fable, and 
was not only shown to Peter and others 
in vision, but "we have also a more 
sure word of prophecy," which bears 
the same testimony, "whereunto ye do 
well that ye take heed, as unto a light 
that shineth in a dark place." 
02 Pet. 1:19\) 



page 8 

THE Post-office authorities now refuse 
all papers not properly addressed. This 
will account for some not getting their 
papers recently. When the name of 
your village or town is different from 
the name of the post-office be sure to 
send the latter. Write addresses very 
plainly and thereby save our time and 
your annoyance. 



SEND the names of any to whom you 
think sample copies of the TOWER 
would be a blessing; or we will send 
you samples for your neighbors-Free. 
Do not part with your own papers, you 
will need them for reference. 



THE MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN is enlarging 
entirely beyond our first expectations. 
It is not yet ready. We will 
give ample notice in these columns, 
when it is. 


