WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., LJ. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God. Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind ; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
■United States, $1 00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ............... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Stratbfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watoh-tower tree upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers • Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
"SALVATION” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The midwinter Testimony Period is called ‘’Salvation” and occupies the entire month of February. Thus the testimony for Jehovah’s name and his means of salvation, The Theocracy, will continue despite the season of the year. All Theocratic publishers will offer to the public first a combination of the book Salvation and the booklet Government and Peace, on a contribution of 25c. As m the daily march around Jericho, portable phonographs will not be left in idleness, but will be used from house to house to run the latest recording announcing the book Salvation. The Informant will offer you-.more detailed information concerning the Period. At this notice you will prepare to do your part during this Testimony, reporting at the end of the month’s campaign how effective your intensive activities have been.
MEMORIAL
Saturday, March 23, after six p.m., is the date for 1940 for the yearly feast in celebration of Jehovah’s name and to the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, Chnst Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each company, therefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 23, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. If there is no
competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately preceding the partaking of the emblems, that short article appearing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled before partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. Jesus and his apostles used real red wine tn symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
YEARBOOK FOR 1940
The 1940 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses presents a comprehensive report of the past year’s world-wide activities of these publishers of Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ. You will marvel at the most interesting and most successful service year yet, even with opposition increasing, nations being swallowed up by dictators, and wartime restrictions being generally applied, curtailing (Continued on page 15)
ffieVWCHTOVVER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	January 1, 1940	No. 1
REJOICE IN HIS SALVATION
"My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation."—Ps. 13:5.
JEHOVAH is the Almighty, the Rock, the Eternal King, the Fortress, the Deliverer, the power of salvation. His salvation is for the righteous, that is to say, for those who believe on him and who joyfully obey God’s commandments. The end of the willful transgressor is destruction. “But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord; he is their strength in the time of trouble.” (Ps. 37:39) The man who looks to another source for salvation is a fool and by his action declares there is no Almighty God Jehovah. “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.”—Ps. 14:1.
2 These are days of peril, when the wicked one is endeavoring to destroy all men and that wicked one, acting through his earthly agents, is seeking specifically to destroy those who have devoted themselves to Jehovah. The ever-increasing woes upon the peoples of earth cause many to desire to find a way of escape. There is but one means of escape from disaster, and that is the way which Jehovah God has provided for those who love him and who prove that love by gladly serving him. During the past year the people of God have been beset on every side by enemies. Being warned by the Lord that much opposition would be shown to those engaged in his service, and much persecution upon such faithful ones by the enemy, the faithful have been greatly comforted by the text for the year 1939: “They shall not prevail against thee.” As we enter upon another year our confidence is wholly in Jehovah, and, in view of the perils that threaten, the text for the ensuing year, and to which attention of those who love righteousness is directed, is this, to wit: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”
’ Being positively informed that this and other scriptures recorded long ago were written for the learning, aid, comfort and hope of the faithful on earth just preceding the final destruction of Satan’s organization (Rom. 15: 4), it will be well to give consideration to the year text and to the context, that we may have comfort and hope. Undoubtedly Psalm 13 is a prophecy recorded for the aid and comfort of God’s people at the present time, and which prophecy is now being fulfilled upon the people of earth who
are wholly devoted to Jehovah and to his King. It is a song composed and sung by David, the “man after [God’s] own heart”, and who was a type of the Greater David, Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God. The Psalm therefore applies to the “feet of him” (Isa. 52:7), because such are a part of The Christ. The Psalm appears to apply to the actual experiences through which David the king was required to pass. It was not written by the shepherd lad, but by the mature man who had been cruelly persecuted by the opponent whom David mentions as “mine enemy”. It must have been written after David had killed Goliath and after King Saul had been stirred to malice by reason of the praise which the women had bestowed upon David in preference to Saul, and after Jonathan had become the real friend and lover of David. It was after that time that 'Saul becomes David’s enemy continually’. (1 Sam. 18:29) Saul spoke of David as “mine enemy”. (1 Sam. 19:17) David’s companions and associates referred to Saul as “thine enemy”. (1 Sam. 24:4; 2 Sam. 4:8) Jonathan declared that David’s enemy would be cut off; which was also a prophecy. (1 Sam. 20:15) Note that verse 4 of Psalm 13 refers to “mine enemy” and “those that trouble me”, and which must have reference to those who connived with and supported Saul in his persecution of David, such as Doeg, the Edomite, Saul’s chief herdsman.—1 Sam. 19:19; also 21: 7; 22: 6-10.
The persecution which Saul heaped upon David put David in a position where he appeared to have been forsaken by Jehovah, as his words indicate. (Ps. 13:1) Such experiences filled David’s heart with sorrow, and David realized that he was in great danger. That persecution of David was done in a malicious endeavor to cut David off from the kingdom. That also was prophetic. Similar persecution began against Christ Jesus, the Greater David, immediately following his anointing. Like persecution has been heaped upon God’s anointed people especially since A.D. 1922. Saul was the one to whom David refers as “my strong enemy”. (2 Sam. 22:1-8; Ps. 18:17) Those prophetic pictures made long ago are being fulfilled in this day, and Psalm 18:17
3
4
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
specifically refers to the deliverance of the antitypical David class from the antitypical Saul class, “my strong enemy.” God’s anointed people now appreciate the danger in which they are placed, and by faith they adopt and utter the words that David uttered, to wit: “He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me; for they were too strong for me.” (Ps. 18:17) “They prevented me [from service to Jehovah] in the day of my calamity; but the Lord was my stay. He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me, because he delighted in me.” (Ps. 18:18,19) These consoling words are now a means of strength which God administers to his faithful people on the earth.
6	It may be well to call attention here to the other “enemies” of David during his reign, because these were also typical. The rebellion of Absalom caused David to flee from Jerusalem. Again, there was that prototype of the traitor Judas Iscariot, whose name was Ahithophel the Gilonite, who for some time acted as David’s counselor or confidential adviser, and who became unfaithful, turned traitor, and joined in a conspiracy against the king. (2 Sam. la: 12) Concerning that traitor counselor David wrote: “Wickedness is in the midst thereof; deceit and guile depart not from her streets. For it was not an enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne it; neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself from him. But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance. We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company.” “He hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him; he hath broken his covenant. The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart; his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.” (Ps. 55:11-14, 20, 21) Such is a description of those who enter into a confidential position with the Lord’s people and then betray them to the enemy.
6	Psalm 109 likewise applies to such. Manifestly the Lord caused these things to be recorded as a warning to the feet members of Christ and to notify them that they would be assaulted in like manner by the enemy in the last days of their earthly journey.
FULFILLMENT
7	Jehovah caused prophecy to be written and recorded by holy men of old, which prophecy must have fulfillment in God’s due time. The fulfillment and revelation thereof to man is for the good of “the man of God”, that he may be thoroughly equipped for the difficulties he must meet. (2 Tim. 3: 16,17; 2 Pet. 1: 21; Rom. 15:4) When God brings to pass upon his antitypical people the experiences that exactly fit the typical, then we may know that
the prophecy is in course of fulfillment. Therefore, in correspondence with the typical experiences of David the fulfillment of Psalm 13:5 comes to pass after A.D. 1922, and comes to pass upon the anointed “feet of him”. It was in that year that the holy spirit was poured out upon all the faithful ones then in the organism of flesh. (Joel 2:28,29) The fulfillment applies even later than that and during and after A.D. 1929,- at which time the antitypical Goliath’s fear-inspiring power over God’s anointed remnant was killed by “the stone” of the kingdom truth identifying the “Higher Powers” as Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and after the “seven last plagues” had been poured out. (1 Sam. 17:40-54; Rev. 15:1; 16:1) Psalm 13:5 applies even later, to wit, after 1931, when the antitypical Jonathan class was first seen by the “remnant” to be foreshadowed by the prophecy at Ezekiel 9:4, and which identification was followed later by the revelation of the same earthly class as the modern Jonadabs. (2 Ki. 10: 15-23) That identification was made more complete in the year 1935 (A.D.), when it was revealed by the Lord to his people and caused to be publicly proclaimed that the “great multitude” is an earthly company, the “other sheep” of the Lord, which are gathered to the Lord before Armageddon. (Rev. 7:9; John 10: 16) It was at that same time, at the Washington (D.C.) convention, that the idolatrous practice of flag saluting was publicly mentioned at a meeting of God’s people held on the 3rd day of June, 1935, and which laid the basis for more trouble. Thereafter the modern-day Philistines were identified and made known to the people of God. Thus the physical facts that have come to pass locate the beginning of the fulfillment of the prophecy, and the present-day facts show that the prophecy is yet in course of fulfillment The prophecy, therefore, has a peculiar interest to all who have covenanted to do God’s will.
DANGER
8	Looking again at the prophetic type, it is observed that David was in danger of death by violence, not a death of peaceful sleep due to the inherited condemnation that came through Adam’s sin, but a danger of death at the hands of his mortal enemy Saul and his allies in wickedness. (Ps. 13: 3) David was therefore in need of protection and deliverance that he might be saved from being cut off from the throne to which he had been anointed by Jehovah.
’ “The feet of him,” that is, of the Greater David, Christ Jesus, are those of the anointed remnant, the witnesses of Jehovah who are commissioned and sent forth to declare the name of the Almighty God and to announce his King throughout the earth as a witness and warning to the people. Because of their faithfulness in the performance of duty, as com-
January 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
5
manded by the Lord, Jehovah’s witnesses are continuously set upon by their mortal enemy, the Devil, and his wicked agents on the earth, who have conspired together to cut off the remnant from the kingdom and from becoming a part of God’s “holy nation”. (Ps. 83:1-4) These faithful servants are now greatly in need of protection, deliverance and salvation, not from death the result of inherited sin, but from destruction at the hands of the enemy. The salvation needed is from destruction of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and their companions, the Jonadabs, which destruction is threatened by the combined enemy, and particularly the religious element, and which the enemy is maliciously and desperately trying to carry into execution. The text for last year informed God’s people that the enemy should not prevail against them, although they would fight against them. While the persecution increases, with faith in God and full confidence in him and his King those who truly serve the Lord now can confidently look to the Lord for protection and say: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”
ENEMIES
10	The invisible enemies of those who are devoted to the great Theocrat and his government by Christ Jesus are, to wit: Satan the Devil, the arch enemy, and a host of wicked spirit creatures operating with Satan against God and against all who love and obey Jehovah. Those invisible enemies moved against David and, in doing so, used Saul and his supporters in an effort to destroy David. Likewise today the Devil and his wicked spirits move to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions, and in this wicked warfare the antitypical Saul class, the visible ones who do the bidding of the Devil, join in the conspiracy to bring about such destruction of God’s faithful people.
11	The antitypical Saul class is “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” made up of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other malicious religionists, including those who were once in line for the kingdom and who now form the “evil servant” class. (2 Thess. 2:3, A.R.V.; Matt. 24:48-51) All of these who, together, compose “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” work together and induce many simple-minded dupes, who are now influenced and controlled by the wicked demons, to join with them in this malicious conspiracy. Such visible leaders hide themselves behind a “refuge of lies” and resort outwardly at times to “fair speeches”, by which they deceive the simple-minded. All such fear man, but do not fear God.
12	Saul’s Edomite herdsman, Doeg, whose name means “fearful”, spied upon David and gave information to be used to the destruction of David. Likewise the modern-day Saul class have their spies who
seek for information to bring about the destruction of the faithful servants of God. Such spies mingle with God’s faithful servants, pretend to be friendly, and do this in order to find something that might be used against the faithful. Such spies, like the meaning of the name of Doeg, are “fearful” of men, but they do not fear God. They fear men may not think as highly of them as they desire to be thought of, and hence they are led to do things in the presence of other men which they think might bring to them praise and approval. Such spies serve the Devil for selfish gain and are held to their leaders of the Saul class by ties of religion. Otherwise stated, they are religionists and followers of religious leaders. Some specific examples of these are the dupes of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, who attempt to break up the meetings of God’s faithful people, and such as police officers who act at the behest of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy or members of that priesthood, and such organizations designated as “The American Legion”, “The Christian Front,” the “Christian Mobilizers”, the Coughlinites, and other similar dupes and agents of the Hierarchy. Thus it is seen that the Lord foretold this combination of enemies who would conspire together to bring about the destruction of those who serve God, and this conclusively proves that such enemies are the offspring of the Devil.—John 8: 44.
’’Working together with and playing into the hands of the aforesaid agents of the Hierarchy are also the rebellious ones pictured by Absalom, who claim to be in line for the heavenly throne. These do not see the existence of the Theocratic Kingdom because they are blinded by self-interest and are moved with ambition for positions more favorable to them; and they try therefore to discredit the servants of Jehovah, by which means they hope to exalt themselves to more favorable positions than they now occupy. The modern-day-Absalom rebels against the kingdom are supported in their work by those who attempt to counsel and advise the Kingdom class, and which false counselors were pictured by Ahitho-phel the Judean counselor who betrayed his chief. The name Ahithophel means “brother of disguising” or “dissembler”. By his act of treason against the king he prophetically foreshadowed Judas Iscariot, who betrayed the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater David, and he also foreshadowed the modern-day Judas or traitor class. This conclusion is fully supported by the words of Jesus at John 13:18, 21, and also those words of Jesus serve to apply Psalm 55 to Judas, and to his antitype, the Judas class of the present time.
14 The horde of enemies against Jehovah and his King and kingdom were further foreshadowed by the Philistines and their allies. The Philistine giant Goliath was survived by other monstrosities, to wit,
6
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
(1) Ishbi-benob; and (2) Saph, another giant; and (3) Goliath’s brother; and (4) the twelve-toed, twelve-fingered giant of Gath. (2 Sam. 21:15-22) All of those wicked giants fell by the hand of David and those who were companions with or servants of David. That entire wicked combination above mentioned prophetically pictures the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the Nazis, the Fascists, the Communists, the totalitarian-monstrosity organizations, which now fight against the Theocracy, which government or Theocracy is now represented on the earth by Jehovah’s witnesses and their “companions”. These faithful representatives .of the Lord have a commission from Jehovah to advertise the Theocratic Government, and this commission they must fulfill; and by doing so they draw upon their heads the wicked persecution and assaults from the combined enemy aforementioned. Thus the prophetic picture shows the antitypical David class, the “feet of him [the Greater David, Christ Jesus]”, together with their companions, in action, and that all such servants of Jehovah God are in great danger and in need of protection, deliverance and salvation. The faithful now see and appreciate this prophetic picture given for their warning. The cry of David unto Jehovah, as set forth in the 13th Psalm, prophetically foretold the cry of the faithful servants of Jehovah and the companions who are now on the earth. Everywhere on the earth today the persecution of Jehovah’s servants increases. This is clearly in fulfillment of the words of Christ Jesus applying to the present time: “And ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.” (Matt. 24:9) These faithful servants of Jehovah are now beset by the combined enemy, and are often arrested and thrown into prison. They are ill-treated and abused and some of them cruelly put to death. The combined enemy now surrounds those servants of the Lord, all of whom are in danger, and that danger is ever increasing. Some of the Lord’s little ones come to the point of almost despair, and it is for the comfort of those who are weak in faith that these precious promises are recorded in the Scripture. This is the time, therefore, for all the Lord’s servants to fully trust in and have complete confidence in Jehovah and his King.
15	All of Jehovah’s servants with anxiety look to Jehovah and Christ.Jesus for help, and many of them wonder how much longer they must endure the assaults heaped upon them by the enemy. They pray unto God words to this effect: “Consider and hear me, 0 Lord my God; lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death; lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that trouble me rejoice when I am moved.”—Ps. 13: 3, 4.
16	The experiences through which David passed exactly fit the conditions and experiences that now
surround and beset the faithful servants of Jehovah on the earth. Those servants of the Lord now call to mind the words of Jesus, which apply to them at the present time: “But he that shall endure unto the end. the same shall be saved.”—Matt. 24: 13.
” These words were spoken by the Master to aid and comfort those who are undergoing trying experiences. The test is now upon God’s people. Jesus was put to the severest test and proved faithful. His servants, called to follow in his footsteps, must be subjected to a like test; and being thus forewarned, they are forearmed and they put their trust wholly and completely in the Most High.
MERCY
18 Jehovah heard the cry of David and showed his mercy toward his servant, the “man after [his] own heart”. David, while suffering at the hands of his persecutors, said to Jehovah: “But I have trusted in thy mercy.” (Ps. 13:5) The faithful servants of Almighty God do not trust in vain for the mercy of Jehovah. It is written: “His mercy endureth for ever” toward his servants. (2 Chron. 20: 21) “Which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy unto thy servants that walk before thee with all their hearts.’’ (2 Chron. 6:14) One who covenants to do the will of Almighty God, and who because of natural imperfections stumbles but rises up again and goes forward, and who continues in that way with a pure heart, may confidently expect to receive the mercy of the Lord. “For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children’s children; to such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them.”—Ps. 103:11, 13, 14,17, 18.
” Because one claims to be a servant of the Lord does not mean that he shall obtain mercy at the hands of Jehovah. The Scriptures show that God’s mercy is extended to those who faithfully serve him. “Also unto thee, 0 Lord, belongeth mercy; for thou render-est to every man according to his work.” (Ps. 62: 12) The mercy of God is not extended to the wicked, that is, to those who continue willfully in wrongdoing. God puts in the mouth of his anointed the prayer, and the faithful ones speak the words of the prayer concerning those who willingly persecute God's faithful servants: “Let there be none to extend mercy unto him; neither let there be any to favour his fatherless children.”—Ps. 109:12.
10 One who has covenanted to do the will of God and who has received a knowledge of the truth, and
January 1,1940
Siie WATCHTOWER.
7
who then willingly does violence to God’s anointed, cannot hope for mercy at the hands of the Lord. The Scriptures make plain this matter concerning those once in line for the kingdom who do violence to God’s organization, because by so doing they treat Christ and his blood as a common thing.—Heb. 10: 26-29.
81 Jehovah extends his mercy to his anointed. The man David was subject to natural weaknesses as are other men, but his heart was always right and pure toward God. He was God’s anointed servant and never willingly departed from the way of righteousness. David trusted in the mercy of Jehovah, and he received mercy at the hand, of Jehovah, and therefore David’s words concerning the mercy of God apply to the class whom David pictured, namely, “the feet of him [Christ Jesus, the Greater David].” “He is the tower of salvation for his king; and sheweth mercy to his anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.”—2 Sam. 22: 51.
22	Jehovah saved David from his enemies and granted salvation to him in mercy. There were those who forsook Saul and took their stand with David and served with him, and they also received salvation in mercy. (1 Sam. 22:1,2; 1 Chron. 12:1-22) So likewise Jehovah grants salvation in mercy to the “remnant”, who are of the antitypical David class, and to the “companions” of the remnant, who are the antitypical Jonathan class. Those who are of Jehovah’s organization, and those who put themselves under that organization and who continue faithfully to serve God, may confidently expect to receive the mercy of the Most High.
23	Why did God extend mercy to David and deliver him and save him from his enemies? For the same reason that he in mercy grants protection, deliverance and salvation to the remnant and their companions; and that is for His name’s sake. Jehovah’s name is called upon the anointed remnant, and the Jonathan class become companions of the remnant in declaring Jehovah’s name. The individuals who make up these classes are not of first importance, but are only of secondary importance. God does everything for his name’s sake. It is his great name that is involved and must be vindicated. The words of Jehovah addressed primarily to Israel apply with full and complete force and effect to those now in a covenant to do the will of God and who trust in his mercy. Therefore Jehovah says concerning those of spiritual Israel and his companions, and in behalf of whom he exercises mercy: “But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen, whither they went. Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, 0 house of Israel, but for mine holy name’s sake, which ye have pro
faned among the heathen, whither ye went.”—Ezek. 36:21,22.
2	‘ Today God’s mercy is extended to the remnant who because of natural weaknesses commit unintentional wrongs, but it is not extended to those who resort to lies against God’s organization and who do wrong against his organization but do not repent and turn entirely away from wrongdoing and then seek the face of the Lord for forgiveness. David said: “I have trusted in thy mercy”; and so likewise those who follow in the footsteps of the Greater David, Christ Jesus, trust in the mercy of Jehovah and receive “the sure mercies of David”. (Isa. 55: 3) They receive God’s mercy because they continue in a perfect heart devotion to Jehovah and in the faithful, actual service of the great Theocrat and his King. They are faithful in declaring God’s name as they are commissioned to do. They are faithful to protect God’s organization.
WHO SAVES
25	Those who practice religion rely upon their religious organization to provide for them protection and salvation. Such are doomed to complete disappointment, and their end is destruction. Those of the “evil servant” class are also religionists, who rely upon their own ability to develop character that will insure them the protection and salvation from Jehovah God. They too will be sorely disappointed. The “evil servant” class often deceive themselves to the point of advocating “universal salvation”, falsely claiming that the love of God provides salvation for the Devil himself, and this they do in the face of God’s plain declaration, “All the wicked will [God] destroy.”
26	Jehovah God is the source of life. He grants salvation only to the obedient ones through Jesus Christ. “Salvation belongeth unto Jehovah.” (Ps. 3:8, A.R.V.) Jehovah grants salvation by and through Christ Jesus, and 'there is no other name given under heaven whereby men can be saved’.— Acts 4:12.
27	Those devoted to Jehovah, in the language of God’s prophet, truly say: “Behold, God is my salvation.” (Isa. 12: 2) ‘Truly in the Lord our God is salvation.’ (Jer. 3: 23) “Salvation is of the Lord.” (Jonah 2:9) If a person believes that the Bible contains God’s Word of truth, then that person must surely say that there is no means of salvation aside from Jehovah. Christ Jesus the King is the Greater David and is the anointed of Jehovah God and is the agent by whom Jehovah sends salvation and who saves his people from the disaster that Armageddon brings upon the world. To those who are devoted to Jehovah and who continue in faith and faithful to him and his kingdom he says: “Behold, thy King cometh unto thee; he is just, and having salvation.”—Zech. 9: 9.
8
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn,N. Y.
“ Salvation is not for the wicked at any time: “Far from the lawless is salvation, for thy statutes have they not sought." (Ps. 119:155, Rotherham) Salvation is only inside Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, and those who oppose the Theocracy cannot receive salvation. Those who are not wholly for the Theocracy are against Jehovah and his King. Surely those in this day of God’s enlightenment granted to his people, who trust in Jehovah and Christ Jesus, must see that the Theocratic Government is of paramount importance, because that government vindicates Jehovah’s name, and they must also see that unless one who claims to be the servant of Jehovah God now fully and entirely supports the Theocracy he cannot expect salvation from the terrors and destruction of Armageddon. Nor can such unfaithful one expect salvation to life. The vindication of Jehovah’s name shall now be accomplished, and it is his government by Christ Jesus that accomplishes this vindication. Therefore Jehovah says: “I bring near my righteousness [for vindication of my name]; it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry; and I will place salvation in Zion [God's capital organization] for Israel my glory.”—Isa. 46:13.
” Addressing his words to Zion, Jehovah says: “Thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.” (Isa. 60:18) Let those who desire salvation and who have put their trust in the religious systems give heed to the infallible Word of Almighty God and utterly disregard the speech of men. This is the day of Jehovah, and of this time Jehovah says: “In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah [not Babylon, nor any part of the religious systems of the world or elsewhere]: We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth may enter in. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusteth in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength.”—Isa. 26:1-4.
30 God set up the “cities of refuge”, to which the unintentional manslayer might flee for protection from the executioner’s hand (Num. 35:9-34), and which cities of refuge picture the salvation under God’s organization from destruction that shall fall upon the world at Armageddon. It is in that organization that those who will foirn the great multitude now find shelter and protection, and which shall be to their salvation from disaster at Armageddon. The ark which Noah built at the command of Jehovah also pictured God’s organization which furnishes protection and salvation to those who place themselves under God’s organization.
51 Now all nations of earth are in distress and perplexity. It is clearly to be seen that the wicked
demons under the command of Satan are besieging or obsessing and taking possession of the minds ol both those who rule and those who are ruled. Religion practiced by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and others has been the means for the demons to seize control of the people. Upon the faces of multitudes now is seen the expression of the demons. Only the demons could induce persons who were once quiet and considerate people to now resort to such wicked deeds as those committed by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy'and their dupes in their attempts to break up peaceable assemblies of persons who come together to worship God in spirit and in truth. Let the reasonable and sensible persons who believe the Bible is God’s Word have in mind now what the apostle of Jesus Christ said to those who practice religion, to wit: “I perceive that in all things ye are extremely devoted to the worship of demons.” (Acts 17 : 22, Dia-glott) Not since the days preceding the flood has there been such a manifestation of demons and demon influence as that now exercised upon the people. Concerning this very time Jesus gave full warning: ‘‘But as the days of No'e were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matt. 24:37) Multitudes of persons are yet held in subjection to the religious systems, and particularly to that wicked system ruled by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority, and are blinded by such religion and know not the right way to go. Many of these desire protection and salvation. Let all such, then, depart from the religious teachings of men and demons and look to follow and obey the Word of Jehovah God, which is man’s only true guide. (Ps. 119:105) The religious systems can furnish neither protection nor salvation to anyone from the terrors now upon the world and from the disaster that is about to come upon the world at Armageddon. To those of sincere heart who truly desire his salvation Jehovah now says: “Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom m\ soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him. and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles [nations] And in his name shall the [nations] trust.”—Matt 12:18, 21.
salvation when?
’’“Salvation” means deliverance from the world disaster at the battle of Armageddon and the granting of life everlasting to the faithful obedient ones under the kingdom of Jehovah. Salvation or deliverance was foreshadowed by what came to David and to his companions. They were delivered from King Saul, who pictured the “man of sin” class, “the son of perdition”; and that deliverance to David and his companions came at the battle of Gilboa, which battle pictured Armageddon. (1 Sam. 31: 1-10) David and his companions were saved from the traitor Ahithophel; and that wicked one, when his
THE WATCHTOWER.
9
January 1,1940
counsel was rejected, went and hanged himself, just as Judas Iscariot did after betraying Christ Jesus. (2 Sam. 17:1-23) They were saved and delivered from the rebel Absalom at the battle in the wood of Ephraim, in which Absalom was killed. (2 Sam. 18: 6-17) David and his companions were saved from the Philistines at the battles of Perazim and Gibeon, in which battles Jehovah fought for his anointed king and his army. The battle of Gibeon particularly pictured Jehovah’s “strange act” of vindication at the battle of Armageddon, at which time, that is, the battle of Armageddon, those who are devoted to God will receive deliverance and salvation. At the battle of Armageddon salvation and deliverance will come to the anointed remnant and to their companions, at which time all the enemies will be destroyed, down to the lowest earthly member of the Devil’s organization. That great destruction will immediately follow the time when the earthly representatives of Satan shall proclaim “peace and safety”. That battle of the great day of God Almighty will strike down all the enemy. Rapidly is that day now approaching. It appears that quite soon the religious head of the earthly organization of Satan, thinking that God’s witnesses are done for, will proclaim “peace and safety”. The witnesses of Jehovah, seemingly forsaken, may wonder how long it is until the end, and they say: “How long shall mine enemy be exalted . . . ! and [continue to] say, I have prevailed against him; and those that trouble me rejoice when I am [re]moved.” (Ps. 13:2-4) Jehovah, by Christ Jesus, will exercise Ins almighty power against the enemy, proving that Jehovah is supreme, and this will follow immediately after the completion of the proclamation of Jehovah’s name and kingdom in the earth (Ex. 9:16) and suddenly when the proclamation of “peace and safety” is made.—1 Thess. 5 : 3.
HIS ACT
33	Jehovah’s act of salvation is certain at his appointed time, and all those who remain faithful and true to the great Theocrat shall be delivered. The faithful may confidently rely upon such deliverance. Therefore the faithful will not now be discouraged by the increasing woes upon the world and the persecution of themselves, but they will lift up the head with gladness because there is overwhelming evidence that the day of deliverance is near.
34	For his name’s sake Jehovah will save and deliver his faithful people. “And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor; therefore his arm brought salvation unto him [as represented by his faithful people on the earth at Armageddon] ; and his righteousness [the vindication of his name], it sustained him. For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of sal
vation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke. According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay recompence.” —Isa. 59:16-18.
35	Describing his act of vindication the prophet of Jehovah records: “Was the Lord displeased against the rivers! was thine anger against the rivers! was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thine horses "[war steeds] and thy chariots of salvation! Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger.” This Jehovah does for his faithful people. “Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.”—Hab. 3: 8, 12,13.
’• Of necessity the woes upon the world must increase until the final climax at Armageddon. It is clearly to be seen that the enemy is surrounding God’s people on every hand. They should therefore keep in mind the words of Jesus concerning this time: “And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption [deliverance] draweth nigh.”—Luke 21:28
ST The time arrives when there is a great calamity upon the earth, and no more opportunity to carry the message to the people, but, Jehovah having supplied his people abundantly with spiritual food for their strength, they can say as his prophet records: "Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.” (Ilab. 3:17,18) (See The Watchtower 1935, page 202.) At that time the makers of images, who bow down to idols and who worship demons and who compel flag saluting, shall go to confusion together: “They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them; they shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.”—Isa. 45:16.
“ The disastrous result upon the enemies the prophet of Jehovah describes in these words: “Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner [die like gnats (Young’s translation) ; like a louse (Hebrew)] ; but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness [vindication of Jehovah’s name] shall not be abolished.”—Isa. 51: 6.
” At that great battle for the vindication of Jehovah’s holy name, to those who are devoted to the great Theocratic government it is said : “Ye shall not
10
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. 1
need to fight in this battle; set yourselves, stand ye still [after having gone through to the finish of God’s ‘strange work’], and see the salvation of the Lord with you, 0 Judah and Jerusalem; fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them; for the Lord will be with you.”—2 Chron. 20:17.
REJOICE
40	What this calendar year may bring forth we do not know. With God’s people time is no more. His people do know, however, that all the surrounding conditions point to the near approach of Armageddon, when the great issue of supremacy and vindication of Jehovah’s name will be settled for all time. They confidently look to Jehovah for his mercy and protection, and they know that salvation belongs alone to Jehovah and that those who trust in his mercy and continue faithfully to obey God shall receive protection, deliverance and salvation.
41	For some time the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, in the lead of the religionists, have put forth their strong efforts to prevent the Jonathan class from hearing the truth. In this wicked effort they have received the aid and help of the “evil servant” class, which class continue to say with sarcasm: “Where is the great multitude!” That combined company of religionists that go to make up “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” continue to blaspheme the name of Almighty God by holding forth to the people that salvation may be had from the religious systems and through character development. Those enemies ridicule the faithful witnesses of the Most High who carry the message of the Theocratic Government to the people who desire salvation. The enemy derides the faithful witnesses of the Lord and heaps contempt upon them and at the same time shames the counsel that is given to the poor in spirit, the Jona-dab class, many of whom are yet held under the religious system and who cry and sigh because of the abominations there done. To the enemy Jehovah says: “Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor; because the Lord is his refuge.” (Ps. 14: 6) For some time many of God’s people have said, and say: “Oh that the salvation of Israel [spiritual Israel] were come out of Zion!” (Ps. 14:7) Let all such who have hope and who look for salvation now rejoice because the day of deliverance is at hand. By faith we now see the climax of Armageddon and, like David, continue to say: “But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”—Ps. 13: 5.
42	Mark this: that the saved ones now say: “My heart shall rejoice”; and all those who now trust in the mercy of God and rejoice from the heart proclaim the truth, for “out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh”. (Matt. 12:34) Having a heart appreciation of the salvation which vindicates
Jehovah’s name and proves his word true, the remnant and their companions continue to rejoice and go forward sounding with the mouth and by the use of recorded speech the praises of Jehovah and his government by Christ Jesus.
43	This time of rejoicing was pictured by the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt. With the sea in front of them and the great army of Egypt, the Devil’s agent, behind them, the situation looked desperate for Moses and his host of Israelites. But they trusted in Jehovah, and when Jehovah’s mighty hand delivered them, Moses and those with him with great joy joined in the song: “The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation.” (Ex. 14: 30, 31; 15:1, 2) Now by faith the people of God see the day of deliverance near, and at the climax of the battle of Armageddon they will greatly rejoice and sing: “The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation.”
44	For the comfort and hope of his people Jehovah long ago caused to be recorded many prophetic pictures, some of which are here mentioned. When King Jehoshaphat and all the people with him beheld the destruction of Ammon, Moab and that religious crowd of Mount Seir-ites, the Lord made them rejoice: “Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy ; for the Lord had made them to rejoice over their enemies. And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets, unto the house of the Lord." (2 Chron. 20:27,28) So likewise Armageddon will witness the end of the enemy. Then will the faithful behold the destruction of the enemy: “For in one hour is she made desolate. Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her.” (Rev. 18: 19, 20) That will be a time of great rejoicing as foretold by the Lord Jesim Chri.-t “And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God: for true and righteous are his judgments; for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.” “And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunder-ings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.”—Rev. 19: 1, 2, 6.
WHO REJOICE NOW
45	There is now no joy in the world for those who are against the Theocracy. On the contrary, a great cloud of blackness hangs over the earth and the people are held in gross darkness. Religious systems bring no comfort or joy to the people. The efforts of the commercial element to turn the people to re
January 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
n
ligion bring neither comfort nor joy to mankind, but, on the contrary, increase their woes. Amidst all of the darkness, strife, war and confusion and the everincreasing activities of the wicked demons the faithful people of Jehovah God trust in his mercy and rejoice and have every reason for increasing joy. Because of his faith in Jehovah David wrote: “My heart shall rejoice in th}' salvation." He wrote this as God’s prophet for the benefit of the present-day faithful people of God. David manifested his joy in the coming salvation of Jehovah. Likewise the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions now by faith see the ever-increasing evidence that deliverance and salvation are at hand, and by faith their joy increases and they continue earnestly and zealously to publish to the world that salvation will come to those and those only who trust in and who obey Jehovah and his King. Concerning the faithful anointed it is written: “In thy name shall they rejoice all the day; and in thy righteousness [vindication] shall they be exalted.” (Ps. 89:16) Mark this: that their joy is solely in “Thy salvation”, that is, the salvation that belongs only to Jehovah. As “the feet” of Christ Jesus, the royal One, the faithful remnant now ‘publish salvation’ (Isa. 52: 7), and joyfully and with full confidence in the Theocratic Government they proclaim to those who will hear: “Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.” (Rom. 10:13; Joel 2: 32) As for their “companions”, the prospective “great multitude”, these rejoice and with zeal engage in proclaiming the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government as the means of protection, deliverance and salvation. Behold them now coming from every nation and people and tongue and ‘with a loud voice, saying, Salvation [be ascribed] to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb”. “Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.”—Rev. 7:10, 15.
*• Regardless of what the ensuing year may bring forth, and of the burdens that may come to those who have devoted themselves to Jehovah, let all such at all times keep this before them: that salvation is by Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and that government is here and Christ Jesus has taken his power and reigns. “‘Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ.”—Rev. 12:10.
‘T Many centuries ago faithful men such as David and others of the prophets set their heart upon the Theocratic Government. Because of their faith m that government and its King, and their love for Jehovah and the Messiah, those men endured all manner of persecution and affliction and died in faith, waiting for the coming of the King. The King is now here. The Theocracy has begun to function. With confidence we look for the early return of those faithful men of old, and then they will enter into the service and joy of the Lord in fullness Those who are now on the earth and who are wholly devoted to God and his King need to wait only a very short time, but in that time they must endure hardness as good soldiers of the King. Keep in mind the admonition of Christ Jesus: ‘He that endures to the end shall be saved.’ We know that the day of deliverance is near. We fully trust in the mercy of our God and diligently strive to obey his commandments and proclaim his name and kingdom. Therefore all of God’s people may throughout the coming days have constantly in mind these words: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”
INHER
IN THE typical picture made with the nation of Israel, Jehovah's priests occupied a position of responsibility toward him He makes first the best provision for them God’s provision for occupancy of the land by his priests, as well as by those who are not of the priesthood, was portrayed in the vision given by Jehovah to his prophet Ezekiel concerning the division of the land and the location of its inhabitants.—Chapter 45.
The “land” here is not the literal earth. Rather, it pictures the position and condition in which members of God’s organization are placed.
To his disciples Jesus said: “In my Father’s house are many mansions [dwelling places] ... I go to prepare a place for you.” (John 14:2) Allotment of the land, as described in Ezekiel’s prophecy, clearly refers to the same thing. The faithful disciples of Christ Jesus are made members of Jehovah’s “royal priesthood”.—1 Pet. 2:9.
TANCE
Ezekiel’s vision referred to the time when Jehovah’s people on earth, his faithful witnesses, would be delivered from the religious enemy organization and its power and would be restored to God's favor and brought into his Theocratic organization, receiving an allotment therein Jehovah’s government or kingdom is a Theocracy. The organization of The Theocracy, as disclosed in the Scriptures, may be stated thus: The Almighty God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” and who is the Supreme One. is the Creator and Builder and Organizer. His only begotten and beloved Son, Christ Jesus, is Jehovah’s Executive Officer, whom Jehovah makes the King of the world. By the grace of Jehovah and by his selection there are associated with Christ Jesus in the Kingdom 144.000 who are taken from among men and begotten of God’s spirit as children of Jehovah God. These are antitypical Levites and must serve him m his spiritual temple. When anointed of his spirit for temple
12
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y
service, they are in line for Jehovah’s “royal priesthood”, and, proving faithful, they are made “priests of God and of Christ” and “shall reign with him a thousand years". (See Revelation 7: 4; 14:1, 3 ; 1: 6 ; 20: 4, 6.) Christ Jesus is the Head thereof, or the High Priest of Jehovah God. Such is a brief description of the capital organization of Jehovah God, to which in Scripture the name “Zion” applies.
The official or capital organization Zion is the new heaven of righteousness. It is not visible to human eyes, and the earthly remnant thereof yet on earth must be changed from human to spirit in the first resurrection. The Scriptures further disclose that The Theocracy will have visible representatives on the earth, who shall perform the duties of governors under the direction and supervision of the theocratic King. In times of old such men were “fathers” unto God’s people. They proved their faithfulness unto Jehovah God and shall have a “better resurrection” and be made the children of The Christ and also be made his representatives on the earth. These visible representatives of the theocratic King are designated “princes in all the earth”, according to Psalm 45: 16. “Princes” here means governors, rulers or stewards.
(25,000)
Levites
Prince
The Sanctuary and the Priests
r i n c e o
s
The City
”0 o o
(Diagram of the allotments in ‘'the holy poition”, twenty-five thousand foursquare)
Ezekiel 45 1 reads : “Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation unto [Jehovah], an holy portion of the land : the length shall be the length of five and twenty thousand reeds [cubits], and the breadth shall be ten thousand. This shall be holy in all the borders thereof round about.” This “holy portion of the land” occupied the central position in all the land of God’s restored people, thereby picturing how the lives and interests of all the people will move about Jehovah’s organization, which is Zion his royal house. It is Jehovah God who does the selecting; as stated at Deuteronomy 16: 6: “The place which [Jehovah] thy God shall choose to place his name in.” Allotment of the land is also given consideration in Ezekiel 47 (verses thirteen to twenty-two) and in chapter 48 (verses eight to twenty).
The allotment of persons and things in the holy place is described in this manner: “Of this [oblation of land] there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred in length, and five hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty cubits round about for the suburbs thereof. And of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and twenty thousand,
and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be the sanctuary and the most holy place.” (Ezek. 45:2,3) This was the area of ground on which the temple of Jehovah stood, and the ground for the temple occupied the centei of the tract of land; hence the portion of the land abo\ < described is for the priests to occupy. “The holy portion of the land shall be for the priests the ministers of the sanctuary, which shall come near to minister unto [Jehovah] ; and it shall be a place for their houses, and an hoh place for the sanctuary.”—Ezek. 45: 4.
Only the. Levites of the family of Aaron were priests, all other Levites were servants or ministers at the temple of Jehovah God. Jehovah locates the antitypical Levites at a convenient point for service. “And the [portion of land] five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand of breadth [immediately north of the portion assigned for the sanctuary and the priests], shall also the Levites, the ministers of the house, have for themselves, for a possession for twenty chambers.” (Ezek 45:5) Jehovah God has provided an everlasting abode in his organization for the Christians here pictured by the nonpriestly Levites The mam fold foresight and wisdom of Jehovah is thrilling. Even the most minute things he has provided. For instance, undei the law covenant arrangement made with the nation of Israel the Levites were located in forty-eight different cities, six of which were called cities of refuge. (Num 35 1-S‘> Three of those cities were on one side of the river Jordan and three on the other side of it. It was the duty of the Levites in the cities of refuge to give information, aid and comfort to those who fled thither, seeking refuge Likewise it is the duty of the antitypical Levites or Christians to givt information, aid and comfort to those who now seek Jehovah’s theocratic organization. This they must do by giving them a mark in the forehead, that is to say, giving them intelligent information as to what such must do in ordei to have Jehovah’s favor. God, through his prophet Ezekiel especially commands that those of the antitypica! Levite class must go through the land proclaiming the message of Jehovah’s theocratic kingdom under Christ and thus put .1 mark upon the foreheads of those of good will toward God and who are seeking the way of Jehovah It is this class ot persons who are thus marked, and who thereafter come mm and abide in the city, that are spared and taken through tin great tribulation.—Ezek. 9 6, Zeph 2:3.
In the outer court of the temple seen in vision by Ezekiel (40:17) the Levites are assigned thirty chambers However, in the assignment of the territory to the Levites God specifies twenty chambers for them, and that would seem to signify that God divides the Levites up into twenty courses of service at the temple. There will be divisions or courses of service, but the Levites will all be together in one territory, and no longer scattered about in forty-eight cities as formerly. In the allotment of the land, showing the ultimate condition of their location, all the antitypical Levites, the called, chosen and faithful ones taken out by Jenovah from all nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues as a people for his name, by his grace will finally be gathered up and brought into his heavenly city or great organization.
Allotment of land is made for “the city”. “And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand broad, and five and twenty thousand long [from east to west], over
January 1, 1940
WATCHTOWER,
13
against [(7?.7.) side by side with] the oblation of the holy portion [for the temple] : it shall be for the whole house of Israel.” (Ezek 45: 6) Thus the temple was not in the city, but the temple and the city were separated from each other by about eight thousand cubits. Since the city Zion is not mentioned in this vision, it seems that “the city” here described is not Zion, the invisible kingdom, but that it pictures more the earthly representation of God’s heavenly invisible government. (Consideration is given to this city also in chapter 48:15-17, 30-35.) Both the city and the temple were in the “holy oblation” of land, the temple being in the upper or northern portion, and the city in the southern. The entire “holy oblation” of land, twenty-five thousand cubits square, is a picture of God’s universal organization called “Jerusalem”, while Zion, Jehovah’s royal family composed of Christ Jesus and his church, is pictured in the land allotted to and occupied by the temple, and which is also occupied by the priests. The city mentioned at Ezekiel 45:6 is said to be named Jehovah-shammah, “the wonder or renown of Jehovah.”—See Ezekiel 48:35, margin.
The earthly representatives of Jehovah’s kingdom will be the resurrected faithful prophets and witnesses before Christ, and these are designated at Psalm 45:16 as “princes in all the earth”, and their position is shown in God’s organization Ezekiel 45: 7, 8 states: “And a portion shall be for the prince on the one side and on the other side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the possession of the city, before [in front of] the oblation of the holy portion, and before [in front of] the possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east side eastward; and the length shall be over against one of the portions, from the west border unto the east border. In the land shall be his possession in Israel: and my princes shall no more oppress my people, and the rest of the land shall they give to the house of Israel according to their tribes.” The word “prince” in this text manifestly applies to an entire company and refers to the resurrected, faithful prophets who were faithful witnesses before the day of Christ, and who, as a company, Christ will make rulers in all the earth. Christ is King of these earthly representatives, and Jehovah God is the great King over all. The fact that there shall be no more oppression, as these verses say, shows the kind of men Jehovah will install in office as officials ruling the earth. They \\ ill be righteous and their rule will be righteous. Instruction is given concerning these earthly rulers “Thus saith the Lord God, Let it suffice you, 0 princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, saith the Lord God.” (Ezek. 45:9) This prophecy indicates what the "princes in all the earth” will do. Righteousness will be maintained.
The commerce of Satan’s organization is wicked and oppressive. In God’s kingdom everything must be done in righteousness. “Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath. The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of .in homer, and the ephah the tenth part of an homer: the measure thereof shall be after the homer. And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs; twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels shall be your maneh.” (Ezek. 45-10-12) There will be no juggling with the medium of
exchange, nor changes of measures. Big Business, with its military organization for its protection and for the oppression of the people, will never again exist. The righteous representatives of the kingdom on earth will instruct the people in righteousness and will require all to deal righteously. The measures and weights will be in harmony with the divine rule which Jesus declared: “Good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over.”— Luke 6:38.
Jehovah’s righteous government will not tolerate insubordination on .the part of anyone, but all must obey the Theocracy. Ezekiel 45:13-15 says: “This is the oblation that ye [earthly rulers] shall offer [the Lord], the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of barley. Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten baths are an homer: and one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat pastures of Israel, for a meat [meal] offering, and for a burnt offering, and for peace offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord God.” These verses describe the amount that shall be brought in for various offerings, all of which offerings are “to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord”, that is, reconciliation for the people. All the people will be required to recognize God’s kingdom and accept these resurrected faithful prophets or servants of God as the representatives of the kingdom on earth, and that the earthly princes are their representatives to treat with the heavenly royal priesthood and in behalf of the people who seek reconciliation with God. The prophecy also shows that the people will be required to contribute something toward such reconciliation, and that such contributions will be their full obedience and co-operation. The people will receive their instructions from the visible princes, and these instructions they will be required to obey.
Ezekiel hears further instructions concerning these rulers: “And it shall be the prince’s part to give burnt offerings, and meat [meal] offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities [in all the appointed feasts (7? V.)] of the house of Israel: he shall prepare the sin offering, and the meat [meal] offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make reconciliation [ (R.V ) atonement] for the house of Israel.” (Ezek. 45: 17) The fact that Jehovah gives such specific instructions regarding the duties of the princes indicates that he, by and through Christ Jesus, gives special recognition to these faithful men who of old maintained their integrity, and who died faithful to God, and that he will resurrect them as perfect men and make them representatives of the kingdom on earth. These men will be the visible representatives on earth of Zion, which is God’s organization. (Isa. 32: 1) The peoples of earth will be required to act through these earthly representatives of God’s organization. A grand inheritance for these princes'
The vision of Ezekiel does not at all mean that an earthly temple will be built at or near present-day Jerusalem for the use of the people. There will be no reason for the erection of such a building. What this vision really means is that it is a prophecy which will be fulfilled in Jehovah’s due time It is a vision of God’s organization in operation, showme
14
STie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the assigned positions of those who have to do with the organization. That God’s temple is clean is shown by Ezekiel 45:18: “Thus saith the Lord God, In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a young bullock, without blemish, and cleanse the sanctuary.” It was on the tenth day of the month when Ezekiel was given the vision; therefore the vision in substance says that this in
visible temple will yet be constructed by Jehovah to begin operations at God’s own appointed time after being brought together. The faithful disciples of Christ Jesus are made clean through the merit of Christ Jesus’ shed blood and are made living stones for Jehovah’s temple. (1 Pet 2:5) All who are brought into the temple and made a part of it must be of this cleansed condition.
LETTERS
GREATER THE BATTLE, GREATER THE VICTORY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Gathered in assembly here in New Orleans, Louisiana, 225 of your brethren, at the time of our zone assembly, wish to take this opportunity to send to you our deep gratitude and warm Christian love.
We are grateful to our heavenly Father for the marvelous and rich supply of spiritual food he has provided for us through the columns of The Watchtower, at a time when darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the people, when there is a famine in the land, not for bread and water, but for the hearing of the Word of the Lord, and when the Devil’s totalitarian crowd are desperately seeking the destruction of all who support the Theocracy.
We appreciate that the greater the battle, the greater the victory, and this we see in this priest-ridden section in our zone. Six months ago we had in Louisiana Zone One 142 regular publishers, 100 irregulars, 302 associated, and a peak of publishers for one month of 187. Now there are 197 regular publishers, 190 irregulars, 500 associated, and a peak of 260 publishers. The increase is largely made up of those sincere persons of good will who have come out of the Catholic system
Your fearless stand before Satan’s wicked crowd is an incentive to your fellow warriors to faithfully perform the task set before them
We wish to inform you that we are wholly and unreservedly for the Theocracy and will remain loyal regardless of all opposition.
May Jehovah, our heavenly Father, continue to richly bless you and keep you, is our daily prayer.
Eight new companies have been formed since October last Your fellow witnesses in the Theocracy,
Louisiana Zone One.
JEHOVAH’S LOVING-KINDNESS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
I take this chance to show my gratitude and appreciation of Jehovah’s loving-kindness which he has extended to me. Owing to my first association with one who was once enlightened of the knowledge of God but who has shamelessly and openly joined the pollutions of this world and become a willing tool of Satan, the house-to-house witnessing was entirely foreign to me.
But now, seeing the forces of Satan in entire shape, and that the Lord has graciously extricated me from such a tool of the Devil, and a demon m human form, who strictly launched his activities in vilifying and disdaining the Lord and his people and the method and means Jehovah is using in performance of his strange work, now I thank Jehovah for enjoying the grandest privilege of the field service with his people.
The article “Drama of Vindication”, disclosing the fulfillments of Joshua’s prophecy, which the Lord recently caused to be discussed in seven consecutive issues of The Watchtower, is really a permanent blessing from the Lord and has enabled the Lord’s people to more fully locate and identify the forces of Satan and the Achan class. The book Salvation is also a bountiful gift of Jehovah “This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.”
And I wish to assure you, dear brother, that I am now wholly and wholeheartedly united with you, the Society, the Lord’s representative on earth, and al! others of like precious faith in every land.
With fervent and warmest greetings, I am Your brother in His service,
J. B. Egede, Nigeria.
100 PERCENT FOR THE CHANNEL
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Christian geetings in the name of our King, Christ Jesus. We wish to thank you for sending Brother Howlett to visit the different companies in this part of the country
We believe that Brother Howlett’s visit was timely, fully under the direction of the Lord. There has been so much confusion created by those letters that O. R Moyle sent to the different brethren throughout this particular area.
Enclosed you will find the Waukegan [Ill.] company’s Pledge of Loyalty to the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, also to you as the Society’s president. Our company is 100-percent for the channel that has been used to dispense the “meat” in due season to the household of faith.
PLEDGE OF LOYALTY
We, the undersigned, wish to express our appreciation and thanks to Jehovah’s Theocratic arrangement on earth, the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society.
We deem it a privilege and honor to serve Jehovah and to haw a part in the vindication of his name.
We declare ourselves wholeheartedly for Jehovah and his King, Christ Jesus, standing firmly in the belief that the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society is still being used to make clear to his anointed the truths which are being revealed from his vast Storehouse of Treasures, the Bible
[Signed] Edward J. Monahan Esther Monahan Zephyr Tuttle Gladys Sabine Michael J Kohr Lula S Harter Fred Aebly Jessie Aebly Clara Holcomb
BRINGING ENEMIES TO Dear Brethren :
At the end of December last the activities of Jehovah’s witnesses were reported to the pnest-in-charge of the Bonda mission of the Church of England in Inyanga district, in Southern Rhodesia. The priest was so desirous to know what message Jehovah’s witnesses are delivering to the people m his district He sent for them to visit him at the mission station on Sunday morning in order to find out for himself what was going on The company servant Brother Johnson Chishaya, Noah Porno, and several others accepted the invitation
Linus Holcomb Dora Scheuermann Marge Monahan Bob Monahan Laura Monahan Jack Monahan-Betty Holcomb Agnes Anderson
SHAME
January 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
15
On Sunday morning these brethren went to the mission station, taking a phonograph with “Religion and Christianity”, “Enemies,” and several other records and some books and booklets in English. The priest received them gladly; they were taken into a private chapel; ministers and sisters were sent m to greet their visitors. These brethren were astonished to see European ministers and sisters shake hands with them, as this is seldom seen in Southern Rhodesia. Food was prepared for them and they were made to feel at home.
The pnest called in aU leading men and women, black and white, to come and listen to what their friends would have to say On addressing this special gathering he said: “Brethren, we have heard little about your preaching, but we would like to know fully what is your teaching and what is wrong with our teaching of the Bible.” Brother Johnson Chishaya gladly responded and said: “Do you know that there is a difference between religion and Christianity-f” Priest: “No. We know they are the same.” Chishaya: “Would you like to hear Judge Rutherford’s lecture dealing with this matter on the gramophone f” “Play it, please,” replied the priest After the records were played Chishaya presented the book Enemies and the booklets Safety and a few others to the priest. He received them gladly and Chishaya asked to continue to play more records. After hearing the records Brother Chishaya continued and showed to them how religionists rob the people in the name of God, and read from some chapters in the Bible: Isaiah 55:1,2; Micah 3:11; John 10:11-13. The priest and his minister were exceedingly pleased both by what they heard on the records and by what Chishaya explained to them.
A public meeting was arranged in the church, and all the members were asked to attend this meeting. In this meeting the minister spoke strongly against what they had been teaching to the people and the method they had employed in collecting the money from natives in the church. The minister said' “No preacher or minister will be paid monthly as we used to do; and no plate will be used to collect money from the public in the church; we shall have to work ourselves to get money; there are many means of making a living. Those who want much money would have to go to towns and work there. We cannot deny the truth; we will try to do as Watchtower books say.” When this statement was made by the pnest in charge many natives, preachers, ministers, etc., resigned from their work or position in their church. Thirty-four people left the mission work.
In a few days’ time there was a great change at Bonda mission Watchtower books were studied publicly m the church as weJ as in the public meetings by the European ministers. They wanted Brother Johnson Chishaya and others to help them to teach the people the truth. Immediately this was reported to the bishop of this church at Salisbury, the capital town of Southern Rhodesia The bishop was very angry and proceeded to Bonda mission immediately. When he arrived there he was very wild against the European priest and ministers who allowed and accepted Watchtower literature in the mission He found that things had been changed; and this annoyed him very much He called a big public meeting in the church, and there he called the European minister who allowed the'Watchtower teachings at this place to come to the front of the crowd of natives (the church members). He rebuked and insulted him shamefully. The unfortunate minister bravely said: “We believed what Jehovah’s witnesses said because we proved things ourselves when we read their books and heard some lectures on the gramophone. I would like the bishop to examine the book Enemies.’’ On hearing this the bishop grew more angry and threatened to assault this minister who asked him to read the book Enemies.
The bishop started from the bottom again to reorganize the work, but many people have lost confidence in them. But this minister refused to follow their teachings again, and immediately left the place, having nothing more to do with that church. The bishop instructed all his members to assault or kill anyone who came to the mission station as Jehovah’s witnesses or if any of them visited their houses; telling them that if they killed any of them he (the bishop) would defend them in the court or would take the blame.
When I visited Inyanga company I went out with brethren everywhere in that district, as we had some friends living near that mission station. I went there to help them to go forward in their work against the enemy. We experienced no opposition a' all, and up to this time no trouble has been given from anyone in that district. God’s Kingdom work is increasing in every corner of Southern Rhodesia, with a very little opposition here and there The boldness of the Kingdom publishers in this colony is bringing the crowds of enemies to shame.
By the Lord’s grace brethren have determined to stand firm on Jehovah’s side to the very end.
Yours in his kingdom service
0. M. Kabvngo, Southern Rhodesia
(Continued from page J?)
the Theocratic work in many countries. This report is prepared by the president of the Society. Additionally, there is a brief comment by the president on the text for the new calendar year, together with a text for each day of the year accompanied by an appropriate comment thereon as taken from recent issues of The Watchtower. The edition of the Yearbook is limited, and hence the regular contribution of 50c a copy is taken therefor. Order promptly, with remittance to cover Each company will place their orders with the local company servant, that he may convenience this office by sending in a combination order.
“MODEL STUDY” NO. 2
This booklet is a valuable and indispensable complement to the original model study booklet. Model Study No. 2 enables anyone equipped with phonograph and lecture recordings to carry on model studies on the seven latest recorded speeches by the Society’s president, from the speech “Safety” in 1937 down to and including “Government and Peace” in 1939. The booklet also contains a Reference Index very convenient in locating the desired lecture record on any particular subject of vital interest today. There are 64 pages of material, enclosed in a sturdy cover, and
the booklet will be supplied on your contribution of 5c a copy Those in organized companies should send in their orders in combination through the local company servant.
1940 CALENDAR
The 1940 Calendar sets out the text for the new calendar year, to wit: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation ” (Psalm 13 5) A beautiful color illustration, specially painted, harmonizes with the theme of the text, and its portrayal of what is impending will gladden your heart. Neat calendar pads indicate the special Testimony Periods of the year and the special lines of endeavor of the other months of activity in publishing the Kingdom gospel Calendars, of which the supply is limited, will be sent on order, remittance accompanying, at 25c each, or $1 00 for five to one address. Companies will please order through their company servants
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 4: “Rejoice in His Salvation,” fl 1-24 inclusive, The Watchtower January 1, 1940
Week of February 11: “Rejoice in His Salvation,” fl 25-47 inclusive, The Watchtower January 1, 1940
FIELD EXPERIENCES
A LANCASHIRE (ENGLAND) PIONEER REPORTS:
“I called back on a man last Tuesday evening and ran ‘Government and Peace’. He was so thrilled he was beside himself with joy and couldn’t thank me enough. He fed me on buttered scones and tea and sent me home laden with home-grown tomatoes and gorgeous bronze and golden chrysanthemums. I called the next morning to pick up my phonograph and the man said he would remember that message to his dying day and couldn’t go to sleep till three o’clock in the morning for going over the message. It was the grandest speech he had ever heard: ‘Good old man, it’s the truth, but God’s putting the words on thee mouth’; ‘My word the parsons and priests would murder him if they could’; 'My word, lass, I am glad you’ve come and opened my eyes before it’s too late, but it’s God who’s directed you here and I’m right glad ; you’ve made me happy.’ Last night he heard ‘Victory’ and nearly went mad with joy and gratitude to Jehovah for sending me to him. I had to go home again weighed down with flowers, vases and tomatoes, and tonight he has been to the Salvation study and is coming to the Kingdom hall Sunday. He has been a Sunday-school teacher for over twenty years, but now has finished with religion for ever. Saturday morning I worked territory witnessed only on a fortnight ago and placed 3 books and 40 booklets, and appointments to play ‘Government and Peace’ at three homes. This is proof that people are thinking and taking an interest in the truth. Saturday afternoon I was working in some poor property and could quite distinctly hear a heated discussion on religion and Jehovah’s witnesses. A man was telling the household that religion was a snare and a racket and Judge Rutherford was the only man on earth telling the truth to the world. Imagine their surprise when I knocked on the door, presenting the message, and the man giving out the truth said: ‘Come in, you’re just the person we want here. Now tell ’em what we stand for and tell ’em where religion’s a racket.’ I recognized him to be one with whom I placed booklets. He has never attended a meeting and yet was standing up for the truth.”
PHONOGRAPH IN NEW YORK CITY BUSINESS TERRITORY
“In the nation’s greatest city a pioneer (a deaf-mute) now uses the doorstep method of setting up his phonograph with excellent results. Recently during three hours of actual door-to-door witnessing in the business section he had 12 setups, an attendance of 30, placing 24 booklets and 2 books. ‘Jehovah certainly is blessing the doorstep setups,’ he writes. ‘I mostly work business and put it up on everything; have from 12 to 18 setups daily.’ ”
RE A 23-YEAR-OLD CANADIAN-BORN CHINESE
“Recently I made a back-call on Mr. Suey. He was glad to see us. ‘Oh,’ he said, ‘I have saved up some money. Have you a phonograph for me!’ I replied: ‘Sure, you can have mine at a reduction. I have used it six months, also the records.’ Mr. Suey said: ‘You know I am studying to go out in the Lord’s work, as soon as my father comes here [Alberta] on this farm. Next fall I can go. I have some money left. Can I get The Watchtower and Consolationf' Mr Suey added: ‘I have been lending my books out and need some more. Give me two Salvation, one Jehovah, four booklets, and I am glad you come. Now I can visit my neighbors and the records will explain.’ ”
OCTOGENARIANS NOT ON THE RETIRED LIST
Maryland: “On invitation of our daughter, Mother and I came up here for the summer. After consultation with the local servant, I went to work witnessing. Results: Day'-(mostly September and October), 57; hours, 156; books 112; booklets, 464. September 10, while here, celebrated my 80th birthday anniversary. Have six married sons and daughters, 16 grandchildren, and two great-grandchildren Had four or five successful information marches, followed by transcription lectures at the Moose Hall.”
Cleveland, Ohio: “Pardon me for intruding on your precious time, but I just can’t help letting you know hov much I appreciate the phonograph which came to me on the morning after the 8th, which was my 80th birthday. It was indeed a birthday gift from Jehovah, to be used in proclaiming his name. May grace and strength be given me to do with my might what my hands find to do.”
Pennsylvania (Zone4) : “A publisher 81 years of age consistently leads the entire company in hours in the field He always exceeds his monthly quota of 60 hours, and has mon than once put in nearly 100 hours in the field. Recently, while engaging in an information march with others a vicious and incompetent police chief forcefully removed the signs from this elderly marcher’s person, but, strong in the Lord, this marcher immediately returned to the soundcar where extra placards were kept, put on another set, and went whistling down the street. Incidentally, the high, handed police chief is now under arrest charged with mail cious abuse of process, while the faithful elderly pubhshci continues to push the battle to the gate.”
WELSH RELIGIONIST TURNS TO CHRISTIANITY
"About two months ago (Port Talbot) I called on a Catholic woman. She was so nasty she began shouting and causing an uproar and told me to ‘go to hell’; but I left her with a Face the Facts booklet. I called last week again on her. She asked me if I was the woman who was there last time, and I said, Yes. She then told me how sorry she was and did I have more books to give her more light So I left her with Enemies and Riches, and now I have to call back with the phonograph records.”
IN MORMON TERRITORY, ’WAY OUT IN UTAH
“I’m now working in territory which was covered thie< weeks ago, and in sixteen hours, during three days, placed 22 bound books and 36 booklets, with 48 sound attendance Having started at last to really use the doorstep setup, 1 find it much more effective to invite them to listen rather than to ask if I may play or if they wish to listen, as I used to do. Even though we may feel a little embarrassed at first, it always proves the best course to follow every single detail of the instructions we receive from the Governor of The Theocracy. Many things have happened in the course of these few months that I have been a pioneer which prove beyond a doubt that I have chosen the right course and that Jehovah has protected me. These Mormons—they want to convert me! One said today (measuring about two inches with her finger and thumb) : ‘Well, you have a little of the truth.’ The varnish is sure hard to peel off from these Mormons! I think I need a chisel.”
16
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., (J. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Ambuboh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150, Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario. Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Stratbfleld. N. S. W , Australia
South African ..............   Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required b> the postal regulations
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of addre-s, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (earning notice of expiration) will be sent ttilh the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N.Y, under the Act of March 3, 1819.
“SALVATION” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The midwinter Testimony Period is called “Salvation” and occupies the entire month of February. Thus the testimony for Jehovah’s name and his means of salvation, The Theocracy, will continue despite the season of the year. All Theocratic publishers will offer to the public first a combination of the book Salvation and the booklet Government and Peace, on a contribution of 25c. As in the daily march around Jericho, portable phonographs will not be left in idleness, but will be used from house to house to run the latest recording announcing the book Salvation. The Informant will offer J'ou more detailed information concerning the Period. At this notice you will prepare to do your part during this Testimony, reporting at the end of the month’s campaign how effective your intensive activities have been.
MEMORIAL
Saturday, March 23, after six p.m., is the date for 1940 for the yearly feast in celebration of Jehovah’s name and to the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each company, therefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 23, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. If there is no
competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately preceding the partaking of the emblems, that short article appearing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled before partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. Jesus and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
YEARBOOK FOR 1940
The 1940 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses presents a comprehensive report of the past year's world-wide activities of these publishers of Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ. You will marvel at the most interesting and most successful service year yet, even with opposition increasing, nations being swallowed up by dictators, and wartime restrictions being generally applied, curtailing
(Continued on page 31)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	January 15, 1940	No
REPROACH OF MEN
“Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness,
proach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revihngs!1—Isa. 51:7.
the people in whose heart is my laiv; fear ye not the re
to their fellow companions: “Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse ‘ind worse, deceiving, and being deceived.” (2 Tun 3:12,13) The companions of the anointed now p: r-ticipate in suffering with the remnant. They suffer because of their love for righteousness and because of pointing the people to the clear distinction between religion and Christianity.
4 Those who are in a covenant with Almighty God to do his will know that bitter opposition from worldly powers is now just what is to be expected. To his faithful followers Christ Jesus the King says: “And ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake " (Matt. 24: 9) This declaration of the Lord is proved by all the physical facts that have come to pass in recent years. Those words of Jesus make clear the reason for such hatred on the part of the ruling elements of the nations of earth. That hatred is not because Jehovah’s witnesses and companions are bad or that they do anything to interfere with the property or personal rights of the people, or that the\ are doing anything against the general welfare of the people; but that hatred is because his witnesses and companions boldly and fearlessly proclaim tin name of Jehovah God and his King, Christ Jesus The Lord Jesus was hated and persecuted when lie was on the earth. He suffered because he was righteous, because he was his Father’s representative and proclaimed the name of Jehovah God and of his coming kingdom. The witnesses for the King now on the earth, and who are therefore enjoying a like privilege of announcing Jehovah’s name, are also privileged to fill up some of the sufferings Christ Jesus left behind for the benefit of those who should be associated with him in his righteous government. Says the apostle, who suffered for His name's sake: “Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church.” (Col. 1: 24) The Jonadabs now suffer with the remnant because they are companions and fellow workers of such and are engaged in God’s “strange work”.—Heb. 10: 33.
JEHOVAH addresses those who desire and who love righteousness, and who suffer reproaches because they are diligent in seeking righteousness.
For their encouragement and comfort he says: “Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revil-ings.” (Isa. 51:7) Primarily those words were addressed to God’s typical people. Later they apply to all consecrated persons, whether of the anointed or of the “other sheep”. For centuries the Devil has reproached the name of Jehovah, and every creature who has been diligent in serving God has been the object of Satan’s attack. Now Jehovah’s King has been enthroned and has begun his reign and the Devil is exceedingly angry in putting forth his strenuous efforts to turn all persons away from God.
2	The Theocracy is the hope of man. There is no other hope. For this hope and the publication of the Theocracy Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions stand accused before all nations of the earth. They welcome such opposition and the reproach that is heaped upon them. They rejoice to have some part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, well knowing that the Theocratic Government soon shall triumph and that those who stand firmly on the side of the great Ttieocrat and his King will share in that victory and continue forever in the joy of the Lord.
3	The world-wide opposition to the Theocratic Government does not cause discouragement of those who faithfully proclaim the name of the Most High. That their courage may be strong and their hopes continue bright, the Lord feeds his people upon the spiritual food that is convenient for them. The anointed have been privileged for some time to have such spiritual sustenance, and now those who will form the “great multitude” (Rev. 7: 9-17) are hastening to the tower of refuge, the great organization of Jehovah, and it is the duty and privilege of the remnant to give to them all possible aid that they may be enabled to understand what is the will of Almighty God concerning them. It is the desire and endeavor of the Watchtower publications to render all possible aid
19
20
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
' No religious institution nor any of the members thereof suffer as did Christ Jesus and for the same reason. No religious system or institution or the members thereof proclaim the name of Jehovah, the great Theocrat, and announce his Theocratic Government by Christ the King. As to The Theocracy, the religious institutions are either silently or openly in opposition; therefore they do not and can not suffer for righteousness’ sake and the proclamation of the name of Jehovah God. There appears, however, to be a large number of persons held within the religious systems because they have been' ignorant of the truth, and which persons have a desire for righteousness, and it is to such honest and sincere persons of good will toward God that Jehovah’s witnesses and companions are now rendering aid and comfort, that such people may learn the right way, know that Jehovah is the Almighty and the great Theocrat, and that his King, Christ Jesus, is the Redeemer and the One who administers life everlasting to those who obey the laws of the Almighty God. It is the time for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and this witness must be given just before that complete vindication. God has so ordained it, and so it shall be.—Ex. 9: 16.
UNSELFISH
6 The work in which Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions, the Lord’s “other sheep”, are engaged is done not for any selfish reason, and certainly not for any pecuniary gain or worldly honor that might come to them. Their work is done at the command of the Almighty God; and because they love him and rejoice in the opportunity to obey his commandments, they engage willingly in said work, regardless of opposition. They know that God is love, therefore wholly unselfish, and that everything he does is unselfishly done. They know that God is the fountain of life and that to him belongs salvation, and their great desire is for his salvation and full approval. Jehovah’s witnesses are not carrying on a campaign to gain members to their ranks. They are not propagandists. They are not a sect or denomination. They are a company of men and women who have individually taken their stand on the side of the Lord and who jointly go forward in obedience to his commandment to publish the Theocratic Government and to make known to the sincere people of earth God’s gracious provision for man’s salvation. When they have obeyed the Lord’s commandment to tell the truth as long as the door of opportunity is left open, their responsibility ends, because as soon as the witness work is completed God will exercise his unlimited power in the vindication of his name. Then he will assign to his faithful servants other work to do. As they now go forward in publishing The Theocracy it is for those who hear the message to
elect to either serve God and live or reject the message, remain where they are, and suffer eternal death. (John 3: 36) The witnesses of Jehovah, having faithfully performed their commission and duty, will then rest content as to whatever may be the result. They ask no favors of men, but ask only to be given a respectful hearing as the representatives of the Lord. They know that the will of God shall be accomplished, and with that they are wholly content.
REPROACHES
’ Few persons understand just why this company of Christian people called “Jehovah’s witnesses’’ and “companions” are diligent in their efforts to obey the commandments of Almighty God. Likewise few persons understand just why Jehovah’s witnesses and companions should be so greatly reproached by religionists. That some of open mind may be enabled to understand the true reason, the Scriptural evidence is published in The Watchtower. The religious opponents and those who represent them in any and all capacities attempt to belittle the efforts of Jehovah’s witnesses and to class them as a sect of religionists, dub them as fanatics, and wholly misrepresent the work they are undertaking. Let those who desire to know the truth consider carefully what follows.
’ God, “whose name alone is JEHOVAH,” is the Creator of heaven and earth. (Ps. 83:18) To him belong heaven and earth and the fullness thereof. (Ps. 24:1) He created the earth and then made man the perfect creature to inhabit the earth and to fill the earth with a righteous offspring. (Isa. 45:12,18; Gen. 1:28; 2:7) God created Lucifer and assigned him to the position of overseer or overlord of earth's creation. It was the solemn duty of Lucifer to work in harmony with the Creator and honor Jehovah’s name, but that he did not. Lucifer coveted the place and the honor which all creation gave to the great Creator, and he set about to turn all creatures against the great Creator. He is therefore designated in the Scriptures as the covetous one. (Jer. 51: 13) It is written in the Scriptures that Lucifer said in his heart, that is, to himself: “For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north; I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High.”—Isa. 14:13,14.
’ Lucifer concluded that he could accomplish his unholy and unrighteous purpose and desire for honor and praise by protesting against Jehovah God’s manner of carrying forward his purpose. Protest, therefore, was a slander against the name of the Most High. He set about to poison the mind of the perfect man against God, and for this reason he resorted to
January 15, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER
21
lies that the great name and word of the Almighty God might be reproached and defamed. Lucifer expected that his action against God would work out to his own advancement and elevation. He therefore lied to the first man and woman and induced them to disobey God's law and to bring upon themselves death. (Gen. 3:1-5; 2:17; 3:16,17) Because of his wrongful act in yielding to the great enemy Lucifer, Adam was sentenced to death, driven from Eden into the unfinished earth, degraded and cursed and subjected to a lingering death. Adam was unable to carry out the divine command to multiply and fill the earth with a righteous people, and his inability was due to his own wrongful act. All his offspring inherited death, and therefore it is written: “Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.”—Rom. 5:12.
10	Following the rebellion and opposition to God by Lucifer the name of that wicked one was changed, and from that time onward to this day he has been known by the four names, to wit, Satan, Serpent, Dragon, and Devil. (Rev. 20:1,2) Lucifer’s making the attempt to exalt himself and exalting himself brought about his downfall, and God debased him and brought him low, and ever since Satan is the complete expression of wickedness, and in due time shall suffer complete destruction. Of that wicked one it is written: Wet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; that made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners? All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under feet. Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people; the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.”—Isa. 14:15-20.
I! Further describing the Devil it is written in God’s Record, the Bible: “Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so; thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned; therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God; and I will destroy thee, 0 covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. Thine
heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou bast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness; I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee. Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic; therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee; and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee. All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more.”—Ezek. 28:14-19.
12	By way of a parenthetical statement here, it will be noted that, in all the years that have gone by, men who have desired to exalt themselves to a high position and to make for themselves a reputation that they might receive the praise of others have followed Satan’s lead by protesting against that which is right and by resorting to acts of wickedness, thereby hoping to accomplish their own selfish purpose. In every instance it will be noted, as the Scriptures and the facts are examined, that he who attempts to exalt himself at the expense of others is certain to be debased by the great One who promotes or puts down creatures. Few men have learned this unchangeable rule set forth in the Scriptures. Those who have appreciated the meaning of such rule have delighted themselves in Jehovah God and rejoiced to exalt his name. Such persons have appreciated the words written in the Scriptures, to wit: “For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south: but God is the judge; he putteth down one, and setteth up another.”—Ps. 75: 6,7.
15	The prophet then puts in the mouth of those who love righteousness these words: “But I will declare for ever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.” (Ps. 75:9) The faithful remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses now on earth and their companions, the Jona-dabs, know that every good and perfect thing comes from Jehovah God, and they delight to do his will, and consequently they look forward with hope and rejoicing in the salvation that he will bring to them.
14	Turning back now to the rebellion in Eden: Be it noted that the Devil had succeeded in causing the death of the man Adam, God’s perfect creature, and then the Devil, filled with pride and malicious hatred, further defied the Almighty God by declaring that he, the Devil, could cause any and all men to curse God to his face and that no man would remain true and faithful to Jehovah God and therefore God is not the supreme one. (Job 2: 5) That raised the question of who is all-powerful, Satan the Devil or Jehovah God. All creation would look on and see what would be the result, and this creation included the angelic host of heaven. That all creation might in due time know that Jehovah God is the Almighty
22
5He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn. X. Y.
One and that Satan is the chief one of the wicked, Jehovah God accepted the challenge of the Devil and permitted him to put forth his best endeavors to prove his wicked challenge. Although Satan had been sentenced to death, Jehovah God delayed the execution of that sentence of death until such time as the Devil might have full and fair opportunity to prove his boast or demonstrate the fallacy of his challenge. For this reason God said to the Devil, addressing him under the symbol of an earthly ruler, to wit: ‘‘But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.”—Ex. 9:16, Leeser.
15	This emphatic declaration of the Almighty God proves that in God’s due time his own name shall be proclaimed throughout all the earth and that this must be done immediately preceding the time when Jehovah God will exercise or demonstrate his unlimited power against Satan and all his cohorts. It also follows from that declaration of Jehovah that everyone who faithfully proclaims the name of the great Theocrat and his King and government would be a target against which Satan would launch his great opposition and that in this Satan would be joined by all of his wicked hosts. All the facts prove that this conclusion is correct even as the prophetic Scriptures have pointed out.
18	Following the rebellion of Satan Jehovah God announced his purpose to produce a royal seed, that is, a great governing power, which shall act under Jehovah’s command and destroy Satan and all his power. In symbolic phrase the Almighty God said to Satan: “And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.” —Gen. 3:15.
17	The “woman” mentioned here is a symbol under which is foretold God’s universal organization that brings forth “the seed” that will accomplish his purpose, and “the seed” of that universal organization is the great and mighty King of the Theocratic Government, which shall rule the world in righteousness. That seed, the King of The Theocracy, is Christ Jesus. (Isa. 54:1-13; Gal. 4:26,29) A long period of time elapsed during which the Devil continued to debauch humankind and to bring reproach after reproach upon the name of the Most High. Then God sent to earth his beloved Son Jesus to be a witness to the truth concerning Jehovah’s name and his purpose. (John 18:37) Jesus proved himself faithful to Jehovah, and justly received the title “The Faithful and True Witness”. (Rev. 1:5; 3:14; 19:11) Every one who is a faithful follower of Christ Jesus, and who is therefore a Christian, must be a witness to the name of Jehovah God.
THEOCRACY
18	The Great Theocrat is Jehovah God. the Almighty One. The Theocracy is the government of Jehovah God, which shall rule the world in righteousness to the praise and honor of Jehovah's name and which shall fully vindicate his name. The King of that great theocracy, or the one ruling directly under the command of the great Theocrat, is Christ Jesus. For his own name’s sake Jehovah God sent Jesus to earth. The primary purpose of the coming of Jesus was to vindicate Jehovah's name, and it is by and through the Kingdom or Theocratic Government that such vindication shall be accomplished. The secondary purpose of the coming of Christ Jesus to the earth and the laying down of his life was that the ransom or purchase price might be provided to redeem and deliver men who would devote themselves entirely to God and his Theocratic Government. (Matt. 20:28; John 3:16; Rom. 6:23) Jesu> came in the name of his Father. His Father's name was put upon him, and all that reproached Jehovah also hated Christ Jesus for his name’s sake. And even to this day all who faithfully represent the Lord Jesus are hated for his name’s sake, and winch hatred against them is manifested in the worst manner b\ hypocritical religionists.
19	The Theocracy is “the kingdom of heaven" because it is the government of Jehovah God operated from heaven by his duly appointed representative. Christ Jesus the King. At the time of his baptism at the Jordan Jesus was anointed by Jehovah as King. (Matt. 3:16) Then Jesus began his work of bearing witness to the name of Jehovah God. His very first discourse, and each one thereafter, magnified Jeho vah’s name. The first time he spoke to others, follow ing his anointing, he said: “The kingdom of heaven is at hand.” (Matt. 4: 17) That was literally true foi the reason that Jesus, the King, was then and there speaking to those who heard him. For three and one-half years thereafter Jesus went about amongst the people, visiting them from house to house in the towns and villages, telling them the truth concerning his Father, Jehovah God, and of his kingdom. At all times he emphasized the paramount importance of the kingdom, which is The Theocracy, and he specifically commanded his followers to always pray to Jehovah God: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven."—Matt. 6: 10.
10 Jesus made known to his followers that others should be associated with him in his kingdom am! all of these must meet a specific test. (Luke 22: 28-30) He told his followers that all who would be associated with him must be witnesses to Jehovah’s name and to his great government. (Matt. 28:19; Luke 12:32) A condition precedent to being in the kingdom with Christ Jesus was then announced: that they must
J ANU ABY 15, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
23
suffer with him the reproaches that had fallen upon him, and which reproaches would come by reason of his name and the name of his Father. Jesus was “the faithful and true witness” of Jehovah God and maintained that faithfulness at all times while enduring all manner of opposition, even submitting to an ignominious death as if he was a sinner. He made himself of no reputation. He did not seek honor at the hands of men. He never at any time attempted to exalt himself. In the eyes of the ruling element of the world he “had a bad character”, although he was the only true and perfect character that has ever walked this earth. His faithfulness to God in the performance of his assigned duty merited and brought to him God's approval, and concerning him it is written : “But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” (Phil. 2: 7-11) “Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.’’—Heb. 5: 8, 9.
HIS FAITHFULNESS
21	Faithfulness of the Lord Jesus even unto death proved that Satan is a liar and that Jehovah God is true and the Almighty One. God permitted the lifeblood of Christ Jesus to be poured out upon the earth and accepted the same as the purchase price for sinful men who repent, believe, and then faithfully obey and serve Jehovah God. Jehovah God then raised Jesus out of death. Jesus died as a man; he was raised from death as the immortal spirit creature. His resurrection was complete proof of the supremacy of the Almighty God and was Jesus’ reward for faithfulness. The death and resurrection of Christ Jesus make it possible for men who have been born in sin and shapen in iniquity to meet the requirements that the Lord has placed before them and to be delivered from sin and become servants of Jehovah God and receive from him through Christ Jesus the eternal blessing of life everlasting. These mighty, undeniable truths Christians know, and they delight to be permitted to be in a class with Christ Jesus as witnesses to the name of the Most High.
OPPOSITION
22	In opposition to God, and to further reproach the name of Jehovah, the Devil tried to bring about the
death of the babe Jesus, but failed. (Matt. 2:12-17) From the very hour when Jesus was anointed to be the King the Devil tried to destroy Jesus. (Matt. 4:1-11) This the Devil did in his endeavor to carry out his wicked challenge to Jehovah and to further reproach the name of the Most High. During the three and one-half years that Jesus went about doing good, preaching and teaching the people of and concerning the kingdom of Jehovah, the Devil constantly reproached him and tried to kill him. Because of his love and zeal'for doing the will of Jehovah his Father, Jesus literally suffered and constantly bore reproach at the hands of the Devil and his agents for the sake of His Father’s name. It is therefore written concerning Jesus: “I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother’s children. For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.”—Ps. 69: 8, 9.
23	At the beginning of his earthly work God gave to Jesus twelve men as his disciples and companions who should walk with him, be taught by him, and under his direction teach and comfort others. All of that number except one stood the test of persecution and proved faithful to God and to their leader. That one exception was Judas Iscariot, who, because of his selfishness, fell away to the Devil and is designated in the Scriptures as a traitor, “the son of perdition,” and is used as a type foretelling a large class of persons who become unfaithful and betray those who are faithful to God and Christ Jesus, and who constitute the composite body known as “the man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” and which includes the unfaithful clergy and those more specifically mentioned as the “evil servant” class. The eleven faithful disciples of the Lord continued as long as they were on earth to preach Christ Jesus, the King, and to exalt the name of Jehovah and his great Theocratic Government. They at all times stressed the paramount importance of The Theocracy, and for their faithfulness they likewise were reproached and maligned by the Devil.
24	There was a man known as Saul of Tarsus, a lawyer of high repute amongst men, a zealot in the practice of “the Jews’ religion”, and a persecutor of the followers of Christ Jesus. He being sincere in his work, which the Lord knew, in due time the Lord opened his understanding to the truth. He then repented, turned about completely, and became a true follower and servant of Jesus Christ, and his name was changed from Saul to Paul, and the Lord Jesus Christ made him a special apostle and servant to the nations of earth aside from the Jews. This faithful apostle, a true, loyal and faithful Christian, wrote much of the Scriptures thereafter under the inspiration of the spirit of God. He was greatly persecuted
24
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y
by religionists, and in the face of all this persecution he said: ‘Through Jesus Christ we have access by faith unto the grace of God, and we stand and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God; and not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience ; and experience, hope; and hope maketh not ashamed: because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy spirit, which is given to us.’ (Rom. 5:1-5) Again, he wrote to his fellow Christians that they must not be pleasers of themselves, but should seek always to please God: “For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.” (Rom. 15: 3) Frequently he was arrested and haled before the courts for preaching the gospel without first obtaining a permit from some earthly power, and that same devilish rule still exists in all nations in the land today called “Christendom”, where constituted earthly authorities attempt by law to prohibit Christians from preaching the gospel without first obtaining a permit from a police officer.
DEFAMERS
25	All persons who have indulged in the reproach of Jehovah God, of Christ Jesus, and of the followers of Christ Jesus known as Jehovah’s witnesses, have been labeled by the Scriptures and have labeled themselves as the children or offspring of the Devil. It is certain that Satan has selected the means of bringing reproach upon Jehovah God and his servants that would best serve the Devil’s purpose. Following the flood Satan adopted religion as the means of thus reproaching God. He formed religious organizations and has ever since used religion as the chief means of reproaching God’s holy name. Satan first laid hold upon Nimrod and made of him a cruel slayer of beasts and of men; by which means Nimrod became famous amongst other men and was given the name and title of the mighty Nimrod “before [that is, superior to] the Lord”. (Gen. 10:9) Nimrod then set up a political organization with himself as dictator. He carried on wars of conquest against others. He put all the people in a state of fear of himself and his associates and led them into the Devil’s trap and caused them to indulge in the worship of himself and other devils. (Prov. 29:25) Satan, by means of religion, there began to turn men away from and against the Almighty God, and religion has ever been his means of reproaching God’s holy name.
29	When Nimrod died he was held up before the people as a great one who had been exalted to heaven, and the people were induced to worship the name of that wicked one. Thus the Devil not only organized but has perpetuated religion and has used it to carry out his wicked challenge to God and to defame his
holy name. It has been his most successful means of deceiving honest people. As other nations were formed following the organization of Babylon they too were induced to adopt and practice some kind of Devil worship or religion. To bring forth the “seed” and set up His typical theocratic government, to the end that some might be kept in the right and righteous way at the coming of the great King, Jehovah organized the faithful descendants of his friend Abraham into a nation, which nation is designated in the Scriptures as Israel. He also used that nation to make prophetic pictures or dramas foretelling his purpose of setting up the Theocratic Government. The nation of Israel was in fact a typical theocracy, organized to safeguard that people from the wicked influence of the Devil religion. God commanded that they should have nothing to do with those people or nations that practiced Devil worship. He assigned the Israelites to the land of Palestine. He gave to that people his law covenant and commanded that the) should be diligent to obey his law and be ready to serve him. He sent that people into the land of Palestine to take possession of it and to drive out the Devil worshipers who opposed the theocratic government and reproached Jehovah’s name. Therefore God said to his faithful people that not only should they have nothing to do with religion, but they should destroy those who practiced religion and who wrongfully held possession of their God-given lands: “And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them; neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee. The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire; thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein; for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.” (Deut. 7 :16, 25) God thus warned the Israelites that religion would ensnare them. (Judg. 2:2,3) Th ' Israelites fell under the influence of the Devil and adopted the Devil religion and therefore turned to the worshiping of idols and images, and merited and received punishment at Jehovah’s hand: “They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them: but were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works. And they served their idols; which were a snare unto them. Yea, the) sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.”—Ps. 106: 34-37.
27	Because the Israelites adopted and practiced religion God cast them away from him. When the Lord Jesus came to the Israelites he found the leaders among them, called “Pharisees”, and who constituted the clergy of that time, teaching the people religion and religious practices based upon the traditions or teachings of men. Jesus reproached them for it and
January 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
25
told them that they had made God’s law of none effect and had fallen away to the Devil: “Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying, Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders ? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread. But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? Ye hypocrites! well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”—Matt. 15:1-3,7-9.
28	Those religious leaders, the Pharisees, were the chief persecutors of Jesus, and the reproachers of Jehovah’s name. Although they claimed to be servants of God they were in fact the offspring of the Devil, because they had forsaken the commandments of God and adopted and practiced Devil worship. They were constantly reproaching the name of Jehovah God. Therefore Jesus said to them: “If ye were Abraham’s children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which 1 have heard of God; this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication; we have one Father, even God. Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech 1 even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it.’’—John 8: 39-44.
29	On another occasion Jesus told those same religious leaders that they were hypocrites and a generation of vipers, bent upon doing injury to everyone who was seeking to honor and serve Jehovah God. "But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto w’hited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your
fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of [gehenna] ?”—Matt. 23:13, 25, 27, 29, 31-33.
80	Mark this emphatically: that it was the religious men that reproached the name of God and Christ Jesus and that caused Jesus to be charged with all manner of wrongdoing and to be prosecuted and convicted of high treason and crucified as if he was a wicked creature. It was the religious clergy that tried to keep the people in ignorance of the fact that God had raised Jesus out of death, and they attempted to accomplish the same by bribing men with money and inducing them to commit perjury concerning the resurrection of the Lord. Why did they persecute Jesus and attempt to keep the people in ignorance of the truth concerning him? Because they were the dupes of Satan and did the bidding of Satan; in order that Satan might carry out his wicked challenge to Jehovah God and continue to reproach God’s holy name.
MARTYRS
81	The Devil saw’ to it that all the faithful prophets of God who prophesied concerning the coming Theocracy were cruelly persecuted. They suffered all manner of punishment, and many of them were foully murdered. In every instance the Devil used the religionists to accomplish his wicked work. At the eleventh chapter of Hebrews, written under inspiration of the holy spirit, Paul describes some of these faithful men. He had once been a religionist and now, having become a true Christian, could fully appreciate the condition and circumstances surrounding those faithful men about whom he wrote: “They w’ere stoned, they were sawn asunder, w’ere tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise; God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.” —Heb. 11: 37-40.
82	Those faithful men are held forth in the Scriptures as examples of faith and faithfulness to Jehovah God and to his Theocratic Government. “Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.”—Heb. 12:1.
88	The word “witnesses” used in this text is the same as the word rendered “martyrs”. Those faithful men by their very lifeblood bore testimony to the name of the Most High. Setting them forth as examples, the Scriptures record, for the benefit of
26
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. 1.
others who have followed as -witnesses of the Lord, these words, to wit: “Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.”—Heb. 12: 2, 3.
84	Religionists persecuted Jesus because he proclaimed the name and kingdom of Jehovah. Knowing that they would do likewise to all of Jehovah’s -witnesses, Jesus gave warning that they would have to suffer like reproach; and this warning is couched in these words of the Master: “If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the w’orld would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.” (John 15:18-20) That prophetic utterance of Christ Jesus has been carried out and fulfilled against all those who have been faithful in publishing the name of the Great Theocrat and his Theocratic Government and King. Among those faithful ones was the first martyr following the crucifixion of Jesus. It was that man Stephen, whom the religionists caused to be charged with the crime of sedition. They had him arrested and brought into court. They bribed witnesses to testify falsely against Stephen, and when he stood before the court, and spoke in his own behalf and, above all, to the name of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, the religionists rushed upon him and put him to death.—Acts 6: 9-15; 7: 54-60.
85	Saul of Tarsus, then a religionist, stood by and saw Stephen die because of his faithfulness to God. When he became a Christian that vision doubtless was often before his mind, and when Paul suffered for righteousness he delighted to be in the class in which Stephen was found as the follower of Jesus Christ. All the faithful apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ not only suffered reproach, but were persecuted by religionists to the very end. Saul of Tarsus persecuted many of the followers of Christ Jesus. When he learned', the truth of and concerning the Theocratic Government he immediately abandoned religion, became a Christian, and thereafter strongly contrasted religion and Christianity. He was a living witness to the name of Jehovah God and he died as a witness to the name of the Most High. At Galatians 1:1-16, in the ninth chapter of The Acts of the Apostles, and in the twenty-sixth chapter of The Acts of the Apostles, Paul the Christian shows the complete opposition of religion to Christianity. Per
secuted from one place to another, when he stood before others in Athens he plainly pointed out to them that religion is demonism. (Acts 17: 22, Dia-glott) These facts are mentioned here for the purpose of calling to the attention of others of good will that the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, the opposition to their witness work, is all due to the Devil and his cohorts and is indulged in for the purpose of carrying out Satan’s wicked challenge to Jehovah God, and to prevent, if possible, the setting up of his great Theocracy, and the vindication of God’s holy name.—Ps. 83: 4.
HIS COMING KINGDOM
86	Jesus specifically instructed his disciples that he must go away and that in God’s due time he would come again and assume his high office as King of the Theocratic Government: “Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father’s house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, 1 will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.”—John 14: 1-3.
87	He also warned his followers that the religionists would continue to persecute them, that they must expect this and firmly withstand the reproaches and persecution. “These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues; yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me.’’— John 16:1-3.
” His disciples inquired as to how they would know of the time of the coming of Christ Jesus and his kingdom, and he gave them evidence, which is prophetic, and which prophetic testimony began to have its fulfillment in A.D. 1914, marking the end of the uninterrupted rule of Satan in this world and the beginning of the reign of Christ Jesus the King.— Matt. 24: 3-46.
“CHRISTIAN RELIGION"
” Satan always resorts to lies and fraud to accomplish his purpose. He turned the nation of Israel away from their covenant with God by means of religion. After the death of the apostles religious organizations came into being, and that first religious organization soon labeled itself as “the Christian religion”. Other religious systems have done likewise. That one strong, mighty organization of religion is also called “The Roman Catholic Church” and is ruled by a few men designated “The Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority”. The work of those dictatorial religionists is carried on under the name
January 15, 1940
S5e WATCHTOWER.
27
of “Catholic Action”, which is another name for all kinds of fraud, chicanery, hypocrisy and political manipulation against the common welfare. That organization has blasphemed the name of Almighty God and the name of Christ Jesus as no other organization that ever existed. Holding itself out, and its leaders, as the representative of God and Christ, that organization at all times has been against the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus; not only against it, but claiming that men shall rule the world as the vicegerent of Christ, thus not only reproaching God’s name but denying his announced purpose of establishing the great Theocratic Government by Christ the King. To deceive the people, the Roman Catholic organization claims that God established his church upon the apostle Peter and that Peter was the first pope, and that other men have succeeded him as pope. This blasphemous statement Peter himself emphatically denies, pointing out that the church of God is built upon Christ Jesus, the Chief Corner Stone, and that all the faithful members thereof are designated as stones in that building. “Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby; if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded. Unto you therefore which believe he is precious; but unto them which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner, and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed: but ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light; which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God; which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.”—1 Pet. 2:1-10.
40 There is not one scintilla of evidence that supports the claim that Peter was a pope or that there has been a successor of Peter or that any pope that ever existed represented Jehovah God and His kingdom. By means of fraud and deception the Roman Catholic organization has brought the greatest reproach upon the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. Honest and sincere people have been led to believe that the pope represents Christ and
that the Catholic organization is God’s church; and thus the Devil has caused the blasphemy of God's name, and greater reproach to be heaped upon God's name than by any other means that he has employed.
“ Deceptive doctrines have been promulgated and are still taught by the Roman Catholic organization that lead the people into the Devil’s snare. Among such doctrines is that of “purgatory”. The Catholic organization claims that the dead are conscious in “purgatory17, suffering bodily pain and mental anguish, and that, by means of the prayers of priests on earth, such punishment may be shortened, and that if friends of the dead will contribute money for such so-called “prayers” the same will result to the benefit of the dead. Nothing could be farther removed from the truth than that, because the Scriptures uniformly declare that “the dead know not any thing’’, that they are unconscious, out of existence, waiting for the resurrection. By this fraudulent means of “purgatory” millions of money have been wrongfully extracted from the poor to build up the gigantic political organization that has oppressed the peoples of the various nations and reproached and defamed God’s holy name.
“ The Catholic organization through its Hierarchy leads the people directly into Satan’s trap, causing them to violate God’s specific command concerning images and the worship of the Devil. There never has been any other organization on earth that has deceived so many people and turned so many away from God and the Theocratic Government as that of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
48 And now let this be noted: The Catholic organization of authority, the Hierarchy, constitute the chief persecutors of all Christians now on the earth. Acting under the direction of the head of that organization, persecution against Jehovah’s witnesses is viciously and wickedly carried on in every country on the earth. Faithful men and women are cruelly persecuted, beaten, imprisoned, and some of them killed, because they publish the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. It is that religious organization that has induced the legislative bodies to enact laws for the specific purpose of punishing the witnesses for Jehovah’s Theocratic Government. That cruel religious organization has installed its representatives in all the municipal, political parts of the governments of earth. They enact ordinances or laws which forbid the preaching of the gospel of the Kingdom by going from house to house as did Jesus and his apostles, making this possible only upon condition that the ones who thus publish the gospel first obtain a permit from a police officer. They well know that any real Christian would not apply to any human authority for a permit to do what Almighty God has commanded him to do.
28
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, X. Y
Furthermore, they well know that if application were made for such a permit the police officer would deny it.
“ The Roman Catholic religious organization claims that that organization is in a covenant with hell, and frequently uses the expression, “The gates of hell shall not prevail against us.” By that they convince themselves that they are there to rule the world, and frequently say, “Catholic schemes never fail.” But note what Jehovah God has caused to be written about that Devil-made, religious organization. He has permitted them to go on in their wickedness, but makes it certain that in his due time he will avenge his people, vindicate his name, and completely wipe out that devilish religious organization. “Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves; therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion [Jehovah's kingdom, The Theocracy, with Christ Jesus the Chief Corner Stone (1 Peter 2:3-9)] for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation; he that believeth shall not make haste. Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place. And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.”—Isa. 28:15-18.
*5 Jehovah’s witnesses, by the grace of God, have proclaimed his message of truth, which message of truth exposes the fallacy of religious claims and show’s religion to be of the Devil. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy have long advocated religion amongst the governments, in the schools and elsewhere, until they have induced great political rulers to say, “What we need is more religion.” They have induced the big commercial institutions to say that “we must have more religion or else our government will fail”. But now’ mark the sudden change.
16 During the year that has just passed Jehovah’s witnesses, by a wide proclamation of the truth, have advertised to the world that religion is a snare and a racket, and that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority are the chief ones who set the snares and are the principal racketeers. Jehovah’s witnesses have not made this publication without authority, but have cited the Scriptures that prove beyond a doubt that religion originates with the Devil and is the Devil’s chief instrument. In order now to deceive the people further, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy suddenly changes its tactics. Consequently the public press throughout the earth for September, 1939, at
the request of Pope Pius XII, announced “a nation wide drive to enlist the aid of every American Catholic in a crusade for ‘Christianity’ ’’. Such is a further defamation of the name of God and Christ. Jehovah God has never authorized any creature or organization under the sun to launch or carry on a nationwide drive and a crusade for Christianity. On the contrary, God places his truth before the people in contrast to Satan’s wickedness and permits all to intelligently choose. Those who wish to remain in the Devil’s organization are not driven out; as it is written that those who believe and serve God shall live, and those who do not believe and serve God abide in death.—John 3:35, 36.
*' Amongst other things, that announcement for a nation-wide Catholic drive says: “Christianity is definitely on the defensive today.” That statement above quoted is absolutely foreign to the truth. Exactly the contrary is true. Christianity today is proclaiming to the world that the Kingdom, The Theocracy, is here, and that the only means of relief, deliverance and salvation for the people is by and through the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God. Chimtian-ity warns the people that within a short time Jehovah God, by Christ Jesus, will completely destroj all the governments and systems of this world, including the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Christianity never has to be on the defensive. Christ fights no defensive battles. He will lead in the great battle of Armageddon shortly, which will wipe out the enemy and completely vindicate Jehovah’s name.
“ The aforementioned “drive” is in fact a part ol “Catholic Action”, the purpose of which is to obtain money from the people and to further draw the people into the enemy’s hand that the American nation may be completely dominated and ruled by a dictator, even as almost all of Europe is now ruled That one of the purposes of the drive is to get money to I'm-ther put the people in jeopardy and to advance Catholic Action to grab control of America, note the following, which is quoted from that same announcement made at the request of the pope, to wit: “Formerly generous European countries can no longer contribute funds, which have been cut from 50 to 85 percent in some cases. As the Holy Father has said, the hope of the missions is in America now. This country’s Catholicism was the gift of Europe, and now is the time to pay the debt. . . . Every wage-earning American Catholic can afford one dollar to become a member of this Society for a year. Those who are more interested can acquire life membership or a family enrollment in a special membership. That is little enough to do on behalf of those men and women who are risking their lives daily in battle zones and in leper hospitals to defend and extend the cause of Christianity.”
THE WATCHTOWER.
29
January 15,1940
“ Mark how this will help them out. It is claimed that there are in excess of thirty million Catholics in America. One dollar from each one for a year’s membership would be a snug sum, and a life membership or a group membership would run into many, many millions. For what purpose? To enable Catholic Action to grab absolute control of the American government and rule it by a dictator, just as Nimrod did when Babylon was founded.
50 Mark this further quotation from the above: “This country’s Catholicism was the gift of Europe”; not a gift of Christ. If Catholicism were Christian it would be for The Theocracy. Instead it is a broken-down aristocracy of dictatorial organization, ruled by demagogues, thugs, and gangsters of Europe.
51 Mark furthermore that the above-quoted Catholic announced “drive” says: ‘This is little enough to be done in behalf of those who are defending Christianity by engaging in wars in Europe.’ In other words, Hitler the gangster is fighting the fight of Christianity. Nothing was ever farther from the truth than that statement, as every honest man knows.
31 No more evidence should be required than that above from the Catholic organization to prove that that and like religious systems and organizations are against the great Theocratic Government. The Theocracy will rest upon the shoulders of Christ Jesus. His is a government of righteousness, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority will have nothing to do with it.
31 Jehovah’s witnesses have no fight with human creatures, and certainly not because such creatures are Catholic. Their fight is against the devilish doctrines that have so long been used to deceive the people and to defame God’s holy name and to turn them into the Devil’s snare. Jehovah’s witnesses have no fight against any person because of what he believes or has been taught. The mission of Jehovah's witnesses is to publish the truth of God's Word of and concerning the great Theocrat and the King. It is the truth that enrages the Devil and his emissaries and causes them to fight against Jehovah’s witnesses. In support of this statement that it is the Devil and his emissaries that are fighting against Jehovah’s witnesses, mark the following: “For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.”—Eph. 6: 12.
3‘ Christ and his followers are against the demons ; Christianity is against demonism, and for the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Religion is the worship and service of the Devil and his associate demons. Mark the words of the Scriptures bearing upon this point: “And Paul standing in the midst of
the Areopagus, said, 'Athenians, I perceive that in all things you are extremely devoted to the worship of demons.’ ”—Acts 17 : 22, Diaglott.
" Religion is the chief means that puts fear into the minds of the people and leads them into the Devil’s snare. “Hell” and “purgatory” and indescribable suffering are held up before the ignorant people, and they are induced to hasten into the snare of the Devil, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is the chief instrument used in that devilish work. “The fear of man bringeth a snare; but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe.” (Prov. 29: 25) “Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men.”—Isa. 29:13.
“ Truly then, as stated, “religion is a snare and a racket,” employed wrongfully to ensnare the people and to collect money from them under false representations.
the truth necessary
” The word of Almighty God is set forth in the Bible, and that is the only safe guide for man. “Tin word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto path.” (Ps. 119:105) “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness ; that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.”—2 Tim. 3: 16, 17
“Jehovah’s witnesses are not campaigning to get joiners to any thing or any organization. They arc not commissioned to do such a work. Their work is purely to publish the truth, that men may know the right way to go. As followers of Christ Jesus they must publish the truth, and do so. (John 18:37) From the time that Jesus was on the earth in the flesh until now there have been a few persons who have searched the Scriptures that they might learn the truth, and such have looked forward to and hoped for the coming of Christ Jesus as he promised. Such persons have always been unpopular with religionists and have always been the object of persecution at the hands of religionists. In spite of such persecution and misrepresentation these faithful Christians have pursued their faithful endeavors to learn the truth and to make that known to others. It would not be reasonable to expect them to be in any other class than that class of ones persecuted as Jesus and the apostles were persecuted.
“Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions love righteousness and hate iniquity, and in the heart of each is written the law of God. Therefore they do not fear the reproach of men, neither do they fear the Devil and his host of wicked supporters. They fear
30
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn,\
Jehovah God. Seeing that Jehovah God has promised them life everlasting, they fear that they might come short of the performance of their covenant with Almighty God and therefore fail to receive that
which is promised. They delight to do Jehovah’s will, and with full confidence in him they continue to sing from the heart: ‘We shall rejoice in thy salvation.' —Ps. 13:5.
LETTERS
RESOLUTION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
As pioneer publishers in Wisconsin Zone 1, we adopt the followings resolution:
We give thanks to Jehovah, the Eternal King, for the privilege of being subject to his theocratic government now established on the earth We clearly recognize The Watchtower as the channel being used of Jehovah to provide the instruction and encouragement so vitally necessary to our spiritual well-being, and the Society as the visible organization being used by Christ Jesus to carry out Jehovah’s purposes in the earth. We rejoice that Jehovah has richly blessed you, Brother Rutherford, and has used and contmues to use you mightily because of your faith and obedience. Jehovah knows that your fearlessness in the face of the enemy and your zeal for the vindication of his name fill the hearts of his little ones with joy and cause them to resolve to do more to honor the name of the Most High.
We give thanks that the malicious charges circulated in this territory against you and against the Bethel family have been used by Jehovah to draw those more closely together whose hearts are set on his kingdom, and to cause them to resolve to be completely obedient and faithful to him. We clearly recognize that the charges made could not be intended to honor Jehovah’s name and that the purpose of Moyle, and other with his permission, in circulating such charges could only be to justify himself and to cause divisions among the brethren. Particularly are we thankful that, by Jehovah’s good grace, the Jonadabs so clearly see the issue, and, understanding this as a subtle attempt of the Devil to break the morale of the Lord’s people, quickly take their stand on the side of the great Theocracy.
We are thankful to you and to Jehovah for sending Brother Howlett to visit the various companies in this territory with proper information. His visits have nipped m the bud the attempt to disturb the consecrated and have been a stimulus to all the lovers of righteousness We realize that Armageddon is near and we resolve to “press the battle to the gate” with greater energy. We resolve to continue to follow organization instructions and to co-operate with whoever the Lord directs shall be sent to this territory to represent the Society.
With Christian love from your brother and sister in Kingdom service,
Reginald A. Bourne
Mrs. Reginald Bourne
JEHOVAH DISTINGUISHES HIS ORGANIZATION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The recent light on the question of the “great multitude” has very definitely settled what to all in the past was a mystery, and since your further treatment of this doctrine in your world talk from London last year the mystery is solved and all can now clearly see the Lord’s gracious purpose to vindicate his word and name before the whole creation, visible and invisible, in accomplishing his original purpose through the “other sheep” m filling the earth with their offspring. How grand to know that the sidestepping of the Divine mandate by Lucifer and Adam will be completely compensated by the fidelity of the Righteous Ruler, Christ Jesus, operating in conjunction with the Jonadabs! Surely
one can exclaim with the revelator, ‘Great and marvellous ar< thy works, thou King of the nations; righteous and true are ah thy ways.’
This revelation proceeding from the temple and now lighten ing the whole world has placed the Lord’s people in a unique position and quite apart from every other organization on earth that claims to teach Divine truth, and this is more particularly noticed here in France.
For a number of years past an opposition movement, obviousiv borrowing much of its information from [Pastor] Russell's wnt-ings, has been very active in its work of propaganda in France and adjoining European countries, having made a wide distribution of its literature, in which it especially expounds the theory of the filling of the earth during the Millennium by the millions of resurrected dead, and many people influenced by its teachings have become its proselytes.
This particular society by its literature very generously places Jehovah’s witnesses as the “last of the sects” and does not hesitate to put itself forward in a modest way of its own as the great and only exponent of direct Divine revelation This and other similar schemes of opposition, more subtle even than the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, in that they are propagated under an apparent cloak of truth, have been the means of misleading many sincere people who have been quite unable to distinguish the Lord’s from other organizations. These latter, however, having always as their principal object the exaltation of the one controlling them (religion' adoration of the creature) and these are cases (as seen in the apostle’s admonition) where Satan transforms himself into an angel of light to deceive many; and in one’s daily experience in the kingdom service out here one has often felt the malignant effect of it and wondered how the Lord would unmask the evil
You can therefore well imagine that this great truth on Jehovah’s mandate has brought the whole matter to a fine issue and determines for ever which organization the Lord approves, and it is with a feeling of profound satisfaction and joy that one is now, more than ever, able to show the people where Zion is, and. perhaps equally important, where Zion’s enemies are, and I believe every pioneer and company witness in France shares the same sentiments.
In 1931 Jehovah placed his seal upon his people by gmng them his name, thus separating them from every other arrangement on earth; and now he further distinguishes and magnifies the organization which bears his name, by this marvelous conception of his word—the real meaning of his original mandate
It seems that the Lord is making all these things bare—one-after another (Paul says “the day shall declare it”)—and that it is his purpose to completely unmask every section of the enemy’s camp and at the same time bring Zion forth before the world so that all will be able to clearly recognize the only place where thej may get the Truth.—Isa. 19:19
Well, I felt I must write this line to express the particulai blessing the revelation of this doctrine (which the Lord in his wisdom has seen fit to keep sealed until “the day”) has brought to me individually, and many of the Lord’s people I have met out here have expressed the same joy. These great and progressive Biblical truths enable us to “drink of the brook” during the march and “lift up the head”—Ps. 110 7.
January 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
31
Our company at Marseille joins with me in sending you and all the brethren with you our love in the Lord. The Lord is continually bringing out some of the “other sheep” here, in spite of the opposition of the coalition of religions against the kingdom message.
In conclusion a word of appreciation for the courage and kindliness of dear Brother Harbeck and the brethren at Berne and Paris offices. We feel out here that we are a happy family in the Lord rejoicing together in our kingdom privileges—seeing “eye to eye” with all the watchmen of Zion
The Lord abundantly bless you, dear Brother Rutherford. Your brother by His grace,
Ellis Houghton (Pioneer), France.
APPRECIATION AND THANKS TO JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
I wish to express to you and to Jehovah my God my appreciation and thanks for the wonderful truth and further light I have received since reading the Watchtower publications.
Two years ago I was an agent for the British and Foreign Bible Society, and as my customers wanted teachers’ and reference Bibles and other translations, I was obliged to look elsewhere, as our firm stocked only a limited number and chiefly the King James version. Incidentally I heard that the Bibles I wanted could be procured locally and if I called on Jehovah’s witnesses, as they had a good supply on hand In calling on the pioneers living in our town I found they had just the identical Bibles I needed and furthermore they were remarkably cheap. From time to time I purchased quite a number of copies, and with every Bible I received one of your bound books, and in this way I nearly completed the whole set of sixteen. I was about finished reading the book Riches when our pastor, who, by the way, was Apostolic and claimed to be a prophet of God and also to speak in other tongues, ete., came to visit me and said the Lord had revealed to him that I was reading unsound literature and that I was to gather it all up and burn it straightway. Because of my refusal to do so he became very angry and, as a parting shot, said if I was not careful I would eventually land in the lunatic asylum. At that time quite a number of my friends in the church sent me threatening letters suggesting dreadful things would happen if I did not come baek to the fold. Furthermore, the seducing spirits had so confused my mind that I was at my wits’ end. I may say I held a responsible position in the church and many times I used to
speak with other tongues, and up till this time I used to spend hours in a neighboring haystack praying for further light, and it came, not the way I expected, but through reading your books and papers, and when I took my stand boldly, like the three Hebrew boys, then, and not till then, did the seducing spirits leave me
Truly “Christendom” is a snare and a wicked deception I have wasted forty years in the various churches looking for truth, and to my surprise and chagrin I found that religion and churchianity are a devilish racket. I now thank God for opening my eyes and bringing me out of prison. My one regret now is that I did not see the truth sooner. In my spare time I now engage in the witness work, especially- on Sundays, and, by God’s grace, during the last two years I have placed hundreds of pieces of literature; and one lady, on taking the book Enemies, and pamphlets, said she would like to give me a donation to the work; and on opening the envelope I found it contained £1-4-6. Furthermore, the back-call work is bringing results and we are now in touch with several families.
Your brother and fellow servant,
F. Smith, New Zealand.
CHURCH OF ROME BAAL WORSHIP
Dear Friends :
As you know, last week I paid a visit to your rooms (I came because I had promised to come to see you). It all seems so strange to me, that you, a strange company of people to me, should receive me in the spirit that I was received, that of friendship unheard of anywhere else I have been, for I was a stranger to you Your teaching was good and straight forward, i e., taken from the Bible, which I uphold as the Word of God I was learned in all the arts of the Roman faith, which I now reject and desire to become a witness and join you in the teachings of the Word of God In my humble capacity I desire to help in what I now know to be the Truth.
I cannot come to your sittings often, owing to my work, but whenever I can I will come if you will but accept me.
My friends, in fighting against the Church of Rome, which to me is Baal worship, you are up against a very strong organization. You will find much oppression.
Your sincere and faithful friend and servant of our Lord Jesus Christ,
William Galloway, England.
(Continued from page 18)
the Theocratic work in many countries. This report is prepared by the president of the Society. Additionally, there is a brief comment by the president on the text for the new calendar year, together with a text for each day of the year accompanied by an appropriate comment thereon as taken from recent issues of The Watchtower. The edition of the Yearbook is limited, and hence the regular contribution of bOc a copy is taken therefor. Order promptly, with remittance to cover. Each company will place their orders with the local company servant, that he may convenience this office by sending in a combination order.
“MODEL STUDY” NO. 2
This booklet is a valuable and indispensable complement to the original model study booklet. Model Study No. 2 enables anyone equipped with phonograph and lecture recordings to carry on model studies on the seven latest recorded speeches by the Society’s president, from the speech “Safety” m 1937 down to and including “Government and Peace” m 1939. The booklet also contains a Reference Index very convenient in locating the desired lecture record on any particular subject of vital interest today. There are 64 pages of material, enclosed in a sturdy cover, and
the booklet will be supplied on your contribution of 5c a copy Those in organized companies should send in tbeir orders m combination through the local company servant.
1940 CALENDAR
The 1940 Calendar sets out the text for the new calendar year, to wit: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” (Psalm 13’5) A beautiful color illustration, specially painted, harmonizes with the theme of the text, and its portrayal of what is impending will gladden your heart Neat calendar pads indicate the special Testimony Periods of the year and the special lines of endeavor of the other months of activity in publishing the Kingdom gospel Calendars, of which the supply is limited, will be sent on order, remittance accompanying, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five to one address. Companies will please order through their company servants.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 18: “Reproach of Men,”
1J 1-26 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1940
Week of February 25: “Reproach of Men,”
27-59 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1940
FIELD EXPERIENCES
CALLING THE RELIGIONISTS’ BLUFF (ZONE 28, SCOTLAND)
“To encourage the new publishers at Dumbarton, which also includes Clydebank, a newly formed unit of the Glasgow company, a few of us went over to work the Catholic territory where trouble is usually encountered. We soon found it in the way of threats and abusive language. Down one side of a street some came to their gates forbidding a publisher to enter, and, as usual, loudly proclaiming him a Communist, although one or two forgot their piece and said he was a Fascist and threatened him with violence if he dared to work the other side. Inviting two other publishers to work it with him, he started back, placing 4 Salvation with booklets and Consolation No. 516 right opposite (one Salvation with a Catholic who was disgusted with what she had seen), while those who had threatened were compelled to look on from their windows and see how well they had introduced the publisher to their neighbors. Forty Salvation and over 200 booklets were left in that small Catholic section alone. The following week, a rather frail and comparatively new publisher, having left a CatholicFascist leaflet in a door, saw a woman running after her down the street and calling to her to stop. Expecting trouble, she stood her ground. On approaching, the woman demanded if she had left the leaflet. When informed that such was the case, she said: ‘It’s the finest thing I have ever read. I was cooking my dinner when you put it in, and when I started to read it, I simply had to go right through it. What have you got?’ She took Salvation on the spot. So it’s turning on the heat that does it every time. It not only burns down the barriers for the honest-hearted to escape, but singes the ‘old lady’, and when she goes on the ramp she gets burnt some more.”
JONADAB’S ZEAL FOR PIONEER SERVICE
A North Dakota zone servant writes: "Enclosed you will find an application for pioneer service in behalf of one of good will. I and some pioneers recently made a call on his father, whose name I had in my files. Wallace was present most of the time that we were reproducing the lecture ‘Victory’ for the father. The following Sunday, when the publishers came to bring the father to a meeting to hear ‘Government and Peace’, he was unable to come. Wallace said, ‘I’ll go.’ The pioneers intended to work territory on the way back, intending to give Wallace the opportunity to accompany one of them. But when they came to where there were two homes, Wallace said: ‘You take that house, and I’ll take this one.’ That day he decided to become a pioneer. We took him home, he got his clothes, and joined the pioneers ‘without unhitching the traces of the oxen’. He has been witnessing for three days and does well. Am enclosing an order for a phonograph for him.”
ABOUT TWO ARKANSAS HIGH-SCHOOL GIRLS
“They took some booklets Government and Peace to school. They placed three booklets with their teachers and also did some house-to-house work after school hours. The next day one of the teachers said she had been informed by another teacher to stop the girls from placing the books in school, that it was ruining the churches. The oldest girl said: ‘Well, your churches are going down anyway.’ The next day the teacher wanted the book Salvation. So the girl placed one with her.”
MAYOR NOT INTIMIDATED BY THE PRIEST
"At the meeting in the town square at Doylestown, Ohio, a mob assembled and two men approached the sound-car and attempted to stop the lecture. Finding themselves frustrated in this, they stepped back and listened for a while and then approached one of the witnesses and said they were sorry for their action, that they were misinformed as to what this was. Shortly a group of four or five huskies approached the car, but were headed off by the first two men, who had attempted to stop the lecture, and after arguing awhile they also melted into the crowd. Later on a group of younger' persons started interrupting the meeting by blowing auto horns, throwing tomatoes and eggs, shooting off firecrackers, etc. Following the lecture, a small article appeared in the Doylestown paper stating permission had been withdrawn by the mayor for any further meetings. This was apparently an effort to bluff us out, since the mayor not only indicated his desire to have the meeting, but was willing to give us a written permit. The report was also circulated that ten carloads of American Legionnaires would be in town to break up the meeting. Yesterday, October 7, about 150 witnesses assembled. The men marched, the ladies worked the houses with handbills and books. Quite a goodly number of back-calls were obtained. A large crowd gathered to hear the lecture ‘Victory’, and the entire meeting was held without any interference whatsoever. This was due to splendid co-operation of the mayor and marshal . these officers certainly gave us the very best of co-operation Several times when young ruffians, undoubtedly urged on by the Catholic priest of the town, attempted to drown out the talk with auto horns, etc., the officers quickly moved to stop it. During the lecture the bells of the Catholic church started sounding clangorously, but they were so far away the clanging was ineffective. We were informed that at a council meeting during the week the mayor called in the Catholic priest and informed him that he, the mayor, had given his permission for the lecture to be held and he would see to it that order was maintained, and warned the priest not to start anything. We are not sure, but cannot help but wonder whether the mayor was not helped to this stand b\ the witness recently given in Hubbard.”
NEAR A SEMINARY IN TEXAS
"A kingdom publisher, witnessing around a Catholic incubator where bad eggs are hatched into priests, witnessed only 45 minutes, placing 2 bound books and 13 booklets, m five housek I stopped at a small white house on the way back to meet the car to replenish my supply of hailstones, and was received by a nice-appearing, well-built gentleman. In reply to his query as to what I wanted, I said. ‘I am one of Jehovah’s kingdom publishers.’ His quick answer was: ‘No religion for me!’ I stated that the reason I had come was to show him from the Bible that religion is a snare and a racket, that I had a short lecture by Judge Rutherford which I would like him to hear. ‘What did you say?’ ‘I said, Religion is a racket!’ ‘Boy, how well I know that! I am a highway patrolman here, and I know religion is a big racket. What did you say those booklets are worth ?’ 'Contribute 25c and take these six.’ ‘Here’s 50c, keep the change, and let me have your name and address, and I’ll let you know what I think of them. Be sure to stop here next time you are in town.’ ”
32

<?4
.'fl

■ vra* ?j£ais»iS?aE


a

&




w


Ochtower

"s /
•f*
ri

Announcing s
Jehovah’sKhigdom
<

if

Vol. LXI
Semimonthly
FEBRUARY 1, 1940
No. 3
J.


VMifaxa


AH' •
»■
CONTENTS
Power op the Demons (Parti) Origin of Demons .........
Noah’s Day ..............
Demons and Babylon ......
“Christendom” Is “Babylon” .. Existence of Demons......
Activities of the Wicked.
Israel Invaded
■
Demonism Forbidden
*
When Jehovah Was Alone.....
Letters ...................
Field Experiences .........
“Salvation” Testimony Period Memorial ..................
Yearbook tor 1940 .........
“Model Study” No. 2 .......
1940 Calendar..............
“Watchtower” Studies .......

35
35
36
37
38
38
40
40
.44
.. 46 .. 48 .. 34 ..34 ..34 .. 47 . 47 .. 47
CWTB. & T5.
: “YSAS i\JY YZtlj'l^i^VJ’}]-JSilOWVJlkVJA'zl
STie WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	•» Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54: T3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ In glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the'Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death ; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESL'S was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth" with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents In the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, gl.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Stratbdeld. N. S. W , Australia
South African .........-______Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The 'Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations
Notice to Subscribers • Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. 7., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“SALVATION” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The midwinter Testimony Period is called “Salvation” and occupies the entire month of February Thus the testimony for Jehovah’s name and his means of salvation, The Theocracy, will continue despite the season of the year. All Theocratic publishers will offer to the public first a combination of the book Salvation and the booklet Government and Peace, on a contribution of 25c. As in the daily march around Jencho, portable phonographs are not to be left in idleness, but are to be used from house to house to run the latest recording announcing the book Salvation. The Informant offers you more detailed information concerning the Period. Do your part during this Testimony, reporting at the end of the month’s campaign how effective your intensive activities have been.
MEMORIAL
Saturday, March 23, after six p.m., is the date for 1940 for the yearly feast in celebration of Jehovah’s name and to the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each company, therefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 23, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately
preceding the partaking of the emblems, that short article ap pearing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled before partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. Jesus and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
YEARBOOK FOR 1940
The 1940 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses presents a com prehensive report of the past year’s world-wide activities of these publishers of Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ. You will marvel at the most interesting and most successful service year yet, ever with opposition increasing, nations being swallowed up by dicta tors, and wartime restrictions being generally applied, curtailing the Theocratic work in many countries. This report is prepared by the president of the Society. Additionally, there is a brief (Continued on page 47)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	February 1, 1940	No 3
POWER OF THE DEMONS
PART 1
"But as the days of No'e were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be."—Matt. 24: 37.
TEHOVAH sent Jesus to the earth to proclaim the I truth. Jesus was diligent in telling the truth to J those who would hear him. All faithful followers of Christ Jesus must now be diligent in proclaiming the truth of God’s Word. The primary purpose of Jesus’ coming to earth was and is the vindication of Jehovah’s name by proclaiming the truth; and this is made certain by his words: “To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” (John 18: 37) All real Christians are required to follow in the lead of Christ Jesus, and they prove their integrity by so doing; as it is written: “For even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.” (1 Pet. 2: 21) It follows that the words of Jesus were uttered according to the will of Almighty God. “And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. And ye have not his word abiding in you; for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not.”—John 5 : 37, 38.
2	The Watchtower is devoted entirely to the publication of the truth of God’s Word, as set forth in the Scriptures. Ignorance of the impending danger hinders the helpless people from avoiding such great danger and finding a way of escape. All the people of the world are now in the gravest danger of the power of the demons. A knowledge of the truth will enable those who seek righteousness to find the only means of protection and the way of escape from the demons’ power. What is published here is solely for the purpose of rendering aid to those who desire to know, to learn and to abide by the truth, and the truth will enable them to find God’s provision for their protection and salvation from the disaster that is now impending upon the world and about to fall. It is not necessary nor is it the purpose of The Watchtoicer to hold up anyone to ridicule. The publication of the Scriptural truth, however, which discloses the cause of the great woes that are now upon the people, necessarily exposes the workers of iniq
uity and greatly enrages all such wicked ones, both spirit and human creatures. It is only the truth, set forth in the Bible, that will enable men to be free. (John 8: 32) Never has it been so important for human creatures on earth to know the truth, because this is “the last time”.—I John 2:18.
3	The disciples of Jesus propounded to him the important question as to wrhat conditions would be existent at the time of his second coming and the setting up of the great Theocracy. The answer of Jesus, uttered in response to the question propounded, is the truth, which truth was spoken by him with full authority from Jehovah God. Among the things uttered by Jesus in answer to the question propounded to him by his disciples he said: “And as it was in the days of No'e, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.”—Luke 17: 26.
4	In Noah’s day that which stood out in the most marked degree "was the influence and power of the demons over the peoples then on the earth. The words of Jesus prove that exactly a like condition would be existent at the time of his second coming and would prevail in the earth until God's due time to destroy the wicked. As shown by the Scriptures and the physical facts, Christ Jesus was enthroned as King in the year 1914. The Scriptural proof is that he came to the temple of God in 1918 and there began the assembling and judging of the consecrated ones Since that time the woes upon the people have continuously increased, and today the peoples of the earth are in the most deplorable condition that anyone on earth has ever known. These are penlou-times. The Watchtower now submits Scriptural testimony proving why such terrible conditions exist on the earth and then points out the provisions Jehovah God made for the protection and salvation from such terrors, and which protection can be had only by those who seek meekness and righteousness.
ORIGIN OF DEMONS
5	To blind a man concerning his danger makes it impossible for him to find protection from such danger until that blindness is removed. It therefore be-
35
36
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
hooves every person on earth to lay aside prejudice and preconceived opinions and earnestly seek the truth as recorded in God’s Word. In doing so it will be found that the chief amongst the demons is Satan, “that old serpent,” the Devil. When he was one of the trusted officers in the organization of Jehovah God his name was Lucifer, meaning “bright-shining one”, one with authority. He rebelled against God, and in that time of rebellion he became that wicked one who is known in the Scriptures as “the prince of the devils”, that is, the ruling one amongst the devils or demons. (Matt. 12:24) Jehovah changed his name to Dragon, Satan, Serpent, and Devil. A number of the angels joined Satan in his rebellion against God, and they also became demons, or wicked ones, or devils, and are designated in the Scriptures as “giants”, {Revised Version) “Nephilim”. (Gen. 6: 4) The name “Nephilim” means bullies or tyrants, who are willfully wicked and bent on doing mischief in defiance of God’s law. The Watchtower, issues of September 1 and 15, 1934, gives the detailed Scriptural proof concerning these demons and their operations in the days of Noah.
DEATH SENTENCE
’ The sentence of death was entered against Satan at the time of his rebellion, and which judgment of death appears at Ezekiel 28:18,19. Likewise those angels that joined with the Devil in rebellion against God were sentenced to death. The execution of such sentence or judgment of death, however, God deferred until his own due time to execute the same, at which time ‘all the wicked shall be destroyed’. (Pss. 145:20; 37:20) Satan challenged God to put on earth men that would maintain their integrity toward God, Satan at the time declaring that he could cause all men to curse God to His face. (Job 2:5) This boast of his was based upon the theory that he had influence and power over creation to turn them all against the Creator. In order to give Satan and his cohorts full opportunity to put forth their best endeavors to prove that wicked challenge, God deferred the execution of the judgment of death against them until his own due time to destroy all such wicked ones. Satan’s failure to make good his boastful challenge will prove to all creation the supremacy of Jehovah, the only source of life, the fountain of life, and the Giver of every good and perfect gift. In proof of His purpose in deferring the execution of the judgment of death against Satan, Jehovah said to him, as set forth in the Scriptures: ‘And for this cause have I permitted thee to remain, for to shew thee my power: and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.’ (Ex. 9:16, Leeser) The Scriptures prove that the suspension of the execution of the death sentence applied likewise to the
other rebels called “demons”; and concerning which it is written: “And those angels who kept not their own principality, but left their own habitation, he has kept in perpetual chains, under thick darkness, for the judgment of the great day.” (Jude 6, Diaglott) “For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.” —2 Pet. 2:4.
7	From the time of the rebellion and entering of judgment of death against those wicked ones God has permitted them to operate to the extent of their ability in support of Satan’s wicked challenge. God caused his servants to record in the Bible that, at the coming of the Lord Jesus and the setting up of the Theocratic Government with Jesus as King, the end of Satan’s rule without interference will come and then the wicked angels, together with Satan, shall be executed and no longer will the sentence of death be deferred. Concerning this it is written: “Whose judgment of old does not linger, and their destruction does not slumber.” (2 Pet. 2:3, Diag.) No longer then shall there be any suspension of judgment. The execution shall then take place. Since the time of entering the judgment or sentence against Satan and his wicked associates those wicked ones have acted against God in their endeavor to make good the challenge of the Devil, and to this end they have deceived the masses of the people upon the earth and turned them away from God, but at all times there have been some who have maintained their integrity toward Jehovah.
NOAH’S DAY
’ Noah was a servant of Almighty God and one who preached righteousness. (2 Pet. 2: 5) In Noah’s day the Devil and his other demons had exercised power and influence over mankind to such a degree that all the peoples of earth were corrupted, save Noah and his immediate family. “And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them: and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.”—Gen. 6: 5, 8,11,13.
’ Because of such wickedness and violence God sent the deluge of waters, or great flood, in which all humankind except Noah and his immediate family were destroyed. (Genesis chapters 6 and 7) The words of Jesus, quoted in the foregoing text (Matt. 24:37), together with the physical facts now well known, prove that exactly a like condition now exists
February 1,1940
3Ee WATCHTOWER
37
on the earth and that such condition becomes prominent immediately preceding the battle of the great day of God Almighty, in which battle the wicked ones will be executed.
DEMONS AND BABYLON
10	Follow now the Scriptural account of the activity of Satan and his horde of wicked demons from the day of Noah and the flood even to this present day. God’s Word, recorded in the Bible, is the truth and alone can enlighten men, showing them the right way. (Ps. 119:105; John 17 :17) God’s Word of truth must be the guide of all who will now find the right way and escape the impending disaster. “God is light, and in him [there] is no darkness at all.” (1 John 1: 5) “Light is sown for the righteous.” (Ps. 97:11) That means that one must seek righteousness in order to see and appreciate and benefit from the light of God’s Word. The enemies of God walk on in darkness, and Satan, the chief one of the devils or demons, is deceiving them and leading them in darkness, and all the demons associated with the Devil are in darkness and all are workers of iniquity or wickedness. They all work against Jehovah God and those who serve him. Mark, then, the means employed by the workers of iniquity to keep mankind in the darkness and away from God. The purpose of the Devil and his agents in keeping men blind is to bring about the destruction of mankind.
11	Within a short time after the flood Babylon was organized, with Nimrod as the earthly dictator. (Gen. 10:8-11) That was the first human government organized. From the Babylon stem all political governments of earth, past and present, have sprung. Elven though the original city of Babylon has disappeared, all governments on the earth bear the name of their mother, “Babylon,” and the Devil and his associate demons have exercised and continue to exercise influence, power and control over such governments. The organization of Babylon by Nimrod united religion, commerce and politics as the means of keeping the people in subjection and ruling them. Today all governments, including what is called “Christendom”, keep alive and carry on these same three elements composing Babylon, to wit, religion, commerce, and politics. The thousands of languages that originated at the^time of the confusion of the people on the plains of Shinar, in the land of Babylon, and spoken by the peoples in the different parts of the earth, have kept alive and have been under the control of these three elements, to wit, religion, politics, and commerce.
12	Babylon was demon-controlled, and the people worshiped demons. Its religion was demonism. That chief demon, Satan, from then till now claims Babylon (including all the governments of the earth) as
his own, and this Jesus did not deny, but admitted, when he was on the earth. (Matt. 4: 8, 9) The Scriptures show that organized religion originated with the Devil, who created and brought into action religion for the very purpose of turning mankind away from God. The Scriptures also clearly prove that all the nations, including so-called “Christendom” at the present time, constitute “Babylon” and all such practice a Devil religion because the Devil has deceived men and carried on his religious practice, even in the name of God and Christ. Concerning such Jehovah says through his prophet to the modern-day “Christendom” or “Babylon”: “Come down, and sit in the dust, 0 virgin daughter of Babylon; sit on the ground: there is no throne, 0 daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate. Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble: the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame; there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.”—Isa. 47 :1,12-14.
13	Satan, who is the arch demon, is designated in the Scriptures as “the god of this world” or “prince of this world”, meaning that the world is ruled and influenced by him. (2 Cor. 4:4; John 14:30) All governments of the earth constitute a part of Satan’s visible organization, and such are under the power and influence and control of the invisible demons; and few, if any, of them know this fact. The organization is united to Satan, like as a woman or wife is united to a man, and Satan’s organization is designated by the Scriptures under the symbol of an unclean woman, that is, a Devil-worshiping, sorcerypracticing woman. (Isa. 47: 1-15; Jer. chaps. 50 and 51; Rev. 17: 1-18) Satan’s world organization is generally known as “Babylon”, and all parts thereof practice some kind of religion brought into action by the Devil for the purpose of turning men away from the true and almighty God. For this reason the apostle and servant of Jesus Christ specifically warned the Christians, that is, the true followers of Christ Jesus, that this world is ruled and controlled by the demons and that all Christians must avoid religion, and informs them that their enemies, the demons, fight against all who serve God and Christ. “For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.”—Eph. 6:12.
:js
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
14	Before the confusion of human speech at the tower of Babel the name “Babylon” had the meaning of “gate of god’". That was a religious name, without designating to which god it referred, but which in fact had reference to the mimic god Satan, that is to say, the god or mighty invisible ruler of this wicked world. (2 Cor. 4:4) In Babylon religion took the most prominent part. Nimrod set up religion, with himself as the visible representative of god, that is, Satan, and demanded that the people worship him, Nimrod; and for this reason he became a “mighty one”, and it is written of him in the Scriptures: ‘Nimrod, the mighty one in the earth; the mighty hunter before [that is, superior to] the Lord Jehovah.’ (Gen. 10: 8-10) (See, for further consideration, McClintock & Strong’s Cyclopedia, under the subtitle “Nimrod”.)
13	Bible prophecy has much to say about Babylon and its destruction. The book of The Revelation tells that the destruction of Babylon is the coming event of surpassing interest both in heaven and in earth, the destruction of which refers to the complete fall of Satan’s organization, and not to the literal earth. The destruction of Babylon, as the Scriptures disclose, means the final end of the wicked world over which Satan and his demons have ruled, and which destruction will immediately follow the completion of the proclamation of Jehovah’s name and his kingdom, which work is now in progress in the earth. That witness -work is now designated God’s “strange work”, to be followed by God’s “act, his strange act”, —Isa. 28:21.
“CHRISTENDOM" IS “BABYLON”
16	The Scriptures disclose that the name “Serpent” is given to Satan the Devil to denote him as the arch deceiver, the one who practices fraud and deception upon mankind. One of his chief means of deception is to keep the people always in ignorance of the truth concerning his organization, and particularly concerning Babylon. The Scriptures definitely state that Babylon must be in existence at the end of Satan’s world, at which time it must be and shall be destroyed. “Babylon” is not merely “heathendom” and its religion, but also applies to “Christendom”; and it is in “Christendom” in particular that religion, commerce and politics unite to control the world. So-called “Christendom”, by means of fraud and deception, employs the name of Christ, and that name was so chosen and applied by the Devil for the manifest purpose of defrauding and deceiving the people and turning them away from God. “Christendom” is the highest development of and the most seductive form of Satan’s visible organization. The basic doctrine of ancient Babylon was the religious teaching or doctrine of “immortality”, first of the Devil and all his
demons, and also including all human souls that come under the control of demons. Such doctrine is contrary to and taught in defiance of the truth of Almighty God and his announced decree that the wicked shall be destroyed. That doctrine of human immortality was the first lie ever told, and which was told by Satan to deceive and mislead Adam and Eve (Gen. 3:4, 5) Such lie resulted in the death of man. thus making Satan both a liar and a murderer. “Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it." —John 8: 44.
17	That same Devil-religion doctrine of “immortality of all human souls” is today the fundamental doctrine or religious teaching of so-called “Christendom”, and which proves that “Christendom” is modern-day Babylon. That false doctrine of “human immortality” was obtained from the doctrine taught by the mother, or ancient Babylon, the Devil’s “woman” or organization, and the religious system of “Christendom” is plainly described in the Scriptures as “the daughter of Babylon”. (Rev. 17:5) By tins false doctrine religionists forming "Christendom'' have been deceived and are still being deceived into yielding to the influence and power of the demons and thus they lay themselves open to complete demon control. “Christendom,” so called, offers no protection whatever to the people against demonism, but rather leads the people right into the trap of Satan and his associate demons, and for this reason becomes one of the chief means of hurrying the nations of earth into destruction. The Devil practices all manner of fraud and deception. He organized the chief religious system on earth, under the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and falsely designates that as “the Christian religion”. Even the so-called “Brot estant” systems of religion claim to be opposed to Romanism, but, in fact, they all work together. The Devil then organizes and brings into action Communism, which openly fights the so-called “Christian religion” and also true Christianity. He uses atheists likewise to fight against those who serve God, and thus the Devil uses all these means and organizations to fight against God and against God’s faithful servants on the earth, and to deceive men.
EXISTENCE OF DEMONS
’* Modern-day religious leaders claim that the demons were all destroyed at the time of the flood, and hence by thus teaching they lure the people into the trap of the Devil. The people are thus deceived; and being deceived they easily become the victims of the Devil. The people are made to fear their reli
February 1,1940
SEe WATCHTOWER.
39
gious leaders, and the fear of man leads them into the Devil’s snare. All the scriptures bearing upon the point show beyond any question of doubt that the demons, otherwise designated in the Scriptures as "Nephilim” (Gen. 6:4, 7?.F.), were not destroyed at the time of the flood, but continued their operations after the flood and are operating with the Devil even to this very day. To avoid confusion it must be clearly observed that the “Nephilim”, or wicked demon giants, and “the spirits in prison” to which Jesus preached (1 Pet. 3:19,20) are entirely separate and distinct from each other. The Devil and the Nephilim deceived the spiritual creatures designated “the sons of God” arfd induced them to materialize as men and take human women for wives, and to raise an offspring by such union, and all such offspring were destroyed in the flood. (See The Watch-tower 1934, pages 263-266.) Those “sons of God”, who materialized as humans, were imprisoned by the Devil at the time of the flood. (See proof, The Watchtower 1934, page 275.) As to the Nephilim, the wicked spirit creatures or demons that joined Lucifer in his rebellion, they survived the flood and are yet alive, and are the ones that, together with the Devil, now exercise power and control over the people and the nations of the earth. That the Nephilim were not destroyed m the flood, but were degraded, together with the Devil, the chief demon, and have been permitted to continue actively in their endeavors to turn men against God, mark the Scriptural evidence that follows, to wit: “The Nephilim were in the earth in those days, and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them; the same were the mighty men that were of old, the men of renown.”—Gen. 6:4, A.R.V.
12	Another authoritative translation of this text reads: “The fallen ones were in the earth in those days and even afterwards when sons of God came in unto daughters of men, and they have borne to them, they are the heroes, who, from of old, are the men of name.” (Young’s) It was the offspring of the spirit creatures who materialized as men and of human women that were known in the earth as “men of renown”. The demons, “the fallen ones,” that is, the wicked spirit rebels and bullies, were in the earth then and afterward^, and it is the same wicked Nephilim or demons concerning which the following scripture is written, to wit: “For if God spared not angels when they sinned, but cast them down to hell [(Greek) Tartarus], and committed them to pits of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; and spared not the ancient world, but preserved Noah with seven others, a preacher of righteousness, when he brought a flood upon the world of the ungodly.”—2 Pet. 2:4,5, A.R.V.
20	The word Tartarus means a degraded condition, that is, a condition of darkness with no further hope or opportunity of understanding God’s purpose as revealed in the Scriptures and no hope of life everlasting. Being in darkness or degraded, they are wholly unable to understand God’s purpose concerning the great Theocratic Government. A similar condition is that of the “evil servant” class described by the Lord Jesus, and which persons are cast out from the light and into outer darkness. (Matt. 25 : 30; 13:41,42) As, soon as one turns against the organization of Jehovah God he becomes blind beyond any possible hope of recovery. Although denied the favor of light or understanding of God’s purpose, those wicked spirits or demons have been permitted to exist and to work with their chief, the Devil, to carry out his original wicked challenge made to Jehovah, to wit: That he, the Devil, could turn all men against God. This and other supporting scriptures which follow show that God has reserved or deferred the execution of the judgment of death against these wicked ones until Armageddon, the day of his vindication, and that until that time he keeps the wicked ones under surveillance and protects his faithful people from them. Jehovah declares his purpose at Armageddon to show the Devil and all his supporters that he, Jehovah God, is the Supreme One; and that day of final conclusion of the matter rapidly approaches.—Ex. 9:16.
21	The Devil himself, that is, the chief amongst the demons, is debased and degraded and beyond any possibility of recovery. He is totally depraved. He maintains his organization only by means of fraud, deception and other wicked machinations. That the Devil has and does maintain an organization which operates against God and against all who serve Jehovah God is shown by the Scriptures and the facts, beyond any doubt whatsoever. As an example, there appears in the prophecy (Dan. 2:30-34) the description of a terrible image, disclosing that the Devil is the head of a great and wicked organization, and that next to the Devil are princes or rulers subordinate to Satan the Devil. At Daniel 10: 13, 20 is the record concerning some of these demons designated under the titles “prince of Persia” and “prince of Grecia”. Among these princes is Gog, the demon officer next to Satan. (Ezek. 38:3,16) Next to the princes, according to the prophecy of Daniel, is another order or class of the wicked officers which “bear rule over all the earth”. (Dan. 2:39) This shows three separate divisions of Satan’s invisible organization: “principalities,” that is, the principal ruler exercising supremacy among the wicked ones; “powers,” that is, officers among the wicked ones that exercise power and control; and, third, “rulers,” invisible wicked creatures who have immediate power or in
40
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y
fluence over the nations of the earth under the supervision of the principal power, that is, the Devil. The apostle Paul, under inspiration and direction of Almighty God through Christ Jesus, recorded testimony concerning the foregoing wicked ones, and therefore his testimony is authoritative. Without doubt he knew of the wicked spirit creatures because he was familiar with the Scriptures written by the holy prophets of old. Note, then, that the apostle tells of these wicked invisible rulers that exercise power and control over the nations of the earth, and he divides them exactly as the prophet does, into three classes, to wit: “principalities,” “powers,” and “rulers”; all of which fight against God and against those who serve God. (Eph. 6:12) Also have this in mind: that the Devil has declared his purpose to be ‘dike the Most High”. (Isa. 14:13,14) He therefore sets up an organization, which is a mimic of Jehovah God’s invisible organization. Satan exalts himself to the position of supremacy like unto that of the Most High, Jehovah. Gog, the chief officer of Satan, takes the place similar to that occupied by Jesus Christ, the Prince or Ruler or King of the great Theocratic Government. The wicked angels, that have direct influence and power over the nations of the earth, are made to correspond to the angels of Christ Jesus that always serve him and are under his immediate command.—Matt. 25: 31.
22	As this invisible organization of the Lord Jehovah is provided with earthly representatives, so the Devil has provided his organization with earthly representatives, as the facts following will show. The purpose of the wicked organization of the Devil is to operate in defiance of Jehovah God in his attempt to turn all creation against Almighty God and plunge them into destruction.
ACTIVITIES OF THE WICKED
25	After the flood, or deluge of waters, which destroyed all flesh except Noah and his family, and after human creatures had multiplied and greatly increased in the earth, devil-worship, that is to say, Devil religion, was set up with Nimrod as the chief visible one, and religion was used or employed by the Devil through Nimrod to deceive the people and cause them to ‘worship the creature instead of the Creator’. (Rom. 1:25,30) That was the beginning of organized religion. (Gen. 10:8-10) Demon-worship, or devil religion, was thereafter adopted and practiced in Egypt, where “magicians”, or Devil agents, operated before the people in the practice of devil-worship to deceive both the ruler and the ruled of that land. “And it came to pass in the morning, that his [Pharaoh’s] spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream;
but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.” (Gen. 41:8)—Ex. 7:11; 8:7,19; 9:11
ISRAEL INVADED
“ Jehovah, by the act of Moses his servant, led the descendants of Israel out of Egypt, and at Mount Sinai God affirmed his covenant and declared to them his statutes and laws. The Israelites "had journeyed but a short distance when the Devil, with his religion, invaded their ranks in his endeavor to turn them away from God in violation of their covenant (Ex. 32: 1-10) When the Israelites reached the land of Moab they again fell under demon power and influence and practiced demon religion known and designated as “Baal-peor”, a grossly immoral ceremony. (Num. 25:1-18) Time and again the Israelites fell away from God in violation of their covenant, and in every instance this they did under the influence of religion, which the Devil introduced amongst them. “They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger. Thex sacrificed unto devils, not to God ; to gods whom the) knew not, to new gods that came newly up. whom your fathers feared not.”—Deut. 32:16, 17.
23	Jehovah specifically warned the Israelites that the religion of the demons would be a snare unto them. All the Canaanites and the people round about practiced devil religion, and the warning against such peoples and their practices was a warning against demon religion. God had given the land of Canaan to the Israelites for their inheritance and. as that land was inhabited by people who practiced demon or devil religion, God commanded that the Israelites should drive out these demon religionists “And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, noi shew mercy unto them. Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son. And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them; neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that [devil religion] will be a snare unto thee.”—Deut. 7: 2, 3,16.
20 The Israelites were clearly warned that religion would constitute a snare into which the Devil would entrap them. It was the Devil and the Nephilim that ensnared the Israelites and induced them to practice devil religion in defiance of God's law and their covenant. “And they served their idols; which were a snare unto them. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils, and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan; and the land was polluted with blood.”—Ps. 106: 36-38
February 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
41
" As further evidence that the demons overreached the Israelites, note this in the Scriptures: “Jeroboam and his sons had cast them [the Levites] off from executing the priest’s office unto the Lord: and he ordained him [Jeroboam] priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made.”—2 Chron. 11:14,15.
28	The apostle Paul, who was entirely familiar with the Divine Record concerning the activities of the demons and concerning their inducing the people to practice devil religion in defiance of Almighty God, wrote: “"What say I then? that the idol is any thing, or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing? But I say, that the things which the Gentiles [non-covenant peoples] sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils [(A.R.7.) to demons], and not to God; and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils [demons]. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils [demons]; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table, and of the table of devils [demons].”—1 Cor. 10:19-21.
29	When the child Jesus was born at Bethlehem it was the Devil and his associate demons who put the wicked Herod wise to that event in order that he could carry out the Devil’s scheme to destroy the babe Jesus: “Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judsea in the days of Herod the king, behold, Wise-men [(Greek) Magi] from the east came to Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we saw his star in the east, and are come to worship him." "Then Herod privily called the Wise-men [magicians, religionists], and learned of them exactly what time the star appeared.”—Matt. 2:1, 2,7, A.R.V.
30	The magi, or “wise men”, so called, were clearly the servants of the Devil. This should serve as a warning to all who profess to be the followers of Christ Jesus and who have been deceived by clergymen and led to ignore the existence and power of the demons. Instead of following the admonition of the Scriptures, the religionists known as “leaders” and the principal ones of their flock exalt these devilworshipers or magicians by the ceremonies performed at what is called “Christmas time”. Each one of the magi was of the same class as those otherwise designated in the Scriptures as “the sorcerers”, and which the apostle Paul named as frauds, such as Elymas the Magus, who opposed the gospel preached by the apostle and whom Paul designated as a “son of the devil”.—Acts 13: 8-10, A.R.V., margin.
DEMONISM FORBIDDEN
31	If men were righteous by nature, they would not need the law of God, because they would do righteousness, which is in harmony with God. “The law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient.” (1 Tim. 1: 9) Jehovah God selected the Israelites as his typical people and led them out of the land of Egypt. Those people were imperfect, and therefore needed a law to guide them and keep them in and define to them the right way. Hence God gave to them his law prescribing what is right and prohibiting what is wrong. The law of God was given for that purpose, as shown by the words recorded, to wit: “The law was our schoolmaster [pedagogue, or teacher] to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.”—Gal. 3: 24.
52 From the time of the promise of God that he would send Christ Jesus the Messiah until the actual coming of the Lord Jesus Christ was a long period of time, and the Israelites were given the law of God to keep them in the right way and shield and protect them from Devil religion until the coming of Christ Jesus. One of the specific things commanded by Jehovah God was that the Israelites were not to indulge in any religious practices or demon worship. Note this part of the law, to wit: “And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations.”—Lev. 17 :7.
“ The offer of sacrifices unto demons was an act punishable with death. (Lev. 17:3,4; Gen. 9:5,6) According to the Dowry Version (Catholic Bible) Leviticus 19:31 reads: “Go not aside after wizards [them that have familiar spirits], neither ask any thing of soothsayers, to be defiled by them; I am the Lord your God.” According to the same translation the following is written: “The soul that shall go aside after magicians, and soothsayers, and shall commit fornication with them, I will set my face against that soul, and destroy it out of the midst of its people. A man, or woman, in whom there is a pythonical or divining spirit, dying let them die; they shall stone them; their blood be upon them.”— Lev. 20: 6, 27, Dowry.
** The practice of any sort of witchcraft and the observing of times, such as Hallowe’en, Friday the 13th, the “Holy Year”, constitute an abomination in the sight of God, because the same relate to demons. “There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a con-suiter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord; and because of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee." (Deut. 18: 10-12) This same text in the Douay Version of the Bible, which Bible is used by the Catholics, reads: “Neither let there be found among you any one that shall expiate his son or daughter, making them to pass through the fire; or
42
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that consulteth soothsayers, or observeth dreams and omens, neither let there be any wizard, nor charmer, nor any one that consulteth pythonic spirits, or fortune-tellers, or that seeketh the truth from the dead. For the Lord abhorreth all these things, and for these abominations he will destroy them at thy coming.”
” When Jesus was anointed and began to carry out his commission on earth of proclaiming the truth, the demons, led by the chief one, Satan, the Devil, began actively to interfere with his work and to oppose him. The Devil sought to induce Jesus to violate His covenant with Jehovah God and thereby bring about His own destruction. In that he completely failed.
56 The other demons, working with the Devil, were active at the same time, which proves conclusively that at that time the judgment against them was not executed, but its execution was deferred from the time it was made until God’s due time, Armageddon. Demons are also designated in the Scriptures as “evil spirits” or “wicked spirits”; and such at the time of Jesus would seize the mind of a person and control that person, and it is even so today. Early in the time of the activities of Jesus while in the flesh and preaching the gospel, the demons began to show themselves in opposition to him. Jesus was in the synagogue at Capernaum, there teaching the truth to the people, and his teaching was a great astonishment to them. “And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.” (Mark 1: 23-26) It was one of the wicked spirits or Nephilim in darkness that thus exhibited his power over the man described in the foregoing text.
” There are times when many of the demons, acting together, seize control of a human creature and use that creature to do and perform unusual things. The Scriptural record tells of a poor man dwelling in the tombs, who exhibited unusual and marvelous power. When he was bound with fetters and chains those chains were immediately broken. The power required to break those chains was beyond the power of any ordinary man. It was the demons who seized control of that poor man and put forth the power to break the fetters and chains, thus making it appear that the man himself could do it. The demons know that Jesus is the Son of God, and they know that God’s judgment is written against them and that it declares their ultimate destruction. When the spokesman of those demons that had seized control of the
poor man saw Jesus, the Scriptural account thereof says, “When he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him, and cried with a loud voice, and said. What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not. For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit. And he asked him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion; for we are many. And he besought him much, that he would not send them away out of the country. Now there was there, nigh unto the mountains, a great herd of swine feeding. And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them. And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine; and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand,) and were choked in the sea.”—Mark 5:6-13.
” The demons work in divers ways to control human creatures. They seize the mind of men and use men to perform strange acts and cause such deluded ones to believe that they hear voices of their friends who are dead. There are many instances recorded in the Scriptures of how the demons worked when Jesus was on earth. Only a few of such are here cited, and they are cited to prove the point that the demons, at the time Jesus was on earth, were alive and were not destroyed in the flood as clergymen have represented. One instance follows: A large company of the poor were seeking information at the mouth of Jesus, and the following incident is recorded: “And, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, I beseech thee, look upon my son; for he is mine onh child. And lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth again ; and, bruising him, hardly departeth from him.” “And as he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare him. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and delivered him again to his father.”—Luke 9: 38, 39, 42.
” As further proof that the demons were alive (and are yet alive) and expected a time to come for their final execution, note the following, in which the demons spoke to Jesus: “And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?”—Matt. 8: 29.
*° The Devil and his horde of demons employ a more subtle way of gaining control of the higher-ups amongst the people. Fear of men leads into the Devil’s trap. The Jews feared that they would not stand as high among the other nations unless they had a king. At their request God permitted them to have Saul for king. Saul thereafter fell under the complete influence and control of the demons. (1 Sam. 28:7,8) Furthermore the leaders of the Jews, fear
February 1,194U
Me WATCHTOWER.
43
ing that they would be ridiculed by reason of not having some formalism called “religion”, adopted and practiced the form of worshiping idols and images. When Jesus came to the Jews he found the leaders teaching and practicing religion, showing that they had fallen under the influence of the demons. These leaders, called “Pharisees”, feared they would not be able to hold control over the people and have the people honor them and speak of them as “rabbi” and hail them in public places unless they had some kind of formalism to practice and to thereby induce the people to believe that such leaders were above ordinary men and. were clothed with special power or authority from Almighty God. That fear led such leaders to fall into the trap of Satan. (Prov. 29: 25) They had failed to trust God and obey the covenant God had made with the nation, although they had been frequently warned by Jehovah. For personal gam both of money and of approval of men those clergymen were willing to use the temple of Jerusalem as a place to sell various kinds of merchandise, and thus they made the temple of God a den of thieves”, and this was the result of the machinations of Satan and his associate demons. (Matt. 21: 12,13) Jesus, observing that the leaders of Israel had fallen under the influence of the demons and had adopted and were teaching doctrines contrary to God’s Word, denounced them in unparalleled, vitriolic language. By yielding to the influence of the demons and teaching the people doctrines contrary to God's Word, those clergymen had brought great reproach upon the temple and upon the name of Jehovah God and made his Word of none effect amongst the people; and therefore Jesus said to them. “But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.”—Matt. 23: 13.
41	Concerning the senseless formalism employed by the Pharisees in their religious practices Jesus said: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith; these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides! which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.” <fYe serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell !”—Matt. 23: 23, 24, 33.
42	Those Pharisees, who were religious leaders, had failed to teach God's Word and had substituted the traditions of men; and this they had done by falling under the influence and power of the demons; and concerning them Jesus said: “Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying: Why do thy disciples transgress the
tradition of the elders! for they wash not their hands when they eat bread. But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition! Ye hypocrites! well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”—Matt. 15 :1-3, 7-9.
45	The religious leaders, the Pharisees, were blind to the truth of God’s Word because they had yielded to the Devil and adopted his religion, and hence Jesus said to them that they were blind. (Matt. 23: 19, 24) These Pharisees were not willing to accept the truth as brought to them by the Lord Jesus Christ, and were trying to prevent the people from seeing and understanding it; and this they did under the influence of the demons. They had been made blind by Satan and his horde and thus turned away from God. It was the truth Jesus spoke to them that stung those clergymen and cut them to the quick, and their only answer in defense was attempted violence against Jesus, and that violence was prompted by the demons. Mark this part of the record, which proves conclusively that those clergymen were under the influence, power and control of the Devil and for that reason they attempted to destroy the Lord Jesus Christ: “But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication ; we have one Father, even God. Jesus said unto them. If God were your Father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech! even because ye cannot hear my word Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it.”— John 8:40-44.
“After the crucifixion of Jesus his apostles continued to proclaim the gospel of the kingdom of God, and the demons actively opposed them in their work. The apostles, by the power which the Lord conferred upon them, healed the afflicted, and for their good work the religionists condemned them. (Acts 5:16-18; 8:5-7) Seeing Paul, one of the apostles, exercising power over the demons, some of the commercial Jews tried to do likewise, even as some of the clergymen today pretend to represent the Lord; and concerning this it is written: “Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul
44
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. \
preacheth. And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so. And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye ! And the man in whom the evil spirit was, leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.” (Acts 19:13-16) Clearly the proof here is that those men were under the influence of the demons, and this is further proof that the demons were alive. This fraudulent representation of the Lord Jesus by the chief priest of his religious organization finds an exact parallel today amongst many of the priests, who fraudulently claim to represent the Lord, and who may soon expect to have their clothes torn off and go about naked and bare.
45	In the days of the apostles those wicked demons attempted to deceive and in this present time do deceive some who claim to be servants of God. They were alive and active then, and even in the present day those wicked spirit creatures are alive and active and do likewise deceive many who think that they are serving God. The testimony of the apostles authoritatively written clearly proves that in the end of the world, where we now are, clergymen claiming to serve God would fall under the influence of the demons, and concerning these it is written: “Now the spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to se
ducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron.”—1 Tim. 4:1, 2.
*• In the days of the apostles the non-Jews as well as some of the Jews were offering sacrifices unto images or idols, and concerning that offering it is written: “What say I then! that the idol is any thing, or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is an\ thing! But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils.”—1 Cor. 10:19, 20.
*’ This is further and conclusive proof that the Devil uses religion and religious ceremonies as a means of deceiving the people and turning them awa\ from God. Thus the Devil used religion from the days of Nimrod to the days of the apostles, and what fol lows herein proves beyond all doubt that the demons are in this very day unusually active, employing religion to turn the people away from God. Let those who desire to be on the safe side study and considei carefully what follows. It will be found from the Scriptures that the close-girdling or besetting sin of all who profess to serve God is the influence of de mons brought to bear upon them by religion, and that in order to safeguard themselves they must be dih gent to avoid religion and for safety they must follow closely the Word of God.
(To be continued)
WHEN JEHOVAH WAS ALONE
THERE is but one First Cause: He who is from everlasting to everlasting. Addressing Him, Psalm 90:1, 2 says: “Lord, thou hast been our dwellingplace m all generations. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.” He testifies: “Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I, am Jehovah; and besides me there is no saviour.” (Isa. 43:10,11, Am. Rev. Ver.) His adoring creatures now worship Him, “saying, We give thee thanks, 0 Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast.” (Rev. 11: 17) “Grace be unto you, and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come.” (Rev. 1:4) He is “the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords ; who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen”.— 1 Tim. 6:15,16.
“Hear, 0 Israel: Jehovah our God [Elohim] is one Jehovah.” (Deut. 6:4, A.E.V.) There must have been a time when the great God was alone. There must have been a time when he, the one First Cause, began his creation. Does his written Record, the Bible, disclose what was the beginning of God’s creation! It does. The time of the beginning is not revealed; that is to say, there is no date dis
closed for this among the dates given in the Bible. Whethei that time was a million or ten million years ago is not ma terial to man The fact of the beginning of creation is what man seeks. We may know that the mighty Eternal One who would create all things according to his sovereign will and who would cause a record thereof to be written, wouk cause that record to be written truthfully.
The Word of God records the fact that long before the creation of the earth, when there was no sea, when there were no springs and lakes, before there were any mountains or hills, yea, before the sun and the moon and the stars were made, God began his creation; and that beginning of his creation was his beloved One, known in the holy record as “The Word” (Ho Logos, in the Greek text): “and his name is called The Word of God.” (Rev. 19:13) The word Logos is one of the names or titles given to the beloved Son of God, “his only begotten Son,” and carries with it a deep meaning. When God gives a creature or thing a name, that name bears much significance. Logos means the representative or spokesman for the great Creator. The title is therefore translated “Word”, at John 1:1,14, and 1 John 5- 7 (Auth. Ver.), and Revelation 19: 13, because he who is the Logos is the express Word of the One whom he represents
It pleased God to speak through the Logos, that His message might be conveyed to others of his intelligent crea
February 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
43
tion. (Hcb 1-2) It is therefore appropriate that this mighty and beloved Son be called “the Word of God”. Concerning him it is written, at John 1: 1, 2 according to the interlinear reading of The Emphatic Diaglott: “In a beginning was the Word, and the Word was with the God, and a god was the Word. This was in a beginning with the God.” According to God’s will, he is the one “in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge” (Col. 2:3); he is the one “who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption”. (1 Cor. 1:30) This mighty, godlike One, the Logos, speaking as the embodiment of wisdom and as the authorized representative of the great Jehovah God, said concerning the question of the beginning of creation:
“Jehovah possessed me [(marginal reading) Jehovah formed me] in the beginning of his way, before his works of old I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, before the earth was. When there were no depths, I was brought forth, when there were no fountains abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth ; while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the world. When he established the heavens, I was there: when he set a circle upon the face of the deep, when he made firm the skies above, when the fountains of the deep became strong, when he gave to the sea its bound, that the waters should not transgress his commandment, when he marked out the foundations of the earth; then I was by him, as a master workman; and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him.”—Prov. 8: 22-30, A.R.V.
This beloved One, the beginning of God’s creation, was the delight of the great God; and the Father, the Creator, took his beloved Son into his counsel, and thereafter operated through him in the creation of all things that have been created. “All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.” (John 1: 3) “Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature [firstborn, not as to mere rank and position, but as to order of being created] : for by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all 11.mgs consist” (Col. 1:15-17) As further proof that the Logos was God’s true and trusted One, Ephesians 3: 9 states. “God . . . created all things by Jesus Christ.” Not that he was Jesus Christ at the time all things were created, but this mighty One who now holds the name and title of Jesus Christ, as well as other titles, was the One who created .11 things aside from himself. Nothing was ever created by the Almighty God after the creation of the Logos, except by and through this his'"beloved One.
In God’s due time this creature, the Logos, was transferred from heaven to earth and was made in the likeness of man. “The Word [Ho Logos] vies, made flesh, and dwelt ..mong us.” (John 1:14) He was then known by his Godgiven name of “Jesus”, because the name “Jesus” means that he is the Savior. (See Matthew 1:21.) At the time of (tie beginning of his earthly ministry he was anointed by i lod’s holy spirit (Matt. 3:16,17) ; and from that time forward he was known by the title “Christ”, because Christ
means Anointed One. (Matt. 1:16) After he had repre sented Jehovah faithfully on the earth, he was given, in addition to his other titles, the title of “Faithful and True" —Rev. 19:11.
At Revelation 3:14 it is stated that the Logos was “the beginning of the creation of God”: “These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God.” After creating him God made the Logos his active agent in the creation of everything that was created. The great God placed his beloved One, the Logos, in a position of confidence and trust. He counseled with him; and all things were created at the direction of the Almighty God, by and through the work of his beloved One, the Logos. Here then, in the Bible, is the authoritative proof that the stars and all things visible and invisible were created by Jehovah God by and through his active Agent, the Logos. In this and in all other work the Logos has been at all times true and faithful in representing the great Jehovah God.
The Logos, when made flesh, said: “God is a Spirit” (John 4:24) Jehovah is “the invisible God”, invisible to man, and he always will be. “Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen.” (1 Tim. 6:16) The word “spirit” is translated from the word pneuma in the original Greek text of the Scriptures, which Greek word is elsewhere translated in the English Bible wind. The wind is invisible to man, and it has power. God is invisible to man, ami possesses unqualified power. It is therefore appropriate that we speak of God as The Spirit; because he is, and always will be, invisible to man and in him resides all power.
Jehovah God is not a spirit creature, but is The Spirit Being, because “from everlasting to everlasting”. The Logos is a spirit creature, and was created by the Great Spirit, Jehovah. From the time of being created the Logos was “with the God”, in his presence, and ever his delight It is therefore entirely proper, according to the Scriptures, to state that the Logos, now also known as Christ Jesus, the great and mighty Son of God, is a spirit creature, and tin. first creature of all of God’s creation.
No creature can exist without form or organism Everv creature must have a body suited to him. “There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual [pneumahkon] body ” (1 Cor. 15:44) The natural body is flesh and blood and bones. A spirit body has none of these; “for a spirit hath not flesh and bones.” said Christ Jesus to his disciples after his resurrection when he appeared to them in a specially created body of flesh. (Luke 24: 39) “Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God.” (1 Cor. 15: 50) Man cannot describe the appearance of a spirit body, because this knowledge has not been given nor revealed to him. To the spirit-begotten Christians the apostle John wrote: “It doth not yet appear what we [spiritual sons of God] shall be”, that is, what a spirit creature is like.—1 John 3: 2.
Among the spirits created by Jehovah, through his beloved One the Logos, was Lucifer. His name means “morning star”, or “the bearer of light”. (See Isaiah 14:12, marginal reading.) It is also written concerning him : “Thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.” (Ezek 28: 14)
46
STe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, 5. Y.
The term “stones of fire” here seems to refer symbolically to other spirit creatures shedding forth great light. (Heb. 1 • 7 , Ps. 104 ■ 4) In symbolic language the “stars” are used to represent spirit creatures. (See Numbers 24:17; Job 38:7; Psalm 148: 3; Daniel 12:3; Revelation 2: 28; 22 :16.) As the stars which we behold shed forth light reflecting the glory of the great Creator, so the spirit creatures in the realm of the great God are bearers of light in His name and to His glory.
A class of creatures created by the great God, by and through the Logos, is described in the Scriptures as “cherubim”. The great eternal Jehovah is represented as dwelling between the cherubim. (See 1 Samuel 4: 4; 2 Samuel 6:2; Psalm 99:1.) Thus the Scriptures indicate that the cherubim occupy positions of honor and trust near the great Jehovah God.
“Seraphim” is the name given to other creatures of the spirit realm. They were created by the Logos, acting in the name and under the direction of the great Jehovah God. These creatures are bearers of light reflecting His glory. —Isa. 6: 2-4, 6.
“Archangel” is the name given to some of God’s spirit creatures, which name signifies “first in rank” of the angels. (1 Thess. 4:16) The title or name “archangel” was also applied at times to the Logos, when he was serving Jehovah in a certain or specific capacity.
Angels are others of God’s spirit or heavenly creatures, made by him through his beloved One the Logos. “Who maketh his angels spirits: his ministers a flaming fire.” (Ps 104:4; Heb. 1:7) “Angels” means “messengers”, sent or dispatched as deputies or representatives to perform some specifically assigned duty. In the outworking of the divine purpose these messengers or angels have always been employed by Jehovah to carry out his orders. These angels are spirit creatures, and are therefore invisible to man. They have from time to time been granted the power to appear before men in material bodies, and then at the proper and convenient time to disappear or dematerialize. Many instances are recorded in the Bible where angels have appeared in the form of men in order to perform some mission granted to them by Jehovah. These spirit creatures have often been sent by the Lord God as messengers of war, to execute orders against the enemies of his people. These angels are spoken of as the hosts of Jehovah God. They are also referred to as “legions”, thus indicating that they are organized into great bodies to carry out Jehovah’s purposes. When the Logos, then Christ Jesus, was on earth and
was about to be slaughtered by his enemies, he said to Ins disciple: “Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to mj Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?” (Matt. 26:53) These mighty spirit creatures God has made for his purposes and for his pleasure. That they are beautiful and glorious beyond description of human phrase there can be no doubt. When some of these appeared in the form of men they were beautiful and glorious. It follows, then, that in their spirit bodies they are far more beautiful and glorious.
Long ages ago, before earthly time began, the great Jehovah God had a wonderful and mighty organization consisting of a host of spirit creatures, the beautiful angels among them, archangels, seraphim, cherubim, Lucifer and the mighty Logos, the two latter being designated as “the morning stars”. (Job 38:7; Isa. 14:12; Rev. 22:16) We may be sure that the great Creator would not create these mighty creatures for any idle purpose; therefore we must know that each one of them was assigned to some duty of importance. They were, when created and so assigned, all holy; because they were completely devoted to God These glorious spirit creatures, all in harmony with God, constitute what is called “the heavens”.
Above and higher than all, of course, was the great Jehovah God ; and all his holy creatures were singing praises and rejoicing before the Eternal One. Psalm 68 4, 33 “Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name JAH [abbreviation for 'Jehovah’], and rejoice before him. To him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old. Io, he doth send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.” All these heavenly creatures of the spirit realm obeyed, supported, upheld and looked up to and praised the great GOD, therefore it is written that Jehovah rides above the heavens of the heavens All the heavens declared his glory and sang his praises
Up to the period of time thus far described in God’s creation there was no earth and, of course, no man Up to this time there was nothing in heaven to mar its peace, beauty and happiness. We know this because God had created everything there, and all the works of Jehovah ar< perfect, says Deuteronomy 32: 4. So far as the divine record discloses, nothing up to this time had occurred as an inducement to cause the deflection of any of the spirit creatures. As a mighty host, led by The Logos and the other great light-bearer that walked by his side, they proclaimed the praises of Him “the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy”.—Isa. 57:15.
LETTERS
RESOLUTION
Dear Brother Rutherford;
The Rockford company, having learned of the activities of the “evil servant” class m this vicinity, wish to assure you and all the brethren at Bethel of our continued unshaken love and confidence.
We clearly see that this attempt to disrupt the witness work at its source in Brooklyn exactly parallels Satan’s attempt in 1917 when the “evil servant” class so clearly and wickedly manifested itself.
Knowing that this attack presages more desperate attempts by Satan to preserve his power and destroy the Theocracy, we are
the more alert to obey Theocratic regulations, as our very lives depend on such obedience.
We further resolve to heed the notice in The Watchtower and will not enter into discussions or correspondence with those who are bent on justifying themselves in ‘slandering their own mother's son’.
Praying that present conditions may only result in greatei joy when the Shout of Victory is given, we are
Your brethren and fellow Kmgdom publishers, Rockford Company, Illinois Zone 3
February 1, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER
47
DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION
We, the Janesville company of Jehovah’s witnesses, Wisconsin Zone 1, attended Brother Howlett’s meeting at Beloit, Wisconsin, and wish to make the following declaration and resolution:
We declare that we stand firmly on the side of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, and for the Theocratic Government, which we know, from revealed prophecy, is now being established on the earth We recognize that The Watchtower is the means used to bring these truths to those of good will We resolve that we shall obey all instructions received from the Watch Tower, knowing that such proceed from the higher powers, Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. We resolve to be completely obedient to the Society as the visible part of the Great Theocracy.
ON SIDE OF JEHOVAH GOD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
I am a patient at the hospital and have been for some time. Both my lungs are affected, and four years ago the family doctor advised my coming here to take treatments.
When I first entered Sea View I became interested in the Seventh-Day Adventists and was reading their literature and having studies with them. I really was beginning to accept the seventh day, or Saturday, as the Lord’s Day of Rest and tried to observe it as best I could here. But it seems, now, that God interfered.
One day, by accident, my bed-partner tuned in her radio at 1300, and the Watchtower was broadcasting its fifteen-minute reading period I did not understand what “church” was broadcasting, but, as it sounded good to me, I sent for the booklet offered Soon thereafter Brother Shuter and Sister Miller called on me and wanted to know if I had enjoyed reading the booklet, to which I replied, ‘Yes,’ but that I was interested in the SeventhDay Adventists I had become quite convinced that the sabbath must be kept, and told them so. This they contradicted; but I was a little stubborn and said they would have to prove it to me from the Bible. Sister Miller said she would be glad to get me some reading matter on the subject, which she did, and I started reading it with an open mind and a prayer that I might see the truth, but quite sure that before I was finished I could still say the sabbath must be kept. As I read and looked up the Scripture verses I began to have some doubt in my mind, and further study revealed to me that the sabbath law was meant only for the Jews and only until such time as the promised redeemer should come to fulfill the law.
Soon after Sister Sexton started coming to see me regularly and brought me the Bible study helps and other literature. At limes it amazed me to see how differently these books explained
things as compared with that taught in the churches, and I began to understand the reason for present-day conditions
The state of death was another thing which was never satisfactorily explained to me until I read these books.
1 am most fortunate in having my own little radio now, with earphones, and almost daily listen to your recorded lectures and studies broadcast over station WBBR Also had the privilege to listen to your world-wide message “Government and Peace” from Madison Square Garden on June 25 of this year It was a most stirring message, and I am glad I did not miss it.
It has been my desire for some time to be able to attend one of the Sunday evening Bible study meetings here on the island, and on Sunday, August 20, this was made possible Sister Sexton and Sister Miller arranged it so they could bring me back to the hospital in good time. It was good to be among people of good will and to see how a Watchtower study is conducted. The ready response to the questions on the study was interesting to note All this has convinced me that Jehovah’s witnesses are the anointed of God performing their work in declaring the vindication of his name.
I would like to be counted as among those of good will who are looking forward to the righteous kingdom, under Christ Jesus the King. I have taken my stand on the side of Jehovah God and abide his will.
Sincerely,
Theresa Erust
SOURCE OF JOY AND CONSOLATION
Dear Brother:
I am writing to you to say how pleased I am that the books I have had, including Salvation, have revealed the truth of the Bible, Jehovah’s Word, so vividly in the light of the events of the past week. The Scriptures are certainly revealing the naked truth, and already Fascism is upon the civil population of England
I am pleased with these truths, and find the reading of the Bible a source of great joy and consolation. I am of military age (32), but will register my conscientious objection, as the Bible says “Thou shalt not kill”. If only all the peoples of this earth were to be witnesses for Jehovah as I am, what a beautiful paradise we would be living in 1
I must now close and hurry to post this, as it is growing dark now and the permanent black-out is due to start in a few minutes and I must find the pillar box before then.
Jehovah’s witness,
Christopher Shelmerdine, England
(Continued from page 34) comment by the president on the text for the new calendar year, together with a text for each day of the year accompanied by an appropriate comment thereon as taken from recent issues of The Watchtower. The edition of the Yearbook is limited, and hence the regular contribution of 50c a copy is taken therefor. Order promptly, with remittance to cover. Each company will place their orders with the local company servant, that he may < onvenience this office by sending in a combination order.
“MODEL STUDY” NO. 2
This booklet is a valuable and indispensable complement to die original model study booklet. Model Study No. 2 enables anyone equipped with phonograph and lecture recordings to carry on model studies on the seven latest recorded speeches by the Society’s president, from the speech “Safety” in 1937 down to and including “Government and Peace” in 1939. The booklet also contains a Reference Index very convenient in locating the desired lecture record on any particular subject of vital interest today. There are 64 pages of material, enclosed in a sturdy cover, and
the booklet will be supplied on your contribution of 5c a copy Those in organized companies should send in their orders in combination through the local company servant.
1940 CALENDAR
The 1940 Calendar sets out the text for the calendar year, to wit: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” (Psalm 13 5) A beautiful color illustration, specially painted, harmonizes with the theme of the text, and its portrayal of what is impending will gladden your heart. Neat calendar pads indicate the special Testimony Periods of the year and the special lines of endeavor of the other months of activity in publishing the Kingdom gospel Calendars, of which the supply is limited, will be sent on order, remittance accompanying, at 25c each, or $1.00 for five to one address. Companies will please order through their company servants
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 3: “Power of the Demons,” fl 1-20 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1940
Week of March 10: “Power of the Demons,”
fl 21-47 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1940
FIELD EXPERIENCES
RESISTING INVASION OF HOME RIGHTS (ENGLAND)
“I had played two (four sides) of the records on my gramophone and was playing the third record at 5k p.m. in the living room of my home, on Sunday 20th August, when I heard a loud ringing and banging on my door. I went to open the door, to see who it was, and as I opened it two policemen stepped in. I checked their progress down the lobby with my outstretched arms. One policeman, No. C 15, then said: ‘If you don’t take that damn thing off, then I will.’ I asked him, ‘What thing?’ and he said, ‘That gramophone or wireless or whatever it is. It is annoying the whole neighborhood. It’s annoying me; I can hear it a mile away.’ I told him it was a gramophone and that I did not know it annoyed anyone, as I had had no complaints and did not think it possible for anyone to hear unless he came very close to the house. They went away. I put the record on again, as I had not heard it properly, and at five minutes past five the two police, C 15 and C 67, came again, this time to tell me that I must give my name, address, age, etc. C 15 said: ‘The row has gone louder; you’ll hear more about this.’ I replied that I had done no harm, annoyed nobody, and that I could not be charged with something I had not done. I also said that whoever had caused them (the police) to come, should have come to me first and the annoyance, if any, would have ceased. C 15 then said, after C 67 had taken all particulars: ‘You know full well this record stuff annoys all Catholics; I am Irish myself, so don’t worry, as 1’11 get you.’ The two police then went away after causing an unnecessary crowd of children to gather at the front and side of the house. I looked out and saw three women laughing, sneering and triumphantly gibing about the affair.”
GROWTH AT DUCKENSFIELD, ST. THOMAS, VIRGIN ISLANDS
“In February of this year (1939) a publisher left his home to work on an estate, and took with him his phonograph and some publications. There he met an interested lady with The Watchtower. They started to study as a company of two, and now they are a company of seven publishers, with several attending the study meeting.”
GETTING THEM TO READ “KINGDOM NEWS NO. 5"
“I have been able to get several Catholics to take the Kingdom News by telling them: ‘It is a little newspaper. Surely your priests don’t keep you from reading newspapers.’ Their usual reply—‘Oh, no, they will let us read that.’ ”
LEARNING TO RIDE THE “BEAST OF BURDEN”
“A publisher in poor health said she would like to use the phonograph, but found it too much for her to carry I asked if she ever had tried the ‘doorstep method’, to which she replied, ‘No.’ I then asked her if she would like to come along with me to the4iomes and see how it was done; which she did. After about an hour and a half she remarked it surely was wonderful how the phonograph got one into the homes, and said that she was sitting down most of the time and really was resting instead of working, and letting the machine do the work. After three days of using the doorstep method she said she would not be without it any more, because she worked far less and got much better results, and more back-calls. She also stated she does not have to carry it very far, as it is sitting on the floor working most of the time while she rests.”
THE ENTERING WEDGE FOR BACK-CALLS
“If they take literature, ask them this: ‘If I come back in two weeks, will you tell me what you think of the booklet Government and Peace and give me an honest opinion of it?’ If they don’t take anything, offer a booklet and ask the same question, and if they agree to give you an opinion, then take their name and return in two weeks. I have gotten as high as ten back-calls a day by doing this.”
PHONOGRAPH MORE EFFECTIVE THAN RADIO IN CALIFORNIA
“The mother told me she was a true Catholic After some discussion, though, it developed she was studying her Bible, and at one point she turned to the daughter, saying, 'See. that is just what we were talking about.’ She took Salvation. Riches, and Enemies, remarking again to the daughter, T wonder what Father-------would say if he saw me taking
these.’ It was decided that we should run the lecture ‘Warning’ at that time. As it neared the end a car drove into the driveway and she said, ‘That is my two brothers; they have been to mass.’ When the men came in, both ladies, pointing to chairs, said, ‘Sh—, listen!’ At the conclusion the me’i had little to say, and, as it was noontime, I left and ate m> lunch in the car near by. Shortly after, the lady camo to the car and said her brother wanted some of the books, also Outcome: six more books placed and a back-call arranged for the following Friday night; at which time they wen ready and waiting for us. Meantime they had read Un covered, and the older woman quite a ways in Enemies. We ran ‘Government and Peace’. As the Madison Squan Garden disturbance as recorded broke out thex really sat on the edge of their chairs. When the judge said, ‘Doubt less none of them had been educated in a parochial college.' the man hollered ‘Wowie!’ and laughed when the parochial college was referred to the second time In the discussioi that followed, the lady asked about images She was quiti familiar with the Ten Commandments, and the first om had caused her to question the use of images. After a turn she said, ‘I am not going to mass Sunday; it’s going to bi hard, as I haven’t missed for years, and I’m going to gel rid of these crucifixes hanging around here, and as mud as I love my little altar, I’m going to put it aside and stoj repeating prayers.’ To take the place of mass Sunday she is going to listen to the speech ‘Victory’ Also, we are to begin a Model Study with them Friday night ”
LIKE THE LOCUSTS’ TAIL LEFT BEHIND (REV 9:10)
“While working the business section I handed the Sa! vation folder to a man in a garage who ‘did not think he would take any of the books’. Before 1 had finished witness ing to the others in the garage this man came to me ami said, ‘I believe I will take those books, both of them ’ Next day some publishers were working the rurals near this sam. Oklahoma town. When the record ‘Snare and Racket' had finished, a lady who was visiting her rural fiiend said ‘Yesterday I was away from home, and when I returned I found a leaflet under my door which told about a book calk : Salvation. I had intended sending for it, but if this is th< same book you have, I will just take it now ’ A few weeks later a man came hunting for me from three or four doordown the street, with this folder in his hand He had decide'1 after reading it that he would like to have the book.”
48

THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburch, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children." - haiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun ; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabl.ng the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterance.-,. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, JI 00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, JI 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be maxieolrect to the respective branch olfices. Hem it tan ce,, from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn olhce, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ....................... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian ......................... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5. Ontario, Canada
Australasian ............ 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield N S. W , Australia
South African ................... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear tn several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price ria’. hate The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once eneh year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of addres„, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second class matter at the post office at Uiooklyn, A 1’ , under the Act of March S, 1ST!,
"REFUGEES”
Millions of refugees of various sorts now abroad in the earth, but this new booklet Refugees, written by the president of the Society, shows definitely how only such thereof as are of good will may and will find the one safe, abiding Refuge and live. By its very front-cover picture Refugees tells a powerful story, but the contents within this 64-page booklet convey a message that God’s refugees will rejoice to get, and that His publishers will have great joy in distributing to them Release of this booklet for distribution coincides with March 23, the day of the Memorial, and detailed instructions thereon are found in the Informant. You may procure a copy of Refugees direct by remitting a contribution of 5c per copy.
MEMORIAL
Saturday, March 23, after six p.m., is the date for 1940 for the yearly feast in celebration of Jehovah’s name and to the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each company, therefore, should assemble after six p m of March 23, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately preceding the partaking of the emblems, that short article ap
pearing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watcht-'u' r shuul-i be read before those assembled before partaking Sin<, the break mg of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture tl.e <i'',itl-of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately The emblem-, should be tin leadened bread and real red wine Jesus and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the am, nted irnuumt should follow’ their lead A report of the eelebialiun should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant In prepare tion therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
“BATTLE SIEGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Spring’s opening will be marked by the “Battle Siege” Testi mony Period, during the whole month of April It will be a pi easing of the siege against religion by a campaign to increase yet more the subscription list of The Watchtower. The unusual offer in effect during the campaign will operate greatly to that result, to wit, one year’s subscription for The Watchtower together with the premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covereo booklet on a contribution of but one dollar, foreign countries, $1.50. This Testimony Period, which is world-wide in scope, will (Continued on page 63)
AeWS'CHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	February 15, 1940	No 4
POWER OF THE DEMONS
PART 2
The fear of man brinaeth a snare; but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe."—Pror
TEHOVAH instructed his typical people concern-I mg the snares set for them by the demons, and J at the same time pointed out the only means of escape to the place of safety. The foregoing text is exactly in point. With stronger reasoning such warning and insti action now applies to all those who have covenanted to do the will of God. All the demons having been cast out of heaven and down to the earth, and knowing that the time rapidly approaches when the final conflict takes place, they are now, under the leadership of Satan, the chief demon, working desperately to entrap the consecrated and plunge them into everlasting destruction. (Rev. 12:7-12) From Genesis to Revelation the Scriptures abundantly give warning of the influence and power of the demons over men. The numerous subtle means employed to entrap men are disclosed by the Scriptures, given to the man of God that he may be thoroughly equipped to serve righteousness. Only those who love Jehovah God and who serve him in spirit and in truth will now give heed to such warning; therefore, for the benefit of the anointed and the Jonadabs these truths are published. Religion has long been the chief means of inducing men to yield to the influence of other men. The religious person fears the pastor, cleigyman or leader of his religious system, and hence he fields to the instruction of such men, and in this way the demons entrap the unsuspecting ones. A person fears that he will not receive the approval of men, particularly the religious leaders, and thus he is led into the snare of the enemy. Let this great truth be fully impressed upon all the consecrated: that the only place of safety is with the Lord and only those who trust Jehovah God and are diligent to render themselves in obedience can be safe in these evil days. Every consecrated one must diligently avoid the seductive influence of creatures. Every one s.Iio desires to have God’s approval must see to it that he does not rely upon men, because men are imperfect. Follow men only as such men follow the Lord Jesus Christ. “Whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe.” The marginal reading of tins text is: “Whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall
29'2.5
be set on high.” That means that the anointed shall be set on high with Christ Jesus only upon condition that such completely trust in the Lord and obey his commandments. The Jonadabs will receive the Lord's approval and find the way to life upon the same condition. Let Jehovah God be your fear, seek Ins approval, and not the approval of men.—Isa. 8: 13.
2	Christianity and religion are two sepaiate and distinct things, and the two are in complete opposition to each other. Those who practice religion are numerous; those who truly are Christian are few It will be found that the religionists are under the influence and power of the demons, whether the} know it or not. The Devil and his host of associated demons are desperately fighting against Christians, and every person who attempts to follow the Lord must be fully awake and constantly vigilant and active in his devotion to Almighty God. Always have in mind that there is but one place of safety, and that is in or under Christ Jesus, who is the head of Jehovah’s capital organization, which organization furnishes protection to those who flee to the Lord at this time. All such must full} trust Jehovah God and de vote themselves to the great Theocracy.
3	A brief reference ttf'the facts will show how com pletely religionists are in the dark. The Scriptures (Rev. 7:4-8; 14:1,3) make it plain that there will be only 144,000 of the members of “the body of Christ” and that those who shall be spared in Armageddon will be few compared to the great number ol people now on the earth. The World Almanut for the year 1939, published at New York, makes the following statement, to wit, (the claim is made) that in the earth there are 682,400,000 persons who are rated as Christians; 331,500,000 of such are rated as Roman Catholic; 144,000,000, Orthodox Catholic; 206.91 K).-000, Protestant. Those figures given by woi Lily publication would indicate that there are millions ol Christians; which, of course, is unscriptural. The claim is made that in the United States alone there are 64,000,000 of so-called “Christians”. Of com sc, these figures are net accurate according to the Bible They are probably correct when applied to what i~
52
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y
known and is practiced under the name of so-called “Christian religion”. To say the least of the millions who are rated as Christians, only a very small number are they who really trust God and Christ Jesus. The religionists and the practitioners of religion and their followers have fallen into the enemy’s snare.
4	Bible prophecy now in course of fulfillment overwhelmingly proves that within a very short time the genuineness of the claim of all such religionists will be put to the crucial test. The crucial test is now upon those who are anointed. The crucial test applied to “Christendom” will show that the great mass thereof are entirely without faith in God and are opposed to the great Theocratic Government, of which Christ Jesus is the King and Ruler, That great mass of persons rated as Christians actually deny God and Christ, and in fear of man they bow down to and yield to the totalitarian “form of godliness” and do the will of Satan and the other demons. By the act of Jehovah God, which the Scriptures designate his “strange act” (Isa. 28:21), the so-called “organized Christian religion” will be totally destroyed, never again to be restored. These are perilous times, as the Scriptures point out, and as the facts fully support. The condition of “Christendom” just preceding Armageddon is stated in these prophetic words: ' This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent. fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away.” —2 Tim. 3:1-5.
5	The prophecy above quoted applies specifically at the present time, and concerning the climax the same prophetic scriptures say: “Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.”—2 Tim. 3:12,13.
0	Since the year 1918, and more particularly since 1933 forward, persecution of those devoted to God and his kingdom has constantly increased and evil men, particularly the religionists, have become more vicious. Being themselves deceived by the demons, they have deceived and continue to deceive multitudes of others. Today Communism, Nazism, and Fascism, and the religious leaders associated with them, increase in their wicked deeds toward the people. The masses of the people are under these wicked leaders, all of whom persecute the supporters of the Theocratic Government. It is necessary for the covenant people of God to have these scriptures and
the attending facts in mind in order that they may escape the snares of the demons.
’ All persons who think can clearly see that the conditions now existing on the earth have grown worse in the past few years and that they continue to increase in wickedness even as foretold by the foregoing scriptures. As foreshadowing this terrible condition existing it is not without prophetic significance that during the actual presence of Jesus Christ m the flesh, more than nineteen centuries ago, and when he was preaching the truth constantly for three and one-half years, only a very small number of the people turned to him then in faith. Now Christ Jesus the King is present, having been enthroned, and few are they who are fully devoted to him, and concerning this very time Jesus said: “When the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?’' (Luke 18:8) The present-day physical facts so completely fit the prophetic utterances of the Lord. All persons who have a desire for life should fully aw aken to the situation and ascertain the cause of the present-day perils, and what is the only means of escape to safety. An honest and unbiased consideration of the Scriptures and the admitted facts will prove to the satisfaction of sincere persons, and that beyond all doubt, that the influence and power of the demons over the people is the primary cause of these times of peril and that Satan, the chief among demons, together with his host of wicked ones, is hastening the whole world like a swift-flowing river down to eternal death, as pictured by the river Jordan flowing into the Dead sea. The demons have employed religion to bring about this terrible condition and by means of religion have deceived multitudes and are still deceiving them and turning them way from God Both the leaders and the rulers in religious institutions have been made to believe, by the influence of the demons, that religion and Christianity are one and the same thing, whereas religion is the open and violent adversary of all Christians. Religion and the practices thereof are the result of demon power and influence. Christianity stands for the truth and full obedience to the law of Almighty God. Religion is demon-worship. Christianity is the worship of Jehovah God in spirit and in truth. Sincere persons should give thoughtful consideration to the commandments of Almighty God given to his typical people concerning religion, and which commandments apply with stronger force to all today who are seeking the wa\ of righteousness.
DEMON-WORSHIP FORBIDDEN
8	From the time of Nimrod onward all the heathen nations practiced demon-worship, or religion, offei-ing sacrifices unto devils. The Israelites, the nation
February 15, 1940
WATCHTOWER.
53
and only people chosen by Jehovah God, were in great danger of falling away to the demon religion. Therefore God commanded the Israelites td avoid demonism or religion. God commanded his typical people to offer to him certain animals in sacrifice, which sacrifices must be offered in the manner commanded by the Lord; and those sacrifices constituted prophetic pictures which God caused to be made foretelling the great sacrifice of Christ Jesus. In mockery of God and to cause the people to stumble and fall away from God the demon religion has required the practitioners thereof to offer animals in sacrifice unto demons or devils. The people of Israel fell under the demon influence, at certain times. The law which God gave to that people clearly shows that the sacrifice of animals to demons was in violation of “the everlasting covenant” (Gen. 9:5-17) and subjected the offerers thereof to the death penalty. Therefore Jehovah gave specific command to the Israelites concerning such sacrifices, to wit: “And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations. And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, that offereth a burnt offering or -acrifice, and bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it unto the Lord; even that man shall be cut off from among his people.”—Lev. 17 : 7-9.
8	Jehovah God plainly warned the Israelites that religion, practiced by the heathen, would be a snare unto them. The religionists served the demons, and such religionists constituted a menace to God's covenant people. Therefore God commanded his people concerning the heathen or demon-worshipers, as follows : “And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them; neither shalt thou serve their gods ; for that will be a snare unto thee. If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I; how can I dispossess them? thou shalt not be afraid of them; but shalt well remember what the Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt; the great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out arm, whereby the Lord thy God brought thee out; so shall the Lord thy God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.”—Deut. 7: 16-19.
10	The Israelites did not give heed to the warning of God concerning religion or devil-worship. God had chosen the Israelites for his own name’s sake, and because of their unfaithfulness in yielding to demon influence God said to them: “You only have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.”—Amos 3: 2.
11	The Scriptures make it clear as to what constituted the iniquities of the Israelites, for which God punished them, namely, idolatry or demon-worship: “All the gods of the people are idols.” (1 Chron. 16:26; Pss. 96:5; 97:7) “But [they] were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works. And they served their idols; which were a snare unto them. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils, and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan; and the land was polluted with blood. Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance. And he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that hated them ruled over them.” (Ps. 106:35-41) “But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table, and of the table of devils.” (1 Cor. 10:20,21) These scriptures show that a religionist cannot be a true Christian until lie fully abandons religion and devotes himself unconditionally to God and Christ and serves God ami Christ accordingly.
12	The Bible used chiefly by the Catholic organization is known as the Douay Version ; and from that version the following texts are quoted, to show that the Catholic leaders have no reason to be ignorant of God’s commandment concerning demon religion. “Go not aside after wizards [them that have familiar spirits; practitioners of demon religion], neither a-k any thing of soothsayers, to be defiled by them : I am the Lord your God.”—Lev. 19: 31.
15	“The soul that shall go aside after magicians [such as have familiar spirits; practitioners of demonism], and soothsayers, and shall commit fornication with them, 1 will set my face against that soul, and destroy it out of the midst of its people.”—Lev. 20:6.
11	Another text in point: “A man, or woman, in whom there is a pythonical or divining spirit [(Authorized Version) that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard; or spirit-medium], dying let them die; they shall stone them; their blood be upon them.” (Lev. 20:27, Douay Version) “Neither let there be found among you any one that shall expiate his son or daughter, making them to pass through the fire; or that consulteth soothsayers, or observeth dreams and omens, neither let there be any wizard, nor charmer, nor any one that consulteth pythonic spirits, or fortune-tellers, or that seeketh the truth from the dead; for the Lord abhorreth all these things,
54
3Te WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and for these abominations he will destroy them at thy coming.”—Deut. 18:10-12, Douay Version.
CATHOLIC RELIGION DEMONISM
15	The Catholic system of religion is one that designates itself and its practices as “the Christian religion”. Doubtless there were many sincere men among those who made up that organization at the beginning, and who later fell away to demonism, themselves being deceived, and who as leaders deceived many others. What is here published is not for the purpose of ridicule, but that the sincere people in the Catholic organization may see and appreciate the perilous position in which they have been put by their clergymen or leaders in the Catholic organization. God specifically commands that those who serve him acceptably must serve him in truth and that such must avoid all manner of demon-worship. “Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.”—Ex. 20:3-5.
16	Paganism means heathenism, that is, the practice of idolatry or demon religion, and is demonworship. (See McClintock & Strong's Cyclopaedia.) Pagan Rome was unalterably opposed to Christ Jesus and the truth declared by him. Paganism is therefore anti-Christian, because it is demonism. That the Catholic religious system or organization adopted the pagan religion, note what follows from an authoritative statement of one among the high Catholic authorities. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy follows its usual course in charging that The Watchtower, in ignorance of the facts, makes the statement that the Catholic religion is demonism. That The Watchtower states the truth, let sincere persons give consideration here to the testimony of the Catholic organization’s owm authority and then determine what course to take. John Henry Cardinal Newman, in 1878, published An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine. That publication was issued at London, England, by Pickering & Co., in 1881. From chapter eight of that publication, page 355, the following is quoted and which was written by Cardinal Newman, to wit:
“Chapter 8. Application of the Third Note of a True Development.
“Assimilative Power
[Page 355] ". . . Had it [the Roman Catholic church] the power, while keeping its own identity, of absorbing its [pagan] antagonists, as Aaron’s rod,
according to St. Jerome’s illustration, devoured the rods of the sorcerers of Egypt? Did it incorporate them into itself, or was it dissolved into them’ Did it assimilate them into its own substance, or, keeping its name, was it simply infected by them?”
[Page 371] “5. [Section 1. §2.] Confiding then in the power of Christianity [Roman Catholic religion] to resist the infection of evil, and to transmute the very instruments and appendages of demon-worship to an evangelical use, and feeling also that these usages had originally come from primitive revelations and from the instinct of nature, though they had been corrupted; and that they must invent what they needed, if they did not use what they found; and that they were moreover possessed of the very archetypes, of which paganism attempted the shadows; the ruler* of the [Roman Catholic] Church from early times were prepared, should the occasion arise, to adopt, or imitate, or sanction the existing rites and custom* of the populace, as well as the philosophy of the educated class.”
[Page 373] “6. . . . The use of temples, and these dedicated to particular saints, and ornamented on occasions with branches of trees; incens<., lamps, and candles; votive offerings on recover} from illness; holy water; asylums; holydays ami seasons, use of calendars, processions, blessing* on the fields; sacerdotal vestments, the tonsure, the ring in marriage, turning to the East, images at a later date, perhaps the ecclesiastical chant, and the Kyrie Eleison, are all of pagan origin, and sanctified by their adoption into the [Roman Catholic] Church."
17	Mark this: that Newman was created a cardinal by Pope Leo XIII in the year 1879. There is no doubt about the learning of Newman, and there is no doubt from his testimony above quoted that the eeremome* practiced by the Roman Catholic religious *ystem originated with the demons and were practiced b\ Pagan Rome and adopted by the Roman Catholic so-called “Christian” religious organization.
18	James Cardinal Gibbons, another Catholic authority, in his book The Faith of Oui Fathers, explains the doctrine of •'purgatory” as taught by the Catholic organization, and then says: “This interpretation is not mine. It is the unanimous voice of the Fathers of Christendom” ; which is proof that ' purgatory" is a part of the doctrines originating with demons. The doctrine of “purgatory” finds no support by any text of the Bible. On the contrary, th< Bible flatly contradicts the “purgatory" doctrine as taught by the Catholic organization ; and this is proof conclusive that said doctrine proceeds from the demons. The Catholic, demon “purgatory” doctrine, in substance, is this: ‘That man possesses an immortal soul; that at the time of dissolution only the bodv
Febbuary 15,1940
S^e WATCHTOWER
5.)
dies, and that the soul lives on forever; that the wicked soul suffers eternal torment in hell; that all souls in purgatory, a place supposed to be between heaven and hell, spend an indefinite time and that in purgatory that soul is conscious but wholly unable to help itself; and that with the prayers of others on earth that soul in time may be saved? (See The Fatih of Our Fathers, chapter 16, pages 205209.) The artist Dore drew many pictures purporting to represent '‘purgatory”, and which pictures could have originated only in the mind of one under the power and influence of the demons. That the doctrine of "purgatory” originated with Satan, the chief of demons,"is clearly shown from the Scriptures. The Bible tells of Satan’s lie to Eve, in which he said to Eve: “Ye shall not surely die. For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." (Gen. 3: 1-5) This statement the Devil made to Eve m response to her statement to him that Jehovah God, the Creator, had commanded that they should not eat of a certain fruit. Satan then spoke the above lie and told her that, when she did eat, she would become “as gods”, that is, demon gods. The yielding of Eve to that lie with the hope that she might become “as gods”, that is, demons, was the beginning of religion amongst human creation. The result of yielding to such lie was that Adam and Eve were condemned to death. That Satan brought about their death by this religious means is clearly shown by the Scriptures.—Rom. 5: 12; John 8:43,44.
:e Satan, the chief amongst demons, is the adversary of God. The Bible contains the word of Almighty God, which word of God is the truth. (John 17:17; Ps. 119: 105) Any doctrine taught by man which contradicts the Word of Almighty God is a lie, and such doctrine or lie proceeds from the adversary, the Devil, and his associated demons The doctrines ami practices of the Catholic-religion organization are specifically contradicted by the Bible. That is particularly true with reference to “purgatory”; to the primacy of the pope; to the dead as being more alive than ever, and prayers for the dead; to the dcctrine and claim that the church of God is founded upon i’cter; to holy water-; to images and the veneration thereof; and to many other doctrines; and these prove that the Catfiolic religion is demonism; and by the practice of demonism the people are led fully into the snare of the Devil and ultimately into destruction.
POLITICS, MAGIC AND DEMONISM
20	Politicians have .always required religion and used it as their handmaid. From the time of ancient Babylon and ancient Egypt on down to this very hour the visible ruling elements ot all nations have had
their “wise men”, astrologers, soothsayers and other demon-controlled religionists at hand for counsel and advice. Such rulers have always called for “more religion”, and continue to advocate more religion to this very day, saying that “the religion of your individual choice is all that is necessary, whether that religion be Catholic, Protestant, Jewish or Mohammedan”. “Any one of these,” say the politicians, “meets the requirements.” This applies emphatically to all dictatorial governments; and even in the democracies, such as the United States, the president and governors of states say, “We must have more religion ; otherwise the government of the United States cannot stand.” Without an exception, the religionists have always opposed the real and true servants of God and Christ, and that opposition shows further that religion proceeds from Satan and the other demons, who are the adversaries of God and Christ and all who follow Christ.
21	Note some of the Scriptural proof upon this point. The founder of Babylon, the dictatorial riih'i. made religion the leading factor of his government (Gen. 10:9, 10) As to ancient Egypt, the king Pharaoh set himself up as a mighty one and in lull opposition to the servants of Almighty God. Moses and Aaron appeared before Pharaoh and dehveied to him the message of Jehovah God, performing there certain miracles. “Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their enchantments. For they cast down every man his rod. and they became serpents; but Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods.”—Ex. 7: 11, 12.
22	Those magicians or sorcerers were the visible representatives and mediums of demons, influencing and inducing the king Pharaoh to put himself m d.-rect opposition to the Almighty God. Each. tun< Jehovah's anointed servant appeared be foie Pha raoh he called upon the sorcerers, magicians, th< demon representatives in the practice of religion, to appear before him and perform certain ceremonies —Ex. 8:7,18,19; 9:11.
23	Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, had his demon mediums or representatives always on hand to give that political ruler advice. (See Daniel 1: 20; 2: 2.) Those demon representatives, practitioners ot religion, were in complete opposition to Jehovah God and his servants; and this is proved by the fact that Jehovah God gave to his servant Daniel wisdom and power to tell the king's dream and to explain to the king the meaning thereof. “Daniel answered m the presence of the king, and said. The secret which the king hath demanded, cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the soothsayers. shew unto the king; but there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and inaketh known to
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ob
the kin" Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these; as for thee, 0 king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter; and he that revealeth secrets mak-eth known to thee what shall come to pass. But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living, but for their sakes that shall make known the interpretation to the king, and that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.”—Dan. 2: 27-30; 4:7.
24	The Israelites would have been entirely safe from the influence and power of demons had they obeyed God’s commandment and kept their covenant and avoided religion. Instead they demanded a king, and God permitted them to have a king, and quickly the king embraced devil religion, and, being influenced by that devil religion, the king violated God’s commandment and rebelled against the Most High. Samuel the prophet and visible representative, a spokesman of Jehovah God, delivered to Saul the king this message from the Most High : “Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.” (1 Sam. 15:22,23) Thereafter Saul, who continued to hold the office of king, made himself a further abomination before Almighty God by seeking advice from a demon medium, the witch of Endor, who lied to Saul and led him further into the demon’s snare. (1 Sam. 28: 7.8) Saul, under the influence of demons, continuously persecuted David, the servant of God, and this persecution he carried on while at the same time he kept up an appearance of godliness; and thus Saul the politician had an outward form of godliness, but denied the supreme power of Almighty God, just as the political religionists do in this present day. Because Saul embraced the demon religion he went into darkness concerning God's purpose and continued ever afterwards in darkness, and had no truth or revelation from Almighty God. (See Exodus 22:18; 1 Samuel 28: 6-18.) The action of Saul was in direct violation of the law of God, as related to demon religion and the practice thereof. “Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood; neither shall ye use enchantment, nor observe times. Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them; I am the Lord your God.”—Lev. 19:26,31; Ex. 22: 18.
25	Saul’s death was because he rebelled against Jehovah God in a manner similar to that of the rebellion of the Devil, and Saul sought advice of one who was a demon medium or wizard: “So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he
kept not, and also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to inquire of it; and inquired not of the Lord; therefore he slew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.” (1 Chron. 10:13,14) This ought to be a warning to all the clergy and the principal ones of their flocks, namely, the politicians and commercial men, who continue to say to the people: “What we need is more religion.''
20	It is appropriate here to compare the course of King Saul, and the cause of his death, with that of the religious leaders or clergymen, both those of the people of Israel and those of “Christendom”, so called. Saul, placed in a position of favor by Jehovah God, went over to demonism, which is religion; and such foreshadowed or was typical of the clergymen of “Christendom” and their course of action and their final end. Concerning those who claim to serve God and who act as clergymen and religious leaders of the people of so-called “Christendom”, and who practice religion, it is written: “For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are destroyed.” (Isa. 9:16) Such religious leaders, who assume to teach the people, do. by reason of yielding to religion or demonism, become blind to the truth and lead others into blindness; and concerning such the Lord Jesus says: “Let them alone; they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.' (Matt. 15: 14) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy takes the lead today amongst all religionists on the earth in an attempt to lead and teach the people in political affairs of the nation, as well as commerce, and to advise the nations and their political leaders what course to take. That religious organization participates in the politics of every nation on earth. The) of the Hierarchy cause the people to err, and all are headed for destruction, as the scriptures above quot ed plainly state. All those who give heed to religious teachers and follow them blindly are therefore held under the influence and control of the demons, and are in line for the same end, unless they awaken to the great danger and turn quickly to Jehovah God and fully trust in him.
ENTRAPPED
" Because the politicians and commercial leaders are induced to believe that the clergy are clothed with some invisible power, such politicians and commercial men fear their religious leaders, and therefore they are led into the snare and entrapped b\ the demons. Politicians and commercial men seek the advice of clergymen, and the clergymen, being under the influence of demonism or demons, give bad advice. Some Biblical history is here quite appropriate. Ahab, the king of Israel, gathered unto himself 400 “prophets”, so called, who were false proph
February 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
57
ets, of course, and practitioners of the Devil religion, and they gave Ahab bad advice: “Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall I go against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.”—1 Ki. 22: 6.
28	Micaiah, the true prophet of Almighty God, was called before Ahab the king, who demanded that Micaiah should advise him; and because Micaiah gave good advice Ahab caused Micaiah to be imprisoned, no doubt on the charge that he was interfering with the war. Ahab the king went to battle and was slain. Thus was foretold that the religionist leaders of this day give advice to the politicians contrary to the Word of God, and the result to the political rulers is certain to be disastrous. Like advice was given to the king in Jeremiah’s time, with similar bad results. (Jer. 27:9,10) There are many other Biblical accounts of advice being given rulers by religious leaders, which resulted bad for them.—-Gen. -11: 1-24; Dan. 2 : 1-13; Ex. 7 :11-8 : 19 ; 9: 11.
29	The Scriptures refer to the present time as “the last days”; and in this same connection, speaking of the present-day clergymen, religious leaders who give advice to the politicians, concerning these religionists the scripture reads: “Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: . . . ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.” (2 Tim. 3: 5-7) In this present day the religious leaders claim to be learned and ever learning, but they, by their course of action, show that they have neither knowledge nor appreciation of the truth of God’s Word; and this is due to the fact that they have fallen under the power of the demons. Therefore they are in darkness concerning Jehovah’s purpose and have no revelation whatsoever from God of his purpose, and, being blind to the truth, they lead the blinded ones into the ditch of destruction. They attempt to advise political and commercial men and at the same time openly oppose those who proclaim God's Word of truth to the people. Let it be admitted that their opposition to The Theocracy is clue to ignorance. That further supports the conclusion that they are under the influence and power of the demons because of spiritual blindness. Continuing, the scripture tells why these men are of Satan’s organization and therefore blind: "Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.”—2 Tim. 3: 8, 9.
30	Those religious leaders and advisers are likened unto the false prophets amongst Israel, particularly
Balaam the prophet, who claimed to serve God, but who was a soothsayer, that is, under the influence and power of the demons, and who acted in that capacity. (Josh. 13:22) He hired himself out to politicians and tried to use religion against the people of God, but his efforts were in vain.—Num 22: 1-41; 23:1-30.
S1 Elymas the magus or sorcerer gave advice to the political rulers against the Christian the apostle Paul, but that advice was prompted by the demons and resulted in nothing good. (Acts 13: 6-12) Today the clergymen who lead in the practice of the so-called “Christian religion” proffer advice to the politicians and commercial strong men, which advice leads the men so advised right into the snare of the Devil. The religious leaders enter into a conspiracy with one another and, with the political, judicial and commercial men, work together in an effort to injure the witnesses of Jehovah God and to oppose the Theocratic Government and, in doing so, those conspirators, as the Scriptures disclose, are influenced by the demons and act accordingly. In support of this, note the following scriptures according to the Catholic Bible, Douay Version, and which are addressed to those who trust in God “Say ye not: A conspn acy for all that this people speaketh, is a conspiracy neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself: and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.” “And when they shall say to you: Seek of them that have pythonical spirits _(A.V.) familiar spirits; demon mediums], and to diviners, that mutter in their enchantments. Should not the people seek unto their God [Jehovah], and not for the living to the dead? To the law rather, and to the testimony. And if they speak not according to this word, they shall not have the morning light ” —Isa. 8:12, 13,19, 20, Douay Version.
32	The religionists have fully approved the con spiracy formed amongst the politicians to rule the world by human dictators instead of having it ruled by the great Theocracy. The pope enters into an alliance with the political rulers to accomplish the rule of the world by dictators, and practically all the religious leaders oppose The Theocracy ; and both the advisers, that is, the religious leaders, and the politicians and others who follow such advice straightway are ensnared by Satan, and they end ultimately in destruction. Fascists, Communists and Nazis, in fact, all “corporate states”, have their religious advisers, and chief amongst such advisers are those men who compose the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, directed from Vatican City by the religious politician, Pacelli.
33	“Egypt” symbolizes the wicked world over which Satan has long ruled, and the Scriptures say that symbolic Egypt was the place where the Lord Jesus
58
3Te WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. \.
Christ was crucified. (Rev. 11: 8) Therefore ancient Egypt, with its absolute dictatorial government and its religious, commercial and military parts thereof, pictured the present-day wicked rule by Satan and his horde of demons, particularly nations which have gone totalitarian or “corporate state”. Note in this connection the prophecy of God that foretells that religion, which is Jemonism, has been the means of leading the politicians fully into Satan’s snare: “The burden [the doom] of Egypt. Behold, the Lord [Jehovah] rideth upon a swift cloud [hence invisible to human eyes; and the cloud symbolizes a storm of trouble for his opposers], and shall come into Egypt; and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his [Jehovah’s invisible, cloud-obscured] presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom. And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof; and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards. And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord [God’s Executive Officer, Christ Jesus, who is cruel to God’s opposers] ; and a fierce king [that is, against wickedness] shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts.” (Isa. 19:1-4) Thus the Lord foretells of the demon influence upon the nations, and particularly upon the political rulers, and what shall be the end thereof.
54	The 16th chapter of Revelation shows that God’s wrath is against the political rulers of the earth and that their end is destruction. The religious leaders, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, have failed to tell the political rulers anything concerning God’s purpose to destroy them, and this manifestly because the religionists are allies of the political rulers and, being under the influence and power of the demons, are blind to God’s purpose. All the dictators of the world have their religious advisers. The ruler of Germany is a Catholic and is constantly advised by the Vatican. He also freely consults the demons through their visible representatives. Other political rulers follow a similar course. Even in the democracies, the chief politicians do the same thing; and this shows that all such are in the darkness and hence blind to God’s purpose and are induced to abuse and persecute the servants of God, who bring to them the message of truth. It is the will of God that the warning from him must be declared, and only those who are entirely devoted to the great Theocrat will declare that warning; and when such warning is declared the combined religious, political and commercial elements and their publications rid
icule and denounce God’s witnesses. As an illustration, the New York World of Monday, July 5, 1927. published the following:
“Giant Radio Chain Hears Rutherford “greatest hook-up spreads to all parts of the world
SPEECH CONDEMNING ORGANIZED CLERGY
“By means of the greatest hook-up in radio history Joseph F. Rutherford yesterday transmitted throughout the civilized world his challenge to orthodox clergy, big politicians, and high financiers as agents of Satan. The hook-up consisted of two more stations than broadcast the Dempsey-Sharkey fight, the previous record, and of three more than reported the reception of Lindbergh in Washington and tin-city. ‘Desert organized Christianity,’ thundered Rutherford. ‘It is an unholy alliance against the common peoples of earth.’ ”
” The speech delivered on that occasion at the Toronto convention of Jehovah’s witnesses greath aroused the indignation of the modern religionists Another speech delivered at that same convention under the title “Passing of the World Powers” wa-delivered and widely broadcast, and which also groat ly stirred the ire of religious leaders and supporters, proving that such religionists are against the kingdom of God under Christ. The message of thos<-speeches was not the composition of man, but words taken from the Bible and applied to facts well know n to all. Because of this opposition to his message the wrath of God is against the Babylonish system. “Christendom,” that is, against the political, religious combination, which rules and which rides oppressively upon the waters of the modern-day Euphrates river, that is, upon the common peoples that bear up the rulers. The Resolution on that occasion, unanimously adopted by God’s people assembled, taken m connection with the aforementioned speeches, appears to constitute the sixth “bowl” or ' vial ' of tin. series of seven annual messages delivered to the peo pies of “Christendom”. Note the prophetic wordapplying thereto and recorded at Revelation 16 12-1 u. A.R.V.: “And the sixth poured out his bowl upon the great river, the river Euphrates; and the water there of was dried up, that the way might be made ready for the kings [Jehovah,and Christ Jesus] that come from the sunrising. And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon [Satan’s organization, represented < hivflx by the religious element], and out of the mouth of the beast [the state], and out of the mouth of the false prophet [anti-Theocracy, made upi of the combined elements of Satan’s organization], three unclean spirits, as it were frogs [loud-mouthed croakers] : for they are spirits of demons [that is. visible representatives of demons], working signs; which go forth unto the kings of the whole world, to gather them together unto the war of the great day
February 13, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER
39
of God, the xYlmighty. (Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.) And they [the demon hosts] gathered them [the earthly representatives of the demons] together into the place which is called in Hebrew Har-Maged-on.” (For further consideration on this point see The Watchtower October 1, 1927, page 297; and Light. Book Two.) That movement of the demons against God’s people pictures the international movement against those who support the Theocratic Government described in Ezekiel’s prophecy, chapters 38 and 39, which movement is under the command of Gog, the Devil's chief representative; and concerning which the Lord says: “I am against thee, 0 Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal: . . . Thou shalt come up against my people of Israel [the devoted people of God; his witnesses], as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen [godless nations] may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, 0 Gog, before their eyes.”
MOBOCRACY DEMONISM
36	A rule or attempted rule by violence is a rule under demon power and influence. In the days of Noah the demons were rampant and filled the earth with violence: “There were giants [demons] in the earth in those days ; and . . . the earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.” (Gen. 6:4,11) ‘As in the days of Noah, so also the coming of the Son of man shall be.’ (Matt. 24:37) Thus said Jesus concerning the end of Satan’s world. The “giants”, or Nephilim or demons, being still under great darkness concerning God’s purpose, continue to exercise influence and power over men and fill the earth with violence in the present day. Concerning this very time and the Devil’s activities therein it is written: “Woe to the inhabited of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he know eth that he hath but a short time.” (Rev. 12: 12) Everyone now well knows that since the year 1914, and particularly since 1918, troubles and woes upon the peoples have increased, and today violence predominates in every nation, and great violence fills the earth, particularly in what is called the land of “Christendom”. Fear controls practically all the people and all the nations, the only exception thereto being those who fully and entirely trust God and Christ Jesus; concerning which it is written: “For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.”—2 Tim. 1: 7.
37	Briefly review the history of ancient and modern times concerning violent practices by religionists. Away back in the ancient days of Sodom a vio
lent mob stormed the house of that ‘righteous and just man Lot’, and howled for the bodies of Lot’s visitors, that they might commit sodomy with them; and that mob also attempted violence upon Lot. Without any question that mob was under the influence and control of demons.—Gen. 19 : 1-11; 2 Pet. 2:7,8.
38	A mob that was composed of Jewish religionists denounced Jesus, whom God had sent, and the mob then voted for and chose the totalitarian ruler Caesar for th’eir king and howled for the lifeblood of Jesus; and that mob was controlled and moved by demons.—John 19:5,6,12-16.
39	The mass movement of the herd of swine down the precipice into the sea was the act of a “legion” of demons. (Matt. 8: 28-33; Mark 5: 1-16) The swine pictured the creature who is now under the control of demons; and rushing into the sea symbolized such heedlessly rushing on to destruction. On every occasion it was the religionists, under the influence of demons, that sought to kill Jesus.—John 8:40,42; 15: 18-21.
40	Because the apostle Paul cast demons out of the slave girl, which girl was used to make money for hei demon-controlled masters, the demons raised a mob of men and attempted to kill Paul.—Acts 16.22-24
41	The mob raised by the idolater or devil-reiigion-ist, demon-controlled Demetrius attempted violence upon Paul because he preached the truth, disclosing to the people the devil religion practiced amongst them.—Acts 19: 24-34.
42	On another occasion, when Paul was at Jerusalem, the religious Jews under the influence and power of demons tried to kill Paul. (Acts 21:27-36) At Lystra, where Paul and his companions were telling the benighted people of and concerning Jehovah God and his kingdom, a company of religionists controlled by demons induced a mob to assault Paul with stones and almost killed him.—Acts 14:8-20.
43	It appears from the Scriptures that the apostle Paul was assaulted by mobs, which mobs were under the influence of the demons, more than any of the other apostles. The Scriptures furnish evidence of a reason for this. Have in mind that Paul himself, according to his own testimony, was a religionist before the Lord opened his eyes to the truth, at which time he became a Christian. (Acts 9:1-16) Paul testifies that he was a zealous religionist, “exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers,” that he “profited in the Jews’ religion”, that he persecuted the church of God and wasted it. He stood by and participated with the mob in the slaying of Stephen, which mob was under the control of demons. (Gal. 1:1-16; Acts 7: 54-58) When he became a Christian he spurned religion, exposed the demons, and declared to all religionists that they were practitioners
60
SKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. 'i.
of demonism. (Acts 17: 22, Diaglott') His faithful devotion to God and his kingdom thereafter enraged the Devil and the other demons against him, and hence they induced the religionists to raise mobs and assault the apostle. In every instance where one has been blinded by the demons and later becomes a Christian and is enlightened by the Lord and faithfully serves the Lord, the demons are enraged against that faithful person and attempt to destroy him. From all these scriptures it clearly appears that no one who consecrates himself to do God's will can possibly prove his integrity unless he spurns religion and faithfully and earnestly serves Jehovah God as a follower of Christ Jesus. Furthermore, the Scriptures show that when one has become a Christian and falls away he becomes the easy instrument of the demons and he appears to be beyond recovery because he has sinned against light.—Luke 11: 24-26; 12:10; Matt. 12: 43-45.
“ Compare these facts of Bible history with the modern-day acts of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their dupes who, influenced by the demons, attempt to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses and their “companions” by raising mobs, which assault the servants of Jehovah God. Such wicked assaults upon Jehovah’s witnesses have in recent months been frequently committed by the Hierarchy and their demonized dupes in many places throughout the United States.
45	In Germany, in the early part of 1921, the Roman Catholic priests spread false reports against Jehovah’s w itnesses, charging that they were financed by the Jews and were working to overthrow the state; and that course of action continued until 1933, when the Roman Catholic Hierarchy was able to induce the political rulers to cruelly persecute Jehovah’s witnesses, and confiscate their property, only because Jehovah's witnesses were preaching the truth of and concerning God’s kingdom. The result of that lying campaign and persecution, instigated by the religious Hierarchy, has resulted in the in
carceration in filthy prison of many of Jehovah > witnesses.
WHAT SHALL BE THE END’
46	Satan and all his associated demons fight against Jehovah God and against his kingdom, and therefore against the interest of all honest persons The demons use religion to blind the people to the truth and then persecute all who tell the truth of God’s Word The Scriptures and indisputable facts show bexond all doubt that since Cain murdered Abel until tins very day demon-blinded practitioners of leligion have wickedly persecuted and caused the death <>l innumerable multitudes of innocent persons. To tin priests of religion, that have taken the lead in -uch persecution and murder, Jehovah God speaking to them through his prophet says: ‘Tn thy skirts i>-found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents.’ (Jer. 2: 34) Religion has blinded the leaders thereot and made blind to the truth all who have followed such religious leaders. This is the undisputed 1-istorx of the world, and particularly of ‘‘Christendom” In the face of this historical proof the conuneicial and political leaders continue to say: “What we need m more religion.” Thus the inspired words found in the Bible are now more fully appreciated by those who rely upon God’s Word than ever before, to wit, that the whole world lies under the wicked one.’—1 John 5:19.
” Satan and his associated demons have under control all peoples of the earth and all nations of the earth that do not put their trust wholly in God and his kingdom.
*8	What, then, will be the end of demonism or religion? That question is plainly and clearly answered by Jehovah God speaking through his prophet Joel All persons who desire to escape the snare of the wicked demons, and who desire to live in righteousness, must now be diligent to learn what Jehovah God makes plain to those who love righteousness and seek meekness.
(To be continued)
“WHAT IS HIS NAME?”
(( A ND Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you, and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them ? And God said unto Moses, I am that I am : and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I am hath sent me unto you. And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you : this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.”—Ex. 3:13-15, Am. Rev. Ver.
“A prayer of Moses the man of God” is contained in Psalm 90, and the Psalm that follows, Psalm 91, was occasioned by that inspired prayer The first two x rises ot Psalm 91 read - “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of Jehovah, He is my refuge and mj fortress; my God, in whom I trust.” (Am. Rev Per.) The prophet of God used four separate and distinct names descriptive of the Self-existent One The four names used are Most High, Almighty, Jehovah, and God. (The Hebrew Scriptures do not use the word “title” with respect to Jehovah God.)
l'’l.BRt ARY 15, 1940
STie WATCHTOWER,
61
Most High This is the name that appears in Psalm 91: 1 in the most prominent position: it is the secret place of “the Most High” wherein security is found. It appears that whenever the Eternal One begins operations in some specific course of action he gives himself a name peculiarly appropriate to that course of action In support of this statement the following proof is submitted.
When God directed Moses to go to the Israelites in Egypt Moses inquired by what name the Lord would be known to them. He asked what he should say to the Israelites when they inquired who had sent him The Lord’s reply was: “Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you” (Ex. 3. 14) According to Rotherham’s translation of Exodus 9-. 14. “And God said unto Moses. I Will Become whatsoever I please. And he said, Thus shalt thou say to the sons of Israel, I Will Become hath sent me unto you ” This indicates that it pleases God at different times and under different conditions to applv to himself a certain name His piophct speaks at one place of God’s kingdom, which would mean that I AM is the king He speaks of God as “The Lord of hosts”, which would imply an army and that the Lord is the Head of that army.—See Psalm 24’ 10
When Jesus came to earth that was the first time that Jehovah made himself known by the name of “Fathei". That name “father” means begetter or life-giver of children That event marks the beginning of God’s “new creation ’, the church of the living God.” (2 Cor. 5:17, Emphatic Diaglott trans.) Jesus was the beginning or the first begotten One of God the Father. At John 3:35 he said: “The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand.” God begets all the members of the spiritual “new ireation”. but he does it through and by his beloved and only begotten Son. (See James 1: IS , 1 Peter 1:1-3, John 5.26; 6: 27. 57.) It was at that time that Jesus taught his disciples to pray: ‘Our Father who art in heaven’ (Matt (i 9) Those who had been brought into the "body of Christ” have become a part of the new creation and have become children of God. and thereby address him as Father—• Korn 8.15
"Most High” is a name signifying the Creator’s relation-onp -o all creation It refers to him as Supreme Ruler over al. powers and principalities. In him reside all power and authority. Anything and everything that is held in possession by any creature is from and subject to the will of the Most High He is above all. There is none like unto him, and no power can prevent him from carrying out his will. The name “Most High” bespeaks supremacy over all; the i )ne to whom all governments, powers and creatures must be in subjection He and his exalted Son Christ Jesus are "The Higher Powers”: “Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers [Jehovah’s Theocracy under his King Christ Jesus] that be are ordained of God.” (Rom. 13:1) He is the Author, the Maker, the Executor and the Finisher of the great divine purpose.
The Lord permitted Solomon, the son of David, to build a house or temple in the city of Jerusalem, and He placed Ins name there. (2 Chron. 7: 16) The Christian witness Stephen, being directed by the spirit of the Lord, said concerning that temple: “Solomon built him an house
Ho wbeit the Most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands ; as saith the prophet, Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what house will ye build me’ saith the Lord: or what is the place of my rest?” (Acts 7 47-49) That house or temple in Jerusalem foreshadowed God's “new creation” under Christ Jesus the Head thereof, and it therefore seems reasonable that the name “Most High” has some peculiar application to the new creation. It is foi the benefit of the new creation that “the secret place of the Most High”, the condition of safety in these “perilous times”, is provided.
Almighty. This is a name of the Eternal One and is first made mention of in Genesis 17 1: “And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God ; walk before me. and be thou perfect ” At that time the Lord was about to make a covenant with Abraham, and He did there make a covenant with him It was at that time t.’iat the narm “Abram” was changed to Abraham In substance the Al "mighty stated to Abraham: ‘I have made and do now in.iki a covenant with you that you shall be the father of many nations, and this shall be signified to you by your name, which from henceforth shall be Abraham which means father of many nations ’ Then he said to Abraham “I am the Almighty God ’’
What was the purpose of announcing this name’ B\ this the Lord said to Abraham. ‘The name Almighty God is a complete guarantee to you of my ability to carry out and that I will carry out the covenant which I am now making with you.’ It was as though God said this ‘Abraham, even though you are an aged man and j our wife is also old, I can and will multiple you exceedingly , kings shall come out of you , and my name ALMIGHTY is a guaranty that this shall be done ’ Then God said to Abraham, in substance ‘Abraham, be honest, blameless faithful and true to me and carry out your part of the covenant , and you may be assured that I will make good my part of the cove nant with you, because I am the Almighty and my power knows no limitation —Read Genesis 17 1-21
Abraham needed assurance from God in order that his faith might be complete lie was almost a hundred years old at that time, and his wife was an old woman Abraham knew that in the ordinary course of nature he could not have a son b\ his wife For him to become the father o’ many nations seemed absolutely impossible from the human viewpoint But now God would make his faith certain The Lord was here beginning a course of action with his servant whom he would use as the father of many nations, and he guaianteed the result of that course of action bj his own name “Almighty God”
Abraham believed God. and his faith was counted unto him for righteousness He believed that the Almighty was able to carry out whatsoever he promised, and that he would do so. “And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred vears old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah’s womb - he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, and being fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform " —Rom. 4:19-21
Abraham’s faith rested in God’s unlimited power as signified by His name ALMIGHTY When Abiaham’s son
62
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N, Y.
Isaac was born, that was a physical fact in further proof that his faith was well grounded Then came the time that God asked Abraham to sacrifice his only son. Abraham’s faith was now put to the most severe test, because this son was the “seed” through which he expected God’s promise to be fulfilled. But believing that Almighty God is powerful beyond limitation he was assured in his mind that God could and would raise up Isaac out of death after Abraham had sacrificed him. When Abraham had proved his complete faith, then the Almighty God called to Abraham through His angel and said:
'Because thou hast not withheld thy son I will bless thee, and multiply thy seed as the stars in heaven and as the sands upon the seashore. In thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed.’ This fact is further proof that the name “Almighty” marked the beginning of faith of the one God used to foreshadow His “new creation” and the faith that is required of the new creation, because Isaac the son of Abraham prophetically pictured Christ Jesus, the son of the Great Father, Jehovah, together with the members of his body, his faithful disciples. This clearly teaches that the members of God’s “new creation” are to rest securely by faith in his promises because he is the Almighty and his promises are absolutely sure and will be performed. This is the reason why, when the time came for the selection of the members of the “body of Christ”, those who have the faith of Abraham were selected (Gal 3: 6-9) Such are by adoption made part of “the seed of Abraham”.—Heb. 2:16, Emphatic Diaglott.
God. By this name the Eternal One is made known in the Bible at the very beginning of creation. Genesis 1:1 reads: “In the beginning God [ (/febreio) Elohim] created.” That name God [Elohim) appears therefore to specifically refer to him as the Creator of heaven and earth and the Giver of breath to all creation. To the same effect the prophet (Isaiah 42:5) says: “Thus saith God Jehovah, he that created the heavens, and stretched them forth; he that spread abroad the earth and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein.” (Ant, Rev Ver.) The name “God” is the name applied to himself as the Supreme One, the Creator and Giver of life, and relates to his responsibility concerning all of his creation. Therefore the term “God” has specific application to the new creation, because it is God’s creation and the highest part of his creation and the only creation to which God grants immortality, Christ Jesus being the Head of the new creation. (1 Cur 15 :53, 54) Now in recent years the Lord associates earthly companions with the remnant of the new creation yet on earth, and these “companions” or “other sheep” of the Lord, the “great multitude” of people of good will toward God and his kingdom, will in due time receive everlasting life from God through Christ Jesus, if they continue faithful, and they shall dwell on earth under God’s theocratic kingdom forever in peace and blessedness.
Jehovah. This is the name which the Lord gives himself and by which he is known to his people of spiritual Israel and their “companions” on earth. Isaiah 42: 8 reads: “I am Jehovah, that is my name.” Interpreters have rendered the name “Jehovah” as “Self-existing One”. The name means that, but it means much more At Exodus 6: 3, it is written
“And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and untv Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by m> name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.” These words God spoke to Moses.
The name “Jehovah” signifies his purposes toward hi-chosen people in particular. God had chosen the Israelites as his typical people. He informed Moses that he would be known unto that people by the name Jehovah, and that the name “Jehovah” would signify to them his purposes concerning his chosen people. Then he directed Moses to go unto the Israelites and tell them that the Almighty is JEHOVAH, and to then explain to them what his purposes toward or concerning them were. “Wherefore sav unto the children of Israel, I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and 1 will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm, and with great judgments and I will be to you a God; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah, your God, who bringeth you out from under Unburdens of the Egyptians. And I will bring yon m unto the land which I sware to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and t< Jacob ; and I will give it to you for a heritage I am Jeho vah.”—Exodus 6: 6-8, Am. Rev Ver.
In substance Jehovah here said to the Israelites that lu-had made a promise to Abraham, and that now he had chosen the Israelites as his own people, and that his purpose toward them was to carry forward his promise made t< Abraham The Israelites here foreshadowed God's non creation, his “holy nation” of spiritual Israelites (1 Pet 2: 9, 10) Therefore the name Jehovah signifies to the new creation God’s purposes concerning them, and testifies that the new creation is the special class that shall receive his great favor. What a wonderfully beautiful significance the name Jehovah has to his faithful ones in “the secret pla<-< of the Most High”. When God would appear unto the Israelites of old by the name of Jehovah he said to Moses: “I Will Become whatsoever I please.” (Ex. 3.14, Rotherham That is to say: ‘I will be to my people all that I will be ' Then Jehovah stated his purposes toward the Israelites which purposes are signified by the name Jehovah When Jehovah brought the Israelites out of the bondage of Egv pt “a mixed multitude went up also with them . and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle.” (Ex. 12 38 j This "mixe< multitude” of people of good will toward Jehovah and his organization pictured the present-day “great multitude’' of persons of good will toward Jehovah and his theocratic government under Christ, and they shared in some of the benefits of God’s purpose toward his people as represented in his name “Jehovah”.
For six thousand years God’s name has been misrepresented, ridiculed, maligned and reproached by Satan and his organization, especially the “Christian religion” part of that organization God will vindicate his name This he will do by giving such a demonstration of his power that all may know that he is the Almightv At stated time-- in the past he has made for himself a name amidst trouble upon Satan’s organization and the peoples under that organization. “Wherefore thou art great. 0 Jehovah God for there is none like thee, neither is there anv God besides thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, evm
February 15, 1940
WATCHTOWER,
63
like Israel, whom God went to redeem unto himself for a people, and to make him a name, and to do great things for you, and terrible things for thy land, before thy people, whom thou redeemedst to thee out of Egypt, from the nations and their gods [religion] ’ And thou didst establish to thyself thy people Israel to be a people unto thee for ever, and thou, Jehovah, beeamest their God.” (2 Sam. 7 22-24, A li.V ) The Scriptures declare that soon Jehovah
will make for himself a name amidst the greatest time of trouble that has ever come upon the world or ever will come upon it. (Matt. 24'21,22) He now gives due notice to the world, both to the rulers and to the people He has visited the nations, “to take out of them a people for his name” (Acts 15 : 14), and he commands this “people for his name” to be his witness in the earth now that he is God and that his name shall be exalted.—Isa. 43: 10, 12; 44: 8.
RESOL
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The Chicago Central unit, functioning as part of the Chicago company and under Illinois Zone No 1, assembled this 8th day of October, 1939, adopt the following Resolution :
1	We recognize that Jehovah is the great Theocrat, that Christ Jesus is his anointed King and Chief Executive Officer, installed upon his throne, and that Jehovah’s Government is a theocracy and now m operation.
2	We recognize the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society as Jehovah’s visible agency upon the earth, through which instructions are sent to his witnesses, who are now engaged in his strange work and privileged to enjoy the spiritual food contained in the columns of The Watchtower.
3	. "We realize and appreciate the fact that this is a time of war, a war between the Theocracy and Satan’s counterfeit, the •.otalitanan-religious combine;
That our fight is not against flesh and blood, but against invisible enemies and spiritual wickedness in high places;
That Satan, the chief enemy, is using men as Ins instruments in fighting against God’s people, whether said men be operating from without the organization or within.
4	We greatly appreciated the privilege of assembling with
UTION
Brother Howlett on October 1, 1939, to be further enlightened concerning the perils of the present day, and the attempts made to cause division among the Lord’s people.
5.	We are m full accord with the words of the apostle Paul at Romans 8: 38, 39 :
“For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord ”
6.	That we desire and are determined to press the battle to the gates of the enemy, to look well after the Kingdom interests in the Central unit, Chicago company, and to do everything to the honor of Jehovah God.
7.	We take this opportunity to extend to you, dear Brother Rutherford, our Christian love and greetings, and our appreciation and gratitude to Jehovah that he is pleased to use you to such a great extent in proclaiming the message of the Kingdom and laboring for his people. Be assured therefore of our co-operation and prayers in your behalf.
This Resolution was unanimously adopted by those present
(Continued from page 50) be the first of a three-month campaign with The Watchtower, and, due to the instant importance of what this magazine contains, the campaign is actually to be launched on March 23, the date of celebrating the Memorial. Now is none too soon to begin your preparation therefor, as to territory, equipment, time, supplies, distributor’s copies, etc. If unacquainted with an organized company of publishers m your locality, notify this office of your wish to get m touch with such for this Testimony Those m foreign lands will write the branch office having supervision. The Informant (which is free) goes into greater detail on this
“SALVATION" TESTIMONY PERIOD
The midwinter Testimony Period is called "Salvation” and occupies the entire month of February Thus the testimony for Jehovah’s name and his means of salvation, The Theocracy, continues on despite the season of the year. All Theocratic publishers now offer to the public first a combination of the book Salvation and the booklet Government and Peace, on a contribution of 25c. As in the daily march around Jericho, portable phonographs are not to be left in idleness, Brit are to be used from house to house to run the latest recording announcing the book Salvation. The Informant offers you more detailed information concerning the Period. Do your part during this Testimony, reporting at the end of the month’s campaign how effective your intensive activities have been.
YEARBOOK FOR 1940
The 1940 Yearbook of Jehovah's witnesses presents a comprehensive i eport of the past year’s world-wide activities of these publishers of Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ. You will marvel at the most interesting and most successful service year yet, even
with opposition increasing, nations being swallowed up by dictators, and wartime restrictions being generally applied, curtailing the Theocratic work m many countries. This report is prepared by the president of the Society. Additionally, there is a brief comment by the president on the text for the new calendar year, together with a text for each day of the year accompanied by an appropriate comment thereon as taken from recent issues of The Watchtower. The edition of the Yearbook is limited, and hence the regular contribution of 50c a copy is taken therefor Order promptly, with remittance to cover. Each company will place their orders with the local company servant, that he may convenience this office by sending in a combination order.
1940 CALENDAR
The 1940 Calendar sets out the text for the calendar year, to wit: “‘My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” (Psalm 13.5) A beautiful color illustration, specially painted, harmonizes with the theme of the text, and its portrayal of what is impending will gladden your heart. Neat calendar pads indicate the special Testimony Periods of the year and the special lines of endeavor of the other months of activity in publishing the Kingdom gospel. Calendars, of which the supply is limited, will be sent on order, remittance accompanying, at 25c each, or $1 00 for five to one address. Companies will please order through their company servants
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of March 17: “Power of the Demons” (Part 2), fl 1-15 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1940.
Week of March 24: “Power of the Demons” (Part 2), fl 16-30 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1940 Week of March 31: “Power of the Demons” (Part 2), fl 31-48 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1940
FIELD EXPERIENCES
A SON EXPOSES HIS "FATHER’S” DUPLICITY
“Many of these ‘other sheep’ are now acti"e Kingdom publishers, who more than attain their monthly quota of hours, and in making back-calls. Some, who only several months ago had gone to monastery to perform their ‘mission’, have even exceeded 100 hours of service in one month. One of these had gone to the parish priest several months ago, when he first heard of the truth, and asked for a Bible. He was given one (Douay Version), and he asked the priest to autograph it. Here is where trouble began (for the priest). This publisher would visit many of the priest’s parishioners and would introduce the Bible with the signature of the priest and, thus gaining their faith and confidence, would proceed to show them that the things taught by the Catholic church find no support in their own Bible. Upon hearing the many stones, the priest was much disturbed, and has endeavored to regain control of that Bible, even making threats that he would get it by force. All this having failed, he tried subtlety, by telling one of the parishioners who attends the Model Study and was out of work that if he would get the Bible for him he would pay one month’s rent for him, etc. All this took place in Aldenville, Massachusetts. The home where we conducted a Model Study last night with about 25 of us there had been Catholic, and naturally possessed some graven images. I deemed it well to elaborate on the Second Commandment, and with the aid of Consolation No. 480, with many scriptures, it was shown how abominable such images are in the sight of God. Without hesitation, and in the midst of the 25 there present, the father of the home, without saying one word, went into the other room and seized a huge crucifix with last year’s palms still on it, and going onto the back porch on the third floor heaved it to the ground and returned quite joyful, dusting his hands, and said: ‘There, that’s over withIsa. 2: 20.”
NEVER TOO OLD TO GET INTO JEHU’S CHARIOT
“After running ‘Victory’ in the home of an interested person a 74-year-old Kentuckian said. ‘First time I ever heard your lectures I belonged to the Christian Church, but that’s the truth. I know the truth when I hear it I will die for the truth ’ I said: ‘Would you like to go witnessing with us next Sunday?’ He said: ‘I will go.’ Following Sunday we went after him. Finding him in bed I asked him if he was ready. ‘I will be ready in a few minutes.’ Not waiting for breakfast, we were off in ten minutes to the field First thing after reaching the field we made a date for a Salvation study at an interested person’s for 2 p.m. After seven hours’ work and placing several books and booklets, we met at our place for study—surprised to be invited to a church house by a man who owned the building, on account of having enough seats. We accepted the offer and put on the lecture ‘Government and Peace’, with 38 attendance inside and some on the outside, with a clergyman in the dark corner who seemed to enjoy it without any controversy. All others enjoyed the lecture with a smile and invited us to come back any time. After taking my companion home, he said he wanted to work his home territory and would like to use the phonograph witnessing. I told him he would get it.”
SOUND-CAR PIONEERS IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
“One Sunday afternoon, in the big tent auditoriums of one of the U. S. migratory camps, mostly occupied by crop pickers here in Imperial Valley, we had the opportunity to play ‘Government and Peace’ to an audience of about 50 people. Following Thursday we returned to finish witnessing there, but were interrupted by the manager and two ot his aides. They told us to leave, and one of them attempted to escort one of the publishers out by taking him by th< arm. We left then, but returned with an additional workei next Sunday and completed witnessing to the camp without complaint or murmur from anyone. The four of us placed among these poor people eight bound books, fifty-five booklets, with 100 phonograph attendance Received orders for more literature, made arrangements for several back-calls, and met three persons who had been out in the work off and on and whom we encouraged to continue spreading the good news. Surely the Lord blessed our efforts in callnm back, where we expected to meet opposition. We pioneers in the Society’s sound-car are parked in a trailer camp alongside a main highway. The car is in such a position that it and the words ‘Lectures by Judge Rutherford’ and ‘Kingdom Message’ are clearly visible to the heavy passing traffic This resulted in several inquiries by passers-by One couple from a close-by town stopped and inquired, took Salvation, and said, when we arrive in their town to work, their hoim will be open for a Salvation study.”
RECEIVED FROM ST. AGATHE DES MONTS. PROV. QUEBEC
“Dear Sir: This last few weeks I have come across the most inspiring piece of literature, namely, that journal en titled La Tour de Garde [French], published by the Watchtower. Never in my life have I found a Bible teaching that shed so much light on the past and future of humanity Now I would like to have a one-year subscription of this journal . . Fraternally your brother in need of light, [signed] Leo G----.”
NOT UNLIKE JONAH BEING WAKED FROM SLEEP
“One day while in the door-to-door work I entered a home and played the record for a lady The house being very warm, I became sleepy and fell sound asleep while the record was playing When the record was finished, I was awakened and was asked where those books could be obtained. The lady then took literature on a contribution of 80c, and I arranged a back-call. The phonograph did all the work while I slumbered.”
BUCK-NUN STIRS UP INTEREST IN KINGDOM MESSAGE
“Someone telephoned him the news that the witness work was going on. ‘Yes,’ yelled the priest, ‘throw pots and pans, and everything else you can get your hands on, when they have the nerve to present themselves.’ The same afternoon they were telling me everything the priest told them that morning. Next day I continued in the service and was halted by the cop, of course, asking me to stop I spoke to him, and before long he himself listened to the phonograph When I had finished the village I found I had placed 3 Consolation magazines, 14 large books, at least 125 booklets, and more than twenty times the phonograph had been played. This New York village possesses about 1,000 people ’’
64
^TCHTOVVer
f'f. ’ f>
74
74
"They shall know that I am Jehovah?
- Ezekiel 35 15
Vol LXT
Power of
Semimonthly
MARCH 1, 1940
CONTENTS THE DEMON'S (P.Tt J)
Issue Corroborative Testimony ......
More Evidence	.............
Armageddon Next ..................
Rejecting the Truth........ ......
Further Evidence of Demon Power...
Torture ..........................
Protection
Will Man Die off the Earth’
The Pay-off . Appreciation and Assurance (letter) Field Experiences “Battle Siege” Testimony Period .. “Refugees” Memorial	.. .
“Model Study” No 2 “Watchtower” Studies
7ii


J Mr
“Y£AREMyW/rNE5S£5;5A!niJ£«OVAH,THATIAMGOD,”-l5a^3;)?Ii
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to Ins creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ tn glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun ; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth" with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expiessed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterance. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents tn the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personal.ties
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50. Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch othces. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn otlice, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .................... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian ......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathtleld. N. S. W„ Australia
South African .................Boston House, Cape Town, Soutb Africa
Please address the Society tn every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several lanpuapesj
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or ad\ersity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each >ear, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment ot a new or a renewal sub scription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with ttio journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N Y , under the Act of March 3, 1873
“BATTLE SIEGE" TESTIMONY PERIOD
Spring’s opening will be marked by the “Battle Siege” Testimony Period, during the whole month of April. It will be a pressing of the siege against religion by a campaign to increase yet more the subscription list of The Watchtower The unusual offer in effect during the campaign will operate greatly to that result, to wit, one year’s subscription for The Watchtower together with the premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covered booklet on a contribution of but one dollar; foreign countries, $1.50. This Testimony Period, which is world-wide in scope, will be the first of a three-month campaign with The Watchtower, and, due to the instant importance of what this magazine contains, the campaign is actually to be launched on March 23, the date of celebrating the Memorial. Now is none too soon to begin your preparation therefor, as to territory, equipment, time, supplies, distributor’s copies, etc. If unacquainted with an organized company of publishers in your locality, notify this office of your wish to get in touch with such for this Testimony. Those in foreign lands will write the branch office having supervision. The Informant (which is free) goes into greater detail on this.
“REFUGEES"
Millions of refugees of various sorts now nbroad in the earth, but this new booklet Refugees, written by the president of the Society, shows definitely how only such thereof as are ot good will may and will find the one safe, abiding Refuge and live By its very front-cover picture Refugees tells a powerful story, but the contents within this 64-page booklet convey a message that God’s refugees will rejoice to get, and that His publishers will have great joy in distributing to them Release of this booklet for distribution coincides with March 23, the day of the Memorial, and detailed instructions thereon are found in the Informant. You may procure a copy of Refugees direct by remitting a contribution of 5c per copy.
MEMORIAL
Saturday, March 23, after six p.m., is the date for 1940 for the yearly feast in celebration of Jehovah’s name and to the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King Each company, therefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 23, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers If there is no
(Continued on page 79)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol LXI	March 1, 1940	No ■'>
POWER OF THE DEMONS
PART 3
"And he cried with a mighty voice, saying, Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, and is become a habitation of demons, and a hold of every unclean spirit, and a hold of every unclean and hateful bird."
—Rev. 18:2, A.R.V.
JEHOVAH, by his Chief Messenger and Officer, in the foregoing text sounds the mighty warning to all persons on the earth who are of good will tow aid God. Satan’s organization has reached its limit in wickedness. The separation of those of good will towaid God from the supporters of the demoncontrolled world is now rapidly taking place, and the worldly system is degenerating with greater rapidity than at any time since the deluge. The so-called “Christendom”, with its demon religion, is in the most reprehensible position of all parts of the world because “Christendom’s” leaders have fraudulently and blasphemously posed as the representative of Almighty God, while at the same time acting completely in opposition to The Theocracy. “Christendom” indulges in a fixed formalism by which she claims to be godly, but at the same time enthely denying the power of Almighty God, and claims for men what belongs only to the Almighty. All the Scriptural evidence shows beyond any doubt that “Christendom”, with her demon-control of men, is modern Babylon, which has entirely turned away from God ard gone entirely over to the Devil. Every ciooked politician, every greedy commercial giant, and every conscienceless clergyman now finds a habitation in modern Babylon. They being in control of the unclean spirit demons, the Lord describes these crooked ones as ‘unclean and hateful birds’. Long ago Jehovah God gave his word that Satan and his demon associates would be permitted to remain and continue their unhindered opposition to him, and that for a certain time; and that at the end of such time God’s name must be declared throughout the earth, and which proclamation will be quickly followed by an exhibition of Jehovah’s supreme power against the wicked qhes. That time limit is up; hence the warning to all nations of the earth now being "oundcd—Ex. 9:16.
* Christ Jesus, the Executive Officer of The Theocracy. is enthroned as King. The demons have been
cast out of heaven and down to the earth, ami the Devil is now afflicting the peoples of the eai'li with ever increasing woes. (Rev. 12:1-12) To all of his people on earth Jehovah by Christ Jesu.' sends this message: “Come forth, my people, out of her [that is, Babylon, Satan’s organization, modern ‘Christendom’], that ye have no fellowship with, her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues ■ for her sins have reached even unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities.”—Rev. 18 4, 5, A.R.V.
3	This warning from the Lord means that even person who will maintain his integrity toward Jehovah God and receive God’s final approval through. Christ Jesus must separate himself and hold himself entirely separate from all things that pertain to demonism. Therefore he must shun religion and everything pertaining to religion, and put his tiu-t wholly and completely in the great THEOCRAT and his government. This warning does not come from men, but is from the Almighty God himself The Scriptural evidence, to which attention has been called in the two preceding issues of The Watchtou er. proves beyond all doubt that the world is now under the control of demons and in the worst condition imaginable. (1 John 5:19) Without any doubt, the Lord in these latter days has made his people to have a clear understanding that religion is of the Devil and is in violent opposition to Christianity, and this He has done in order that those consecrated to him may escape from the power and influence of the demons, which power and influence hang like a great pall over all humanity. For this reason the people of Almighty God now appreciate the admonition of God set forth in the Bible, to wit. “For the worship that is pure and holy before God the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and that one keep himself unspotted from the world."—Jas. 1 : 27, Synac Version.
4	By means of religion Satan has gained control of the world, and the only exception to that demon
68
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
control are those persons who worship Almighty God in spirit and in truth. Let every lover of righteousness now give heed to the warning which the Lord sounds. There is great danger lurking in the way of the consecrated, and some of these are liable to be turned away from the path of righteousness and lose everything. The present days are “the latter times” mentioned in the Bible and concerning which it is written: “Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith [and fall away to religion], giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron [thus marking them as demoncontrolled and hence instruments of the Devil].” (1 Tim. 4:1,2) In times past many have claimed to be followers of Christ Jesus and have regularly prayed the prayer which Jesus taught his followers, to wit: 'Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as in heaven,’ but have not prayed such prayer in sincerity. Such persons, falling away from the truth, refuse to further hear the message of God: “For the time will come when they will not endure the sound doctrine; but, having itching ears, will heap to themselves teachers after their own lusts; and will turn away their ears from the truth, and turn aside unto fables [doctrines of devils].” (2 Tim. 4: 3, 4, A.R.V.) Many of the clergy of the Protestant systems are today in the class here mentioned by the apostle. They follow the wisdom of “Christendom”, expressed by men, and not the wisdom of God’s Word.
6	Under the tutorship of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and prompted by the demons, many so-called “Protestant” clergymen have had bitterness in the heart and have exhibited toward the true servants of God bitter envy and in this have followed “Christendom’s” religious “wisdom”. The following scripture aptly applies to them: “But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not; and lie not against the truth. This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish [demoniacal (A.R.V., margin)].”—Jas. 3: 14,15.
8	Like the people of Athens, “Christendom’s” religion is demonism, resulting from the fear of men and the influence of demons. Note here the words of the inspired servant of the Lord: “Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars’ Hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.” (Acts 17:22) “And Paul, standing in the midst of the Areopagus, said, 'Athenians, I perceive that in all things you are extremely devoted to the worship of demons.’ ” (Acts 17: 22, Diaglott) “And Paul taking his stand in the midst of the Hill of Mars, said, Ye men of Athens! In every way, how unusually reverent of the demons
ye are I perceive.” (Acts 17: 22, Rotherham) Demons had control of them.
’ The religious Jews sought the death of Paul, who had abandoned religion and had become the servant of Christ, and their accusations against Paul were due to “their own demon-worship”, as Festus so declared. (Acts 25:14,18,19, Rotherham) From that day to this Jews have not changed from their position towards Jesus Christ, and hence their religion is the same today, to wit, deinonism. Now in these latter days the religious leaders, Catholic, Protestant and Jew, under the influence and power of the demons, seek to rule the world in a demonized, man-made way, which is directly opposite to the Theocratic Government. All the nations of earth today are in a state of fear, which is not fear of God, but fear of creatures, which fear is n duced by the demons and which is in exact contrast to the fear of Almighty God. (2 Tim. 1:7) For this reason the religious practitioners are those described in the 18th chapter of Revelation as being the inhabitants of Babylon and therefore as unclean and hateful birds, which befoul their own nest and exery-thing round about them.
VIALS
’ The book of the Bible known as The Revelation is Jehovah’s prophecy uttered by the Lord Jesus Christ in symbolisms and recorded by John his servant, and discloses that which must come to pass after the coming of Christ Jesus the king of the Theocratic Government. (Rev. 1: 1, 2) John, as the servant and messenger of the Lord, pictures those who are devoted to and who are faithfully serving God and Christ, and who by the Lonl are approved and brought into the temple and made His sonant-and message - bearers of Jehovah's mes-aize. The Lord Jesus at the temple is attended b\ his he-: of angels who perform his bidding and who, imd< i the Lord’s direction, cause the faithful sen ants of God on earth to perform certain duties. In his own due time the Lord caused the seven “vials” or messages of his wrath to be poured out as a warning. These seven vials or messages of wrath arc poured out in fulfillment of the prophetic utterance by Chri-t Jesus. A detailed consideration of such is set toith in Light, Books One and Two, and particularly treating Revelation chapters nine and sixteen. The angels serving the Lord Jesus act under his command; as it is written: “And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.”—Rev. 16:1.
’The faithful witnesses of Jehovah on earth have a part in pouring out these vials, that is, in announcing the message of God’s wrath Concerning
March 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
69
the sixth vial of God’s wrath, it is written: “And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared.” (Rev. 16:12) The great river Euphrates symbolically represents the peoples of earth, and the sixth vial poured out is a warning from God to the people of good will that they may flee from Babylon, the Devil’s organization, and turn to Jehovah’s organization under Christ, the King of the great Theocratic Government. “The kings of the east,” or those coining “from the sun rising”, as stated in the foregoing text, mean Jehovah, the great Theo-crat, and The Christ, Head and body. (Col. 1:18; Rev. 5:10; 1:5,6) The faithful followers of Christ Jesus upon the earth perform their part as witnesses or bearers of God’s message of wrath to the people. The ‘drying up of the waters of the great river Euphrates’ symbolically pictures the turning of the people of good will away from Satan’s organization, the religious systems, and which work greatly enrages all the demons and also those people on the earth who practice the demon religion. This is symbolically shown by what follows and to which John bore testimony, and which the John class, that is, the faithful witnesses of Jehovah on earth, actually discern. These faithful followers of Christ see the Devil’s organization moving forward to the great climax, and what they see is represented by John saying: “And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, as it were frogs.”—Rev. 16:13, A.R.V.
10	“Dragon” is one of the names of the Devil and means devourer, and stands for the Devil’s organization, the religious element particularly, which bitterly opposes Jehovah God and his Theocracy : “And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed [God’s organization], which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.”-Rev. 12 : 17.
11	The “woman” mentioned in the foregoing seventeenth verse symbolically represents God’s organization ; and against God’s servants the Dragon goes forth to make war, which servants here are described as “the remnant of her seed”. Satan makes war against them because they “keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ”. “The beast” is a symbol of Satan’s organization upon the earth, visible to men and made up of the religious, political and commercial elements. “The false prophet” is the earthly mouthpiece of Satan’s organization and does most of the talking for that wicked organization and utters particularly many loud and boastful claims as to what the visible rulers of the earth will soon accomplish. The "false
prophet” appears in the role of a political prognosticator attempting to foretell or proclaim what the demon organization will do for the peoples of earth. It will be noticed in all these “false prophet” prognostications no credit is ever given to Jehovah God and Christ for what shall be done for the people
12	The sixth vial of Jehovah’s wrath, above mentioned, corresponds to the sixth trumpet, described in Revelation 9:13-21. The pouring out of the vials and the sounding of the trumpets denote a time of woe to Satan’s organization, while to the people of God on earth the same denote a time of hailing THE THEOCRAT and Christ his King, and hence it is a time of joy and triumph to those who are wholly devoted to God. It means the approaching time of the battle of the great day of God Almighty and the complete victory therein of Christ Jesus, the irresistible Warrior. The vials and trumpets, therefore, constitute messages of warning which God has commanded must be delivered to the people. On July 24, 1927, the pouring out .of the sixth vial and the sounding of the sixth trumpet began, and these are still in progress. On August 5, 1928, the pouring out of the seventh vial and the sounding of the seventh trumpet began, and these are still in progress. The seventh poured out by the Lord through his angels was “into the air”, which wa>-specifically against the demons, that is, against the Devil and all of his organization. The seventh con stitutes the declaration of the Lord in favor of The Theocratic Government and against world rule by the Devil and his visible agents. The messages <>: the Lord relating to the sixth and seventh vials of trumpets greatly enraged the demons at the time and thereafter, and since which time these demons have fought against the witnesses of Jehovah, and these demons have brought into action the religious, political and financial leaders on earth, together with all the dupes who follow the lead thereof, against those who support the Lord.
ISSUE
” The vital issue, stated in brief, is this: Shall the world continue to be ruled by selfish men undei the invisible power and control of demons, or shall the rule of the world be by the great Theocrat operating by his exalted and enthroned King, Christ Jesus? Since the time of the sounding of the sixth and the seventh trumpet the people on eai’h who are of good will toward God have been steadily turning away from religion because they have seen that religion is a snare of the Devil and the Devil's associates and is operated as a racket against the people. This has so enraged the Devil and his associate demons and their representatives that the Devil has hastened to gather all his forces of wick-
70
^He WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, X Y
edncss to the battle of the great day of God Almighty, and which gathering is rapidly approaching the climax.—Rev. 16:13,14.
u Following the proclamation of the sixth trumpet the “three unclean spirits”, mentioned in verse thirteen, have been exceedingly active, making great noise and exercising much influence and power. Such spirits could in no wise be representatives of the Almighty God, because it is stated in the Scriptures that they are all unclean: “For they are [the] spirits of demons.” (A.R.V.) And what is the work of those unclean demons! The Scriptures answer, To gather the rulers of the earth and their supporters, that is, the whole world, to the battle of the great day of God Almighty. The Devil sees that his time is short (Rev. 12:12) and that he can now make good his wicked challenge to Jehovah only by destroying all the peoples of all the nations of the earth.
’’Never in time has there been so much woe and distress on the earth as just now. Fear has driven all the nations to the point of desperation. Wars are begun and carried on without any previous notice or declaration. Wickedness in high places, and also in low places, is greater than ever known, and there is nothing to compare with the present day of wickedness except the prototype, that is, the condition on earth in the time of Noah, when the demons overran the earth and God destroyed the visible world in the great deluge, or flood. The earthly leaders sense the coming of a great climax resulting in disaster, and therefore they issue a statement that, unless peace is soon established amongst the nations, the human race will soon perish. Instead of turning to God and the plain instruction given in God’s Word, and ascertaining the real cause of the trouble and the remedy therefor, the worldly rulers turn wholly to the Devil and his associate demons and representatives. Religion, politics and commerce, the three elements visibly ruling this world, step to the fore and with one accord proclaim to the people, “We must have more religion, else our civilization will soon perish.” Thus they act as the mouthpiece of these demons or devils to force all the people into religion, the Devil himself knowing that such will end up in destruction. Note the present-day evidence in fulfillment of prophecy. Only those of good will toward God will note and appreciate the same and give heed to the Word of the Almighty.
CORROBORATIVE TESTIMONY
16	The president of the United States, on December 23, 1939, announces the appointment of an ambassador to the Vatican, which is the chief headquarters of religion on earth. That ambassador is sent to the pope, as the president states, as “my per
sonal representative in order that our parallel endeavors for peace and the alleviation of suffeiinu may be assisted.” (Of course, the United States government foots the bill, and, without consent of the people of the nation, they are made to recognize the pope as the chief religious leader on the earth, and that he is now in league with the United States government.) Continuing, the letter of the president to the pope says: “When the time shall come for the n -establishment of world peace on a surer foundation, it is of the utmost importance to humanity and to religion that common ideals shall have united expression. ... I trust, therefore, that all of the churches of the world which believe in a common God [not Jehovah God, since He is not the eommoi God of religion and politics and they do not fear and obey God, but oppose his government! will throw the great weight of their influence into this great cause.”
” As further evidence that the president, as a po litical power and one of the world rulers, ignores the Creator and relies on man, note that part of his letter to the pope, “This world has created for itself a civilization capable of giving to mankind security and peace firmly set in the foundations of religious teachings. Yet, though it has conquered the earth, the sea, and even the air, civilization toda\ passes through war and travail.”
18	Note the frog-like croaking, boasting, and loud language, to wit: “The world has created for itsell a civilization capable of giving to mankind security and peace firmly set in the foundations of religious teachings.” The ambassador appointed to the Vatican is Myron C. Taylor, a former head of the United States Steel Corporation, one of the greatest coporations on earth, which devotes most of its energ) and money to building war equipment for the d< struction of human lives. Surely no sensible pm so . would say that such a one represents the ureat “Prince of Peace”, Christ Jesus. At the same time the president announces that he has invited tin-president of the Federal Council of Churches, whirl ostensibly is Protestant, and also the president of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, which practice the Jew religion, to consult with him and to act as spokesmen for American Protestantisii and American Jewry, in the common cause of th” three “faiths”, thus proposing a closer relationship, if possible, between religion, politics and finance t<> govern the earth in opposition to the Almighty God and his King, Christ Jesus.
Here is a concrete example and the most pm
suasive proof that religion, politics and commerce are closely linked together for the purpose of estab
lishing peace, regimenting the people, and rulin the earth, and which is a claim by man of bein
x tr
March 1,1940
WATCHTOWER
71
able to do what alone Almighty God can do. This, in connection with the boast of what the world has created for itself, is assuming to do that which is impossible for man to accomplish. “Blasphemy” is properly defined to be a claim by man to do that which God alone can do. The combination of religion, politics and commerce is in open opposition to the Theocratic Government, and therefore the boasting words of the combination are clearly blasphemous. Jesus, the King of The Theocracy, says: “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.” (Matt. 12:30) Clearly, then, the religious, political, commercial combine does not gather with Christ Jesus the King, but opposes him; which is further proof that it is Satan who is using religion, politics and commerce to deceive the people and to plunge them into destruction.
20	Let it be conceded that the purpose of the aforementioned persons to establish peace in the earth is sincere; yet that does not alter the matter in the least, because their announced purpose is exact!} contrary to the announced purpose of the great Theocrat and in defiance of His Word, hence proving that they are the representatives of the demons. For several years I'he Watchtowei has been calling attention to the fact that the alliance of religion, politics and commerce is against Jehovah’s kingdom. Much evidence in the past has appeared in support of that statement. The evidence announced herein should convince all persons who believe in Jehovah God and Christ Jesus that by means of religion the Devil is leading all the nations of the earth into the ditch. The declaration sent out now by religionists, politicians and commercial giants is directly against Almighty God and his King and is in defiance of the words of Jehovah, to wit: “Behold, my servant whom I have chosen; my beloved m whom my soul is well pleased; I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall declare judgment to the Gen-■jles [nations], . . . And in his name shall the Gentiles [nations] hope.” (Matt. 12:18,21, A.R.V.; Isa. 42: 1-7) God’s announced purpose must be and will he carried out, because he has so stated.—Isa. 4G: 11.
MORE EVIDENCE
21	The pope received the message of Mr. Roosevelt with real satisfaction and notified the president that his ambassador would be well and gladly received. Then on the 28th day of December, 1939, the pope made a personal call upon the king of Italy, and concerning which the Associated Press says: “Pope Pius XII called upon Italy’s king and queen today in the first visit by any pope on a temporal prince in more than seventy years. . . . The pope went to the Quirinal palace amid great pomp and
[religious] ceremony.” In this the pope certainly was not following the lead of the meek and lowly Christ Jesus when he was on earth. The Press report further says: ‘Pope Pius today, in a brief speech after the ceremonial meeting with the king and queen, said “the visit resealed the happy accord between church and state”.’ These facts constitute further proof of the confederacy between religion and politics, supported by selfish commerce, to establish a so-called “peace of the world” and to rule the earth in complete defiance of the Word of Almighty God. Shall the efforts of such men succeed? Jehovah, speaking to that unholy combine, says: “Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us.” (Isa. 8: 9, 10) God is with Christ Jesus and all who support The Theocracy against any combine that acts in defiance of His Word.
22	The Catholic press, and all Catholic and other religion-controlled publications, will fully support the united efforts of the religious, political and commercial combine to establish world peace, as suggested by the president of the United States. For some time now the public press has been boldly supporting the religionists, because the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has placed some trusted representative in every organization of the metropolitan press. The Catholic press has become a tremendous factor in influencing the people and turning them into demonism. That religious organization engages in the politics of the world on a vast scale. The December 1G, 1939, issue of The Nation publishes an article undei the title “The Catholic Press” which well says: “The American Catholic press is a vital part of the church’s political machinery and was greatly encouraged by Pope Pius XI, who saw it as a powerful agency of Catholic Action—that is, co-operation between laity and hierarchy for the attainment of Catholic aims. ... On international issues the Catholic press has always advocated whatever political course would further church power. It opposed American foreign intervention in support of the Hungarian Kossuth, a Protestant; it favored intervention in behalf of the Catholics in Ireland and in Mexico. It has opposed extending the ‘Good Neighbor’ spirit in Latin America for fear of spreading Protestantism.” “These Catholic fascist movements flowered when papal diplomacy was in the hands of the present pope.” “Judged by any standard of modern journalism, the coverage of the wai in Spain given by the official Catholic news agency
72
WATCHTOWER.
Bhuoklyn, N. Y.
must be considered one of the most dishonest efforts of our age.”
” It is clearly to be seen that the primary purpose of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is to rule the earth contrary to God’s commandment; which is further proof that said religious institution is the chief instrument on earth of the demons to deceive the people and lead them blindly into destruction.
14 Divine prophecy now in course of fulfillment shows beyond all doubt that the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule is at hand and that the climax will soon be upon the world in the form of the battle of the great day of God Almighty. In the face of all this indisputable proof the religionists today take the lead in the united effort to rule the world by men contrary to God’s announced purpose. In their endeavors to accomplish that purpose the religionists disregard the truth and freely resort to lies. Knowing that the religionists would resort to lies, God through his prophet foretold that the religionists, in justification of their acts, would say, in these latter days particularly: “We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.” (Isa. 28:15) Exactly this is what the Catholic press today is doing, not hesitating to resort to all manner of lies to deceive the people. The press, under the control of the Hierarchy, advocates a unity with any political movement that will further the interest of the Hierarchy, and hesitates not to resort to all manner of lies to cover up their wrongful course and to ease their conscience. The fact that the Hierarchy and their dupes resort to lies is further proof that it is the Devil and his associated demons that are back of the world-movement of religion, politics and commerce to now bring about a peace and the rulership of the world. Satan is the chief amongst all liars. He is the father of lies, and in him there is no truth, and his supporters and dupes follow exactly his lead. (John 8:44) Religion’s being the chief instrument of the Devil on earth and the politicians’ calling for “more religion” further support the conclusion that the Devil is trying to plunge the whole world into destruction.—Rev. 16:14,16.
ARMAGEDDON NEXT
58 President Roosevelt’s letter to the pope, and his appointment of an ambassador to the Vatican and his calling leading Protestants and the leading Jew religionists to join with him in establishing world peace, is hailed by the press as the greatest news of modern times. Will that scheme, originating with the chief of demons, to establish peace amongst the nations, succeed! For a brief period of time only; and this conclusion is fully supported by the Scriptures. It must be expected that soon the nations will
arrive at some kind of peace agreement, and then the religious and political leaders will receive great honor and praise at the hands of the deluded masses of the people. The Scriptures point out that then those who have yielded to religion and have coine under the influence and power of the demons will say concerning the world rule by religion, politics and commerce, the symbolic “beast”: “Who is like unto the beast! who is able to make war with him!” (Rev. 13:4) Then will the unholy combine, drawn together and acting as the visible representatives of the Devil, announce to the world, “We have brought about peace,” and will also say, “Peace and safety.” Then what shall follow! The Scriptures answer: “For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.” —1 Thess. 5: 3.
REJECTING THE TRUTH
26	Deluded religionists stubbornly resist the truth of God’s Word; and this is the result of demon influence. Israel’s king Saul stubbornly refused to hear and obey the truth. Then Jehovah through his prophet said to Saul: “To obey is better than sacrifice, . . . for rebellion is the sin of witchcraft; and stubbornness, iniquity and idolatry.’ (1 Sam. 15:23. Leeser) The person who willfully refuses to hear and obey the truth of God’s Word when the truth is presented to him thereby opens the door and invites the demons to come in. The demons then obsess him, that is, besiege his mind and bring that creature under their control. Many who think themselves servants of God are stubborn and rebellious, refusing to obey God’s Word, and thus yield to demon influence. Therefore Jehovah admonishes those who would find safety in the day of his wrath to “seek righteousness, seek meekness”, before that great and terrible day. (Zeph. 2:1-3) That is to say, Let those who earnestly desire safety and protection be diligent to seek and to do what is right and to ascertain from God’s Word what is the right course, and be willing and anxious to hear and to obey the Word of God, because their hearing and obedience are better than all the sacrifice they could perform. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and like religious leaders urge the people to refuse to give heed to the message of God’s Word when brought to them by Jehovah’s witnesses; and thus the clergy are guilty of aiding the demons in deceiving and blinding the people. The deluded ones, for fear of the clergy, fall into the snare of the Devil. The honest and sincere persons, who give heed to the Word of God, seek righteousness and meekness, and such only find the way of escape and safety at Armageddon. The stubborn and rebellious ones will perish at Armageddon.
March 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
73
FURTHER EVIDENCE OF DEMON POWER
27	The following scriptures are cited to show the demon methods employed to turn mankind away from God. The ones who readily yield to the demon influence are shown to be the emotional, religious practitioners. These are easy victims of the demons and are therefore kept in blindness. The demons besiege or obsess the mind and thereby gain possession or control of the human creature, causing such creature or creatures to indulge in many unreasonable things, such as to run wild and shriek, inflict self-torture, and otherwise pollute themselves. The mass of the insane persons are victims of the demons, being under the power and influence of them. Note the Scriptural evidence in the following texts: Matthew 8:28,29; Matthew 17:15; Mark 5:2-5; Luke 8:27-36; Jeremiah 7:31; Jeremiah 19:5; Psalm 106:37,38.
29	Another method of the demons is to vex and enslave their victims so that the human creature or creatures have no control over themselves or their actions. (Matt. 4: 24; 8:16; 15: 22; Mark 1:32; Luke 6:18; Acts 5:16) A specific case is cited in the Scriptures of seven demons possessing one human, causing great distraction and confusion. (Luke 8 2) The demons have power to paralyze (and do paralyze) human creatures and to cause dumbness and other physical disabilities. (Luke 9:3842; 11:14; Matt. 9:32,33) They also cause human creatures to lose the power of sight and of hearing and speech. (Matt. 12: 22) They also have power over human creatures to be held for a long period of time in a bowed or bent condition of body, being unable to straighten up.—Luke 13:11-13,16.
28	Religionists who believe their dead friends are in fact alive in “purgatory” are the victims of demon influence and power. The Scriptures, without contradiction, show that the dead are unconscious, out of existence.—Eccl. 9:5,6; Ps. 115:17.
30	Victims of demons, being under the influence of demon religion, often hear voices, which voices they are made to believe are those of persons who have long been dead. Such voices, in fact, are the voices of demons impersonating those who have died, and doing so for the purpose of deceiving human creatures who are alive. A striking instance is that at 1 Samuel 28:7-15.
T3RTU7.2
31	Imprisonment and torture originated with the Devil and are practiced only by those who have yielded to the Devil or demon religion. The first re-<. orded instance of torture or tormenting, as stated m the Bible, is assigned to the prince of devils, and .- hows that religionists were used by the Devil to inflict such torment upon Job. The Scriptures show
that the Devil and his associate demons brought about the destruction of Job’s children and his property, and then caused his wife to torment him, and then three religionists came and indulged in a long tormenting harangue, all of which was done for the purpose of turning Job away from God and causing him to be destroyed. Their efforts failed.—See Job, chapters one to three.
32	Those who yield to demon influence soon find pleasure in torturing other human creatures, and particularly those human creatures who boldly give testimony to the name of Jehovah God and his kingdom. Take note of the many fiendish acts of abuse, torment and torture heaped upon the faithful witnesses of Jehovah by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allies, the Nazis, Fascists and other religious totalitarians. Prisons and concentration camps have in recent months become places of torture of Jehovah’s witnesses and others. All of such imprisonment and torture results from the influence and power of demons exercised over people by the practitioners of religion.
33	The law of Jehovah God, given to his chosen people at the hand of Moses, makes no provision for inflicting punishment upon creatures by imprisonment or concentration camps of torture. The first mention made in the Bible of such places of restraint and torment is attributed to the religious, demon-worshiping Egyptians, and which was exercised against God’s innocent servant, Joseph. (Gen. 40:15; 41:14; Ps. 105:17,18) Egypt held many captives in “the dungeon”, or “the house of the pit”. (Ex. 12:29, margin) Such means of imprisonment and torture originated with Satan, the prince of demons, as shown by the Scriptures at Genesis 6: 1-4, and 1 Peter 3:19, 20.
34	The demon religionists, the Philistines, put God\ servant Samson in prison and forced him to indulge in heavy labor. (Judg. 16:21-25) The ten unfaithful tribes of Israel fell away from God by reason of religious influence, became the victims of demons, and thereafter followed the Devil’s lead by setting up and maintaining prisons wherein were confined Jehovah’s faithful prophets and servants. (1 Ki. 22:26,27) It is written: “Asa [the unfaithful, demon-worshiping king of Israel] was wroth with the seer [prophet; one of Jehovah’s witnesses], and put him in a prison house [of torture {Young's translation)^ ; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people the same time.”—2 Chron. 16:10.
33	The demon-worshiping enemies gathered God’s people into the pit and dungeon. (Isa. 24:22, margin; Zech. 9:11) The king of Assyria, the demonreligionist, put the king of Israel in state’s prison. (2 Ki. 17:4) The ruler of Babylon, who practiced
74
SEe WATCHTOW ER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
demon religion, imprisoned the Jews and put them on strict prison fare. (2 Ki. 25: 27-30) Zedekiah, the unfaithful, demon-religious king, maintained torture places or “stocks" in Jerusalem, and in these places the prophet Jeremiah was imprisoned. (Jer. 20: 2, 3) The same demon-worshiping king had the faithful prophet of God thrown into a filthy, miry pit.—Jer. 37:16; 38:6-13.
39	Christ Jesus, the holy and innocent One, was, at the instance of religionists, temporarily put in prison, tortured and disgraced.—Isa. 53: 8.
" The religious, demon-controlled Jews maintained prisons and committed God's faithful servants to such prisons and places of torture. (Acts 5:17-25; 8:3; 22:4,19; 26:10) At the instance of. religionists the apostle Peter was chained between two prison guards.—Acts 12: 6, 7.
38	All the totalitarian states are under the control of demons and practice the demon religion, and at their hands Jehovah’s witnesses today suffer great indignities, imprisonment and torture. Specific examples of such demon-religion practice, and punishment and imprisonment of Jehovah’s witnesses are found in the state of New Jersey, the United States, in Germany, in Quebec, and in other like places.
’* The demon-religion practitioners exalt the political state today even as they did in times past, when the politicians and demon-religionists acted together to punish Jehovah’s faithful servants. (Dan. 3: 8-27) Today the demon-religionists, led by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, induce the political law-making and law-enforcement bodies to inaugurate compulsory flag-saluting, the repeating of national oaths of allegiance, and hailing of men, all of which is done at the instance of the Devil and his associate demons. While all such religious, political rulers by their mouths utter the prayer which Jesus taught his followers to pray concerning God’s kingdom and that they might be delivered from temptation, yet not one of them does so sincerely and consistently,
and they have no real desire to have such prayer answered. They are blind, in the dark as to God's purpose, and blindly yield to the influence and powei of demons.
40	The foregoing great array of Scriptural testimony, which is not subject to successful contradiction, proves beyond all doubt that all religion originated with and is forced upon the people by the Devil and his associate demons, and that the purpose of such is to turn the people away from God and cause them to go into complete destruction. Now in these last days, and just preceding Armageddon. Almighty God by and through Christ Jesus is clearh and plainly putting these truths of and concerning religion and demonism before the people. This he is doing as a warning to them. All persons now hearing the message of warning will by their course of action show which side they are on. The Lord is separating the people of good will, his sheep, from the demon-controlled, the goats. (Matt. 25:31-46'1 All those who will hear the warning and give heed thereto will flee from religion to the place of safetx under God’s organization. All who refuse to near and obey will find the same fate as that of the Devil and all his angels.—Matt. 24: 16; 25 : 41.
PROTECTION
41	Again let the people be reminded that religion is a snare and a racket, originating with the Devil, the leader of the demons, and forced upon the people by the demons: the snare of the Devil, in which to catch the people, and the racket of the religious leaders to rob the people. All the practitioners of religion, and the adherents thereto, will find no place of safety or escape at Armageddon. The scripture plainly says that ‘none shall escape’. (1 Thess. 5'3) The only place of protection and safety is loi those who put their trust entirely in God and m Christ his King. AU who would find the place of safety, remember these words: “Whoso putteth his trust in Jehovah shall be safe.”—Prov. 29:25, A.li.V.
WILL MAN DIE
MILLIONS have without investigation accepted what religion has taught, to wit: “God will destroy the earth; and then all those living in the world will perish with its destruction and then be judged. The ‘dead’ means, therefore, all those who died before the destruction of the world, and the ‘living* all those who were on earth when the time of its destruction came. Or the ‘living* may mean also those in a state of grace, and the ‘dead’ those in mortal sin ; for God will judge both classes.”—Quoted from Explanation of the Baltimore Catechism, 1921 Edition, Imprimatur of Archbishop of New York, page 22, under “The living and the dead”.
What does God the Creator himself say respecting the earth and man upon the earth ? It is God’s purpose that the
OFF THE EARTH?
earth shall never be destroyed. “The earth abideth for evei " (Ecel. 1:4) Since the earth is to stand for ever, it follows that it is the purpose of God that it shall be used for evei That man was created for the earth and that the earth was created for man there is not the slightest room for doubt Upon this point God’s will is expressed, at Isaiah 4f> 12, Is “For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited , I am the Lord, and there is none else. I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded.” Since the dominion of all things resides in Jehovah, he could give it to whomsoever he might will. It is
March 1, 1940
Zfe WATCHTOWER.
written (Psalm 24 1): “The earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.” Psalm 115-16- “The heaven, even the heavens, are the Lord’s, but the earth hath he given to the children of men.”
Man, as well as the earth, belongs to Jehovah God, because God created man. The authority of man to have dominion over the earth having been conferred upon man by Je.’iovah, man must exercise that authority and dominion in harmony with God’s will. When Adam was granted dominion and made a prince in the earth as the son of the great Theocrat and King of Eternity, the duty and obligation devolved upon Adam to exercise that authority in .harmony with Ins Creator. Adam was placed in Eden as its caretaker (Gen. 2 : 8, 15) He was not required to put forth laborious efforts to produce his food. Eden yielded freely all the food that was essential for his sustenance and for Ins pleasure He was given control over the animals, the fowls, and the fish, and these were to render and did render obedience to him. (Gen. 1:26-28) He was clothed with power and authority to produce his own kind and “fill the earth” Had he exercised that God-given authority in harmony with his Creator's will he would have produced a perfect and happy family of children and the earth would have been filled with a righteous race. God gave Adam the privilege to exercise his own faculties He could willingly obey or disobey This, however, did not at all relieve him of the obligation of being in harmony with Jehovah the great Tliecurat and exercising his authority m harmony  with (tod’s holy will
Religion, misrepresenting God and his Word, has led the people to believe that this earth, was made to be a breeding ground for peopling heaven and that had Adam remained a good and faithful officer of Jehovah God then God would in due time have taken him to heaven Quoting again from the above Explanation of the Baltimore Catechism, page 61, fll- “Our first parents and their children were not to remain in the garden of Paradise forever, but were, after spending their alloted time of trial or probation upon earth, to be taken body and soul into heaven without being obliged to die.” For this catechismal statement no Scripture proof is quoted, and there is absolutely no evidence upon which to base such a conclusion. Adam had no promise of heaven There never was a possibility, under any cm umstances or conditions, of his going to heaven He was strictly and purely of the earth. The earth alone was to be his everlasting home. Concerning this 1 Corinthians 15:47 sa\ s "The first man is of the earth, earthy ” Since the earth was made for the home of man, we should not expect to find any promise of heaven for him, and there is not a word found in the Scriptures whereby Adam was promised heaven as a home First four thousand years later was any heavenly opportunity opened up for any creature on earth, when Christ Jesus, in behalf of his faithful footstep followers, opened up “a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh”, •to enter into the holiest,” “heaven itself.” (Heb 10.19, 20; 9 24) Such ones have been begotten of God’s spirit, “to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven.” (1 Pet. 1-3,4) A proper understanding of this matter will enable man to have a e.ear understanding of what shall be the final destiny of the human family.
73
The Scriptures show that God gave man life and gave him dominion in the earth upon the expressed condition that man be obedient to God. Should man never be disobedient, and always remain in harmony with his Creator, he would forever enjoy life and dominion over the earth But in the event he should become a rebellious creature, then the condition was attached, as stated by God: “Thou shalt sureh die.” (Gen. 2:17) With the coming of death all thing-; would be lost. Death, therefore, would conclusively prove that man’s dominion and his life were held conditionally
There is no thought expressed in the creation of man, with dominion granted to him, that he should ever go to torment if he wickedly rebelled. There is no thought expressed in the Bible anywhere that God purposes to put any of his creatures into a place of endless torture On the contrary, the declaration of his law is plain and simple, and means that the life and dominion of Adam were granted upon condition that he obey and that disobedience would mean the loss of his authority and his life “The Lord pre-serveth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.”—Ps. 145: 20.
It was in keeping with God’s loving provision for man to appoint an overseer or helper or protector who would aid man in avoiding the doing of that which was wrong and would bring upon man the penalty for any violation of God’s law. It was the bright “Shining One”, or “morningstar”, or “Lucifer”, the cherubic spirit creature, whom God selected and placed in Eden as overlord or protector of man (See Isaiah 14-12, according to Rotherham’s, Young's, Lecser’s, and the Authorized Version’s translations ) Concerning him and his appointment to this responsible office God said: “Thou art the anointed cherub that coverelh, and I have set thee so.” (Ezek. 28-14) “Cherub” means an officer or deputy to whom are delegated certain heavenly powers and duties. “Anointed” means that Lucifer, the cherub, was clothed with power and authority in the name of God to do certain things; and in this instance he was clothed with power and authority as overlord m the “garden of God” to look after the interests of man and to keep him in the right way. He must ‘cover’, that is, screen, shield protect. It therefore follows that Lucifer was clothed with power and authority to act as an overseer for man, to screen, to shield and protect him from taking a wrongful course by violating God’s law. It was Lucifer’s solemn dutv, both to man and to God, to direct and influence humanity to go in the right way, that man might thereby honor God and prolong his life on the earth.
God had also clothed Lucifer with the “power of death”. (See Hebrews 2: 14.) It was therefore a part of the official duty of Lucifer to put the man to death if he did violate God’s law. For this reason Lucifer occupied a confidential relationship toward God and man. There was committed into his hands a sacred trust of keeping God’s newly-begun government on earth in a pure and proper condition To betray that trust in order that he might overturn God’s appointed means of government in Eden would be an act of treason. The perpetration of the crime of treason under such conditions would cover the perpetrator with perfidy and make him a nefarious, despicable creature and the blackest of all criminals. Lucifer, of course, knew that God had empowered man to produce his own species and that
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y
i 6
in due time the earth would be filled with a perfect race of people. He knew that man was so created that he must worship his benefactor. He knew that he must destroy in the mind of man the thought that God is his benefactor. Lucifer became ambitious to control the human race and to receive the worship to which God was justly entitled.
Lucifer was impressed with his own beauty and importance and power, and forgot that he owed an obligation to his Creator. Selfishness entered his heart. His motive was wrong and his heart became malignant. He was moved to take action concerning Adam, and his motive was wicked. Concerning this purpose Isaiah 14:13, 14 records of Lucifer: “Thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High.” The Scriptures clearly show that Lucifer’s process of reasoning was like this:
‘I am overlord of man in Eden. I have the power to put man to death, but even though man violates God’s law I will not exercise that power. I will induce man to believe God is not his friend and benefactor but in truth and in fact is deceiving man. Besides this, God will not be able to put man to death and at the same time maintain his own consistency; because he has declared that that tree in the midst of Eden is the tree of life, and to eat of that tree means that one will live forever. I will therefore take man to that tree and direct him to eat, and then he will not die, but will live forever on the earth.
‘But before I do that I will first induce Adam to believe God is keeping him in ignorance and withholding from him the things that he is justly entitled to receive. Adam loves his wife. I will first induce Eve to do my bidding, and then through her I shall be able to control Adam. I will so throw the circumstances around Adam that he too will be induced to eat of the forbidden tree of knowledge, and then I will iefuse to put either of them to death. Then I will immediately take them to the tree of life and have them eat of that fruit. Then they will live forever, and not die. By this means I will win them over to me and I will keep them alive forever. I will defy God ; and while he has a realm of angels and other creatures of heaven that worship him, I shall be like the Most High and shall be worshiped even as God is worshiped.’
That was the beginning of religion; for religion, all religion, is contrary to the “pure worship” of Jehovah God according to his commandments. It was a cunning scheme that Lucifer thus devised ; he thought it was a wise scheme. Evidently God knew about it from its inception, but he did not interfere until Lucifer had gone to the point of committing the overt act of overreaching man and inducing him to sin. Concerning this, God said: “Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty; thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness.” (Ezek. 28:17) This selfish meditation in Lucifer’s heart was the beginning of iniquity in him. Up to that time he had been perfect. Of him God says: “Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.” (Ezek. 28:15) The imperfection of Lucifer dates from that moment.
Having carefully planned his crime, Lucifer now pro
ceeds to carry it out. To do so he resorts to religious fraud, deception and lying. When Christ Jesus was on the earth he stated that the rebellious Lucifer “is a liar, and the father of it” (John 8:44) ; thereby showing that Lucifer gave utterance to the first lie that was ever told That lie was, ‘There is no death’ (Gen. 3:4); and the servants of the wicked one have been telling that lie to the people ever since.
Lucifer employed the serpent to carry out his scheme, because the serpent was more subtle than any other beast of the field which the Lord God had made. Lucifer (now Satan the Devil) therefore spoke through the serpent and said “Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?” “And the woman said unto the serpent, \Ve max eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden, but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die: for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened; and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat; and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.” (Gen 3- 1-G) Thus "b\ one man sin entered into the world, and death by sm ; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned" —Rom. 5:12.
As a result of that rebellion God’s mandate to humankind to “be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth”, as stated at Genesis 1: 28, was never demonstrated under righteous conditions, and, not having since been earned out in righteousness, has not been carried out at all according to God’s will and command. Adam and Eve failed to raise up a righteous generation because they both sinned before beginning to exercise the function of bringing children into the world. After the now approaching battle of Armageddon willful violators of God's law will all be gone from the earth, and the “great multitude” of people of good will toward Jehovah and his Theocratic Government who survive, being righteous, by God’s grace, and being thus counted by him because of their faith and obedience, may then fulfill the divine mandate, to “multiply and fill the earth’ The kingdom of God being then in full operation and being unto life for the obedient ones on earth, then ti e words of Jesus apply: “If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death” ■ and, “Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.” (John 8:51, 11: 26) Then, also, the children of the “great multitude” conceived under the theocratic kingdom would be conceived unto life by the grace of God through Christ Jesus. Lucifer, as man’s overlord, failed in the performance of the commission given to him because he rebelled and then led Adam and Eve into sir. before they exercised the divinely given function to bring children into the world. Christ Jesus, the King and man’s righteous overlord, will do what Lucifer failed to do Christ Jesus will carry out the commission given to him and will permit nothing to hinder the carrying out of the divine mandate from being performed by righteous men on earth Thus will be demonstrated that God’s commandment to “fill the earth” with a righteous people will be accomplished That will be a vindication of the name of Jehovah and will
March 1,1940
3Te WATCHTOWER
11
fully demonstrate to men and angels that Satan is a liar and only God is true. The destruction of the wicked at Armageddon will make room for the earth to be properly filled. The original divine mandate given to Adam and Eve in Eden, and restated to Noah’s family after the flood, wfll successfully be carried out after Armageddon in right
eousness by the “great multitude” of surviving “men of good will” on the earth. ‘They shall not labour in vain, nor have children for terror, for they are the seed of the blessed of Jehovah, and their offspring with them.’ (Isa. 65-23, Rotherham) Thus Jehovah God created the earth not in vain; “he formed it to be inhabited.”—Isa. 45: 18.
THE PAY-OFF
WHEN Jehovah God restored a faithful remnant of the Jews to their native land in 536 B.C., delivering them from their captivity in the heathen land of Babylon, and setting them to work at rebuilding the temple of the Lord God at Jerusalem, this little remnant of about 50,000 Jews and their companions were still surrounded by the traditional enemies of Israel. To the north there was Syria, with its chief city Damascus and its false god Hadrach To the west and along the Mediterranean seacoast there was Philistia, with its Pentarchy, or alliance of the five main cities, to wit, Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, Ashdod, and Gath; and above Philistia there was situate Phoenicia, with its cities of great antiquity and commercial power, to wit, Tyre and Zidon.
The Jewish remnant of that day foreshadowed the little remnant of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses on earth since A D. 1918, the jear that marked the end of the World War. Jehovah comforts tins remnant by telling them in advance what shall be the fate of their enemies who persecuted them (Isa 42: 9) Some of Jehovah’s witnesses have at times inclined to become discouraged when they do not see plainly that prosperity and the Lord’s blessing are with them. The enemy continues to persecute them and attempts to hinder the work in which they are engaged, and some of the weaker ones wonder just why this is permitted. Jehovah is permitting each one who hears the truth to identify himself as being either for or against the kingdom. The remnant must keep this m mind always, that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the all-important thing and the kingdom will vindicate his name. Jehovah gives assurance to his faithful witnesses that they shall have a part in the execution of his judgment written long ago in his Word (Ps. 149:9) By his prophet Zechariah, who prophesied to the ancient Jewish remnant at Jerusalem, Jehovah tells the temple builders of today what his judgment, previously written, is against those who oppose God and the builders of his palace or temple.
In the following prophecy of Zechariah the word “burden” means “an utterance of doom”, that is to say, a written penal decree announcing the fate or destiny of the one named. Zechariah was caused to write (9 • 1) ■ “The burden of the word of the Lord in the land [the Revised Version has upon the land; and Leeser's translation has: concerning the land] of Hadrach, and Damascus shall be the rest [lodging-place] thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, shall be toward the Lord.” The name “Hadrach” is identified with Syria and, some authorities say, refers to a Syrian deity. At Isaiah 7:8 it is written: “For the head of Syria is Damascus.” The doom pronounced shows that it finds its ‘resting place’ on Damascus. The name “Damascus” means “industry”, or, “busy place.” It was the capital of Syria, and a busy and industrious place
for Satan and his representatives, even in the days of Abraham, the forefather of the Jews. (Gen. 14:14,15, 15 2) In the day of King Jehoiakim, who reigned at Jerusalem, the Syrians participated in the assault on that city, and this was shortly before the destruction of Jerusalem. (2 Ki. 24:1-5; Jer. 35:11) Both Damascus and the League of Nations of today are products of Satan, the League of Nations being particularly brought out by the British Empire-America combine, or the seventh world power foretold in the Bible. Damascus clearly pictures a part of that League of Nations, because Rezin, the king of Damascus in Syria, confederated with or formed a league with the ten rebellious tribes of Israel against Jerusalem. (Isa. 7 :1, 2, 8) Jehovah caused the prophet Isaiah to give a name to one of Isaiah’s sons, to signify that judgment would be meted out on this league or confederacy. See Isaiah 8:1-4, 9-12.
God’s prophet Ezekiel (27 :16,18), addressing commercial Tyre, said: “Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy making; they occupied tn thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate. Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy making, for the multitude of all riches; in the wine of Helbon [near Damascus], and white wool.” This statement shows that Damascus pictured a commercial element of Satan’s organization and that has intercourse with the commercial-religious-political organization of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Damascus was in an ancient league, and the modern League of Nations is the handmaid of Big Business; hence Damascus of old stands for the commercial-religious part of Satan’s organization upon which the doom of the Lord finds ‘its resting place’ “For Jehovah hath an eye to mankind, and to all the tribes of Israel.” (Zech. 9: 1, Roth.) That statement of the propn-et is a comfort to the remnant because it means that Jehovah will act in their behalf and in behalf of all mankind who stand on the side of Jehovah and remain steadfast at the battle of Armageddon.
The doom or fate is also directed against others; Zechariah (9:2) continues: “And Hamath [of Syria] also shall border thereby”; or, as the Revised Version renders it, “And Hamath, also, which bordereth thereon” ; “Tyrus, and Zidon, though it be very wise.” The name “Hamath” means “fortress”. It was a separate province in upper Syria and in league or alliance with Syrians of Damascus, hence it also pictures an integral part of the confederacy against the Lord and his kingdom, and hence is a part of the religious-political monstrosity that assumes to rule the earth in the stead and place of Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ. “Tyre” specifically refers to the commercial religious element of “Christendom”, of which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is the chief and dominant part; whereas “Zidon” particularly pictures those religious elements that preceded
78
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
Bbuokl^.x. N \
the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and the religious doctrines, traditions and practices of which the Hierarchy adopted and absorbed, the name “Christian” being fraudulently applied thereto. Jehovah’s penal decree is also against these elements of Satan’s organization. The commercial-religious Hierarchy assume to be very wise, and to them Jehovah ironically says: “Behold, thou art wiser [in thine own conceits] than Daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee.” (Ezek. 28:3) Today the public press, the magazines and other advertising agencies of Satan’s organization, under the influence of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, take a fiendish delight in holding up to ridicule and contempt Jehovah’s witnesses. Jehovah now says to these enemies: ’You just wait, and you will get what is your due. Wait until I rise up and take action, and pay you off.’—Zeph. 3: 8.
“Christendom,” now threatened by the growing totalitarian monstrosity, claims to be Christian. On the contrary, she is a colossal fraud, and about her the prophet wrote: “And Tyrus did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets ” (Zech. 9:3) “Organized Christendom,” particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, has heaped up much silver and fine gold, but this will not save her from destruction at Armageddon. Concerning her the Lord says (9:4): “Behold, the Lord will east her out [(R.F.) will dispossess her], and he will smite her power in the sea [of humanity alienated from God and exploited by the Hierarchy] ; and she shall be devoured with fire.” Her “power in the sea” will be destroyed by the terrific storm stirred up by “the east wind” and from Jehovah God. (Ezek. 27-26) “Tyre” herself shall be devoured, and her places of operation shall be made an ash heap. Jehovah God, by his Chief Officer, Christ Jesus, will do this destructive work in due time. Today modern Tyre controls the radio, which is God’s provided means for communication between places of the earth. The Hierarchy uses the radio to exploit the people, and acts with other elements of Satan’s organization to prevent the message of Jehovah’s kingdom from being carried to the people In January, 1933, at the instance of a company of Anglican clergymen, playing right into the hands of the Hierarchy, the Radio Commission of Canada issued an order that Jehovah’s witnesses should first submit to the Radio Commission to be censored the message which they are telling at the command of Jehovah, before broadcasting it to the people To comply with such demand and place before these selfappointed censors the message of Jehovah’s kingdom and let them determine whether or not the same should be broadcast to the people would be, in the language of Jesus, to ‘give that which is holy into the hands of the dogs, and to cast pearls before the swine’. (Matt. 7:6) It would be obeying man rather than God, and therefore be a gross insult to the Lord God. (Acts 4:19) God’s anointed ones now-have no alternative, but must obey implicitly the commandments of Jehovah and his King Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses.—Acts 3: 22, 23.
For the encouragement of those who wholly trust in Jehovah he now tells them what shall be the ultimate result upon the wicked crowd. Jehovah’s faithful remnant will not bow down to Satan’s representatives nor yield to their request concerning the radio. They will not submit to the
censorship of Satan’s organization to be done and performed by the clergy, commercial or political power. Jehov.J.’s witnesses could not be faithful to him and at the same time consent to such wicked agencies of Satan censoring the message of God’s kingdom and determining what shall be broadcast to the people concerning God’s Word. Jehovah is all-powerful, and he will provide in his own good way to get the truth to the people, and this he has done m providing tens of thousands of sound machines for reproducing recorded speeches in public places and in the private homes of the people. Jehovah’s faithful witnesses will not insult him b} yielding to the request or demands of Satan’s agencies The.x will not compromise with Satan’s organization, but will rch implicitly upon Jehovah God, knowing that he will bring to pass all things according to his sovereign will In due time the whole of Satan’s organization will go up like smoke, and will never be known again
Jehovah caused Zechariah to prophesy that the elerg\ and all who sympathize with their commercial religious racket, and all who act as Satan’s agents, shall, ;u->t bcfoiv destruction, see what is coming upon Satan’s organization and this will make them sore afraid. That wicked crowd is now being served with the message of truth, and this has caused fear to take hold on them and ‘their faces gather blackness’. Therefore says the Lord by Zechariah (9 5) “Ashkelon shall see it, and fear, Gaza also shall see it, and be very sorrowful, and Ekron, for her expectation, shall lx ashamed; and the king shall perish from Gaza, and Ashki Ion shall not be inhabited.” Ashkelon, Gaza and Ekron were Philistine cities and were, like Tyre, engaged in commerce either directly or indirectly. They were in sympathv with Tyre, and the doom was against them. They also symbolized the religious element of Satan’s organization, the Romm Catholic Hierarchy being the controlling part The clergv and all minor institutions related thereto arc now in a very panicky state The entire crowd tell the people that “pros perity is just around the corner” and that “the Hierarch} is the chief bulwark against Communism” , hut their cxpe<-tation shall not be realized Religion, Big Business econo mists, advertising agencies, political racketeers, royalty ami aristocracy, democracy and every other element of Satan's organization shall perish, because that is the decree of doom or penal announcement written against them by Jehovah Knowing this, the faithful remnant will confidently go on in their work of proclaiming the kingdom messaire, wholly trusting in Jehovah and doing their work in his strength and with joy and praise to his name
Jehovah made a law covenant with the nation of Israel It provided that a bastard should not enter into the con gregation of the Lord. (Deut. 23 : 2) That law foreshadowed present-day matters. The Jewish Pharisees, being sticklers for the letter of the law but entirely ignoring the spirit of it, and being blind in their own conceits and being the ‘mon holy than thou’ crowd, called in question the legitimacy ol Jesus; in other words, applied to him the name “bastard” (John 6:42; 8:41) A bastard was very despicable in the eyes of the hypocritical Pharisees. Likewise the clergj of “Christendom”, who are the antitype of the Pharisees, look on the outward appearance of men and hypocritically assume to be above reproach themselves, despise the humbk followers of Christ Jesus and put them in the class of bas
March 1,1940
^He WATCHTOWER.
79
tards, and when the clergy are told of the kingdom of God they turn from it with a contemptuous air and at the same time hail the Devil's substitute, the League of Nations, or the Hierarchy-controlled state, for the kingdom of God. The Lord tells them that the One whom they have labeled as a bastard shall put the religious hypocrites out of business.
“And,” continues the prophet (Zech. 9:6), “a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod; and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines” The name “Ashdod” means “stronghold”, and it was the chief town of the five confederated Philistine cities and was the seat of the worship of the sea-god Dagon. (1 Sam. 5: 1-9) It therefore pictures the stronghold of the confederated enemy against God's kingdom. (Ps 83: 5) To this wicked crowd of hypocritical “highbrows” the kingdom of God under Christ is despicable and in their eyes is described by the term “bastard”. Jehovah therefore tells them tli..t the despised One, Christ Jesus, as the great victorious Conqueror, shall take possession of the stronghold of the Philistines (that is, “Christendom” under the Hierarchy) and cut off the whole crowd. The people of good will, known as the Jonadab class, therefore are warned and shown the way of escape in this time of destruction To them God’s command now applies (Zeph 2:2,3) • “Before the cecree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come . . Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; sock righteousness, seek meekness; it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.” “But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces thereof: and I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon ; and I will turn mine hand against Ekron; and the remnant of the Philistines | the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and its religious and political allies] shall perish, saith the Lord God.” (Amos
1: 6-8) All of these shall drink the cup of Jehovah’s wrath (Jer. 25: 20) This will be a vindication of Jehovah’s Word and his name.
For many centuries “Christendom”, under the domination of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and its religious allies, has illegally shed human blood in open violation of God’s everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of the blood of earthly creatures. (Gen 9-1-6) Claiming to be followers of Christ, these, however, have eaten at the Devil’s table and sacrificed to the Devil. (1 Cor 10:21) Concerning the confederated enemies of God, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the Lord through his prophet (Zech. 9:7) says: “And I will take away his blood out of his [the modern Philistine’s] mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth ; but he that remaineth, even he, shall be for our God; and he shall be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite.” The oppressed people of the earth shall be delivered from the voracious jaws of modern Philistines, which have long persecuted them. The remnant, delivered from the enemy organization, “shall be for our God,” Jehovah, that is, as a “people for his name”. “Judah,” whom the prophet mentions, means the class that praise Jehovah’s name; hence Judah here pictures the faithful remnant- “And he [the remnant] shall be as a chieftain in Judah” (R. V.), that is to say, shall be the chief ones on the earth in the publishing of the name of Jehovah. (Isa. 62:10) And just as the ancient city of Jebusi was subdued by the tribe of Judah under King David, who therefore foreshadowed Christ Jesus, the true Governor or Chieftain and ■‘Lion of the tribe of Juda”, so the modern Philistines, that is to say, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and all its religious, commercial, political allies, shall be vanquished It will be a long-due pay-off!
APPRECIATION AND ASSURANCE
’Irak Brother Rutherford:
We, the Bradley-Kankakee company of Jehovah’s witnesses, of Illinois Zone No. 1, desire to express to Jehovah God our grateful appreciation of his loving-kindness manifested toward us b;> levealn.g to us, tnrough the Watch Tower, his marvelous truths, ai'd also granting us the opportunity of telling these truths to others
We desire to express to you our fervent love, knowing that you are wholly devoted to Jehovah and his Theocracy under Christ.
We want you to know that we are with you in your courageous fight for right and truth, and that we refuse to consider the malicious letters which some of the “evil servant” class have been circulating amongst the brethren We will not eo-opera’e with such a class who oppose Jehovah’s Theocratic government
(Continued from page 66)
competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately receding the partaking of the emblems, that short article appearing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled before partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. Jesus and his apostles used ical red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit
“MODEL STUDY" NO. 2
This booklet is a valuable and indispensable complement to the original model study booklet Model Study No 2 enables any
one equipped with phonograph and lecture recordings to carry on model studies on the seven latest recorded speeches by the Society's president, from the speech “Safety” in 1937 down to and including “Government and Peace” in 1939 The booklet also con tains a Reference Index very convenient in locating the desired lecture record on any particular subject of vital interest today There are 64 pages of material, enclosed in a sturdy cover, and the booklet will be supplied on your contribution of 5c a eopy Those in organized companies should send in their orders in combination through the local company servant
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 7. “Power of the Demons” (Part 3), fl 1-18 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1, 1940
Week of April 14- “Power of the Demons” (Part 3), fl 19-41 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1, 1940
FIELD EXPERIENCES
NEW YORK MAGISTRATE ENCOURAGES DEMON ASSAULTS
“Having just had a doorstep setup on the second floor, I descended with wide-open phonograph, all set, and my bookcase, to the first floor of this four-story apartment, catty-cornered from St. Augustine’s Catholic church. A man in overcoat and hat stood silent in center of hall as I neared the apartment door at foot of stairs. It was partly open, and as I stepped in front, a large, big-bellied Irishman, in big white apron, opened it wide. With an ‘oh!’ of surprise I set down my things and extended him an invitation to lecture ‘Government and Peace’. Without warning, wildeyed he sprang out, grabbed me at my overcoat collar with heavy’ hands and shouted: ‘Here's that Communist!’ Pinned against the wing of the lobby door, I remonstrated, ‘I’m a Christian’, but no matter. ‘Get that door open ’’ he yelled to the silent man, and, notwithstanding my demand, ‘Let me get my things,’ I was forced through that door, then through the vestibule door, and out into the street. Heaving with rage he shook and marched me down the street toward the ‘church’ from which worshipers were now emerging. Suddenly he let go and tramped back, I close behind and warning of law action for damage to my things. Turning on the doorstep as I came beneath him, he swung his heavy right arm and gave me a stunning backhand blow on my right cheek, yelling: ‘Stay out of here' they don’t want you in here” Then he threw my bookcase out onto the sidewalk. Next he brought out my open phonograph in position and heaved it into the gutter Into the gutter went records and tone arm. There was I in the gutter adjusting my things as Brannigan’s fellow religionists streamed out of their house of demons and passed me on both sides, with remarks. Friday afternoon following saw us in the big ornate room of the Bronx Magistrates Court No. 2, standing before magistrate on bench, lady clerk and court steno, and an audience of about 25 outside the rail. From start on the magistrate was out to clear Brannigan, remarking: ‘Oh, so you ordained yourself!’ and, ‘Where was Judge Rutherford a judge” and, ‘Can’t we settle this in a Christian way?’ appealing to the Lord’s prayer about forgiving. Brannigan pleaded he was the father of five children, and, lying Cathol-ically, said he had a sick wife and I rang his door bell and insisted on playing my phonograph, and so he just picked up my things and put them outside the door: ‘He was playing a record which attacks our priests and bishops and pope and says they’re back of this war” The magistrate immediately called for the playing of ‘Snare and Racket’. After listening awhile he broke in and said to Brannigan • ‘Is that the same record ?’ The entire courtroom heard the complete recording. Again magistrate appealed for ‘Christian’ settlement and commented: ‘We know there’s nothing so good as sweet religion.’ When, finally, he brought the matter to simply reparation for a scuffed Italian record and Brannigan pleaded financial inability, the magistrate said: ‘Oh, is that all. just a matter of 70c! I’ll pay for it myself,’ and pulls out a dollar bill and his clerk puts it on the table before me. Then with an admonition to me as if I was a trespasser, and with a mild warning to Brannigan (whom he called ‘You old lug*) about laying hands on others, he dismissed the ease, with no penalty to Brannigan for his criminal assault and battery. I left the dollar bill lying before the judge, spurned!”
EVERY ONE HIS OWN SUBSCRIPTION COPY IN CANADA
“Like to report a young Ukrainian lady, a widow, will, five children aged 9 to 15, who has been associated with the Truth for four years, a Watchtower subscriber; then got The Watchtower for her oldest girl, and now’ I send jou four Watchtower subscriptions for the four other children . which makes six Watchtower subscribers in the one home, and each a regular publisher. Can you beat it?”
DELIVERING AN ORDER, KINGSTON, JAMAICA
“He had no money; would I call back? I suggested an order and date he would like me to fetch book. He quickly said: ‘Please fetch it next Sunday morning.' At the hour appointed I called. Imagine my disappointment to find him out, and no word of explanation left for me Well 1 tore from my address book a leaf and left the following ‘Veiy surprised at your action—took you at your word, and you have failed even being polite enough to leaxe some message Why you did not keep your word?’ Weeks passed, and 1 was in that direction, having been asked to do something for a friend. I thought I would call, and did so I found him at home. He greeted me politely, then said ‘I got your note, but was not so pleased over it ’ ‘Why ?’ 'Well, I could not do better about the book I ordered, as 1 met with a disappointment.’ I said that was no reason why ne could not have left me word He hung his head ‘I am sorry, huh Please give me your name and address, and I will keep m\ word this time.’ Time rolled by, my prospect did not turn up. I forgot about it. December 6 I got back hon e to hear a young man had called to get a book—he would return m two hours, being told I would be back then He came, greeted me, and asked if I remembered him. ‘You are the young man who did not keep his word regarding that book ” ‘5 es but I have called for it today.’ He gave me contribution 1 thanked him and showed appreciation of Ins at last kccp'ng his word. He said: ‘Do you know where this book is going I said . ‘No ” ‘It goes to my mother in Chicago, as a Christ mas present ’ I presented him with. Government and I’cai < All of four months after that Sunday a m. call ”
IN AN OREGON CCC CAMP
“Last Sunday we came to a CCC camp M' father went to the office The commander was asleep Ik oked the sergeant m charge if we could play the hour lectuie '(he. ernment and Peace’ for the boys. He gave him a booklet t<> look over, and the sergeant sent one of the boys to ,isk th, commander if it would be O.K. The commander roused in:i his slumber enough to say, ‘Yes, go ahead ’ They announced from their Sound System for everyone to report at th. Educational Building. My father and mother went in ami put on the lecture to 37 CCC boys, and When the lecture w as over he gave each one a copy of the Government and Peace booklet as they came out the door. Asked if they would like to hear another lecture, the majority raised their hands Several did leave after the third or fourth record was played, but a grand witness was given and 33 booklets were placed A few months ago a pioneer from our company witnessed at this same camp and they would not permit him to even witness to the boys.”
80
STie WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street ■>	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death ; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world ; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Gs American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian ........ . . 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N S W , Australia
South African .................. Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tlie needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the Journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y , under the Act of March 3, 1ST9
“BATTLE SIEGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Spring’s opening will be marked by the “Battle Siege” Testimony Period, during the whole month of April. It will be a pressing of the siege against religion by a campaign to increase yet more the subscription list of The Watchtower. The unusual oSer in effect during the campaign will operate greatly to that result, to wit, one year’s subscription for The Watchtower together with the premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covered booklet on a contribution of but one dollar; foreign countries, $1.50. This Testimony Period, which is world-wide in scope, will be the first of a three-month campaign with The Watchtower, and, due to the instant importance of what this magazine contains, the campaign is actually to be launched on March 23, the date of celebrating the Memorial. Now is none too soon to begin your preparation therefor, as to territory, equipment, time, supplies, distributor’s copies, etc. If unacquainted with an organized company of publishers in your locality, notify this office of your wish to get in touch with such for this Testimony. Those in foreign lands will write the branch office having supervision. The Informant (which is free) goes into greater detail on this.
“REFUGEES”
Millions of refugees of various sorts now abroad in the earth, but this new booklet Refugees, written by the president of tlie Society, shows definitely how only such thereof as are of good will may and will find the one safe, abiding Refuge and live. By its very front-cover picture Refugees tells a powerful story, but the contents within this 64-page booklet convey a message that God’s refugees will rejoice to get, and that His publishers will have great joy in distributing to them. Release of this booklet for distribution coincides with March 23, the day of the Memorial, and detailed instructions thereon are found m the Informant You may procure a copy of Refugees direct by remitting a contribution of 5c per copy.
“MODEL STUDY” NO. 2
This booklet is a valuable and indispensable complement to the original model study booklet. Model Study No. 2 enables anyone equipped with phonograph and lecture recordings to carry on model studies on the seven latest recorded speeches by the Society’s president, from the speech “Safety” m 1937 down to and including “Government and Peace” in 1939. The booklet also con-(Continued on page 95)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol LXI	March 15, 1940	No. 6
REFUGE
“The Laid also will be a tefuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble.”—Psalm 9:9.
JEHOVAH foreknew the trouble that would beset those who seive him, and He made provision for their instruction that they might go in the right way and escape the enemy and find the place of complete refuge. He foreknew how the demons would attack his consecrated people and how they are now attacking all those who serve him and his kingdom. Today he is revealing to all such faithful ones his means of protection, refuge and salvation. He foreknew and foretold the time of trouble coming upon the world, and in which all the nations now find themselves. To those who seek him he gives full assurance that if they put their trust fully in him and walk obediently with him they shall have protection and shall not be disappointed. ‘"Thus let them who know thy name put confidence in thee, that thou hast not forsaken the searchers for thee, 0 Jehovah.” (Psalm 9:10, Rotherham) The people now on earth who are of good will toward God, and who are otherwise known as Jonadabs (2 Ki. 10:15-23) and pictured by Jonathan (1 Sam. 18: 1-4), have learned of the Almighty God and have found that His Word is the only safe and true guide. (Ps. 119:105) All the consecrated, both those of the remnant and those who will form the "great multitude” (Rev. 7:9-17), must now be on Ilie alert and diligent at all times to avoid the snares of the enemy and to find safety and refuge, as provided by the Most High.
-'You are fully aware of the fact that at no time within the memory of man have the nations of the earth been in such a deplorable condition as now. Since the close of the World War in 1918 the woes of humankind have increased. Within the borders of all nations there are now many refugees seeking a place where they might abide in security and have some reasonable opportunity to enjoy some of the things which God has provided for man. That the number of the refugees is certain to increase in the very near future must be conceded, and this fact alone increases the burden and distress of many even among those people who now have a measure of peace and prosperity. You are among those who seek the best information obtainable as to why so many
sorrows have come upon the people, otherwise you would not be reading even these lines. Desiring to see righteousness prevail amongst men, you will diligently apply yourself to learn the truth and, so doing, you will clearly see why there are so many refugees, and why in the very near future the sorrows upon humankind will increase, and what will be the end of such.
WORLD CRISIS
3 The divers nations are facing the greatest crisis of all time. The ruling factors of all nations appear to have a premonition of approaching disaster. Refusing to give heed to God’s Word, they are in the dark as to what is just ahead. Each nation is like a frightened man walking in the dark. The controlling force that now moves the nations into action, both offensive and defensive, is fear. The visible rulers of the nations are in a state of great perplexity, sensing, as they do, that some unseen power is moving them rapidly to a great climax. They hesitate not to say that the present nations cannot survive unless some sure remedy, is found, and none of them appear to have any knowledge of such sure remedy. Political prognosticators attempt to foretell the future, but no one has any real confidence in any of such political, religious prophecies. They are in a desperate state of mind, and there appears to them a great pall hanging over them which forebodes disaster. The Lord foreknew this time of distress and foretold it in these words: “Upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; . . . men’s hearts failing them for fear.”—Luke 21: 25, 26.
* The ruling elements of the nations of the earth ignore these prophetic words of the Lord and the other prophecies, which make known to the diligent student of God’s Word what unseen forces are moving the nations to the greatest climax of all time. Concerning such unseen powers the Lord say<,: 'They go forth to the kings [ruling powers] of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the great battle of God Almighty [that is, to Armageddon].’ And what is that invisible force or power? The Lord
84
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
answers that it is the power of wickedness, the Devil, “the prince of demons/’ and his associated demons, who, themselves being blinded to God’s purpose, lead the credulous ones into the ditch of destruction. (Rev. 16:13-16) All nations of the earth today are under the influence and control of the demons. Fear has led these ruling powers into the snare of the demons and caused them blindly to hunt a place of refuge, which they fail to find.—Prov. 29: 25.
FACING DEATH
5 All the nations are facing death, and at the universal war of Armageddon, that is, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty,” all nations shall die. That will not be “death” of the nations at the hands of other nations, but death administered by the Almighty power of heaven: “The Higher Powers” (Rom. 13:1); Jehovah God and Christ Jesus constituting the Higher Powers. The battle of the great day of God Almighty will be fought by Jehovah and Christ Jesus, supported by all the holy angels of heaven, pitted against the Devil and other demons and their supporters on earth who continue on the side of the wicked ones. All the nations suffer the same fate or come to the same end, because all nations of earth are on the wrong side, that is, on the losing side. All of such nations are against the Theocratic Government, that is, the government or kingdom of the Almighty God. At the battle of Armageddon all such nations shall cease for ever; as it is written: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.” (Ps. 9:17) “The wicked shall be turned back unto Sheol, even all the nations that forget God.”—A.R.F.
0	In that battle of the great day of God Almighty democracies will not survive over Communistic governments, Nazism, monarchies or imperialism. All forms of human government shall perish for ever. Only the THEOCRACY will survive. The indisputable facts now disclose that all nations have forgotten God, the Almighty, “whose name alone is Jehovah.” (Ps. 83:18) All of these nations are visibly ruled by political, commercial and ultrareligious elements, and all are under the control of the invisible host of demons, and the Almighty God says that the end of such is “hell”. His judgment concerning the nations of earth announced in the foregoing text is, in brief, “To hell with them.”
the people
’ The people of the various nations under the control of the ruling powers are in great distress and are in fear and trepidation. There is upon them an ever-increasing fear of death, which deadly enemy approaches them from every side: death at sea, from submarines, torpedoes, deadly mines, seaplanes and
warships; death on land, from bombs falling from the air, and death from many other instruments of war; death from starvation resulting from blockades and the restriction concerning food. The theory and practice of the nations is that the men who fight must have the food while those who remain at home have little or none. The people fear death from natural and accidental causes. They are in constant fear of political, religious and other gangsters. They find themselves driven like dumb beasts from their native lands and the homes that they have built. Cruel dictators order them to depart, and they must obey. As refugees they flee before the cruel rulers. Millions of them become exiles, without a place to lay their head and with no means of obtaining food and shelter, and they proceed, knowing not where, and they face the future in utter despair. Fear of death holds them in grasp. The condition of the people, a> now seen, was long ago described by the Lord Jesus in these words: “There shall be great distress in the land.”—Luke 21: 23.
'These words of the Lord Jesus describe a condition that today exists in every nation on earth Even in the nation of the United States there are millions on relief, and fear that even this little relief shall be taken away, and they shall be left to starvation. The people see no way out because they have been kept in ignorance and are yet in ignorance of God’s gracious provision made for those who tru'-t wholly in him. Their ignorance is due to the Dev:! and his religious representatives on earth who have deliberately withheld from the people a knowledge of God’s Word. Jehovah God foretold this present time in these words: ‘Darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people.’ (Isa. 60:2) By reason of much morbid fear the Devil has ensnared mankind in his trap of religion. The people being ignorant ol God’s provision, they follow the blind religious and political guides.
seeking refuge
0	Numerous persons are seeking a means of escape, but, being blind, fail to find the way of escape. A notable example is that of a late American columnist, Heywood Broun. The New York Times of December 21, 1939, reporting on the funeral of Mr. Broun, says: “Turning to the reasons why he wanted to be come a Catholic, Mr. Broun gave four [reasons], . . . The third was fear of death. . . . The fourth reason, in the words of Mr. Broun, . . . ‘There is nothing more ridiculous than individualism ... I cannot even see why Almighty God would be interested in my individual prayer, or even my individual sacrifice, . . . That spiritual corporation I believe to be the Catholic Church.’ ” That man because of fear sought a place of security, and the Devil led
March 15,1940
SEe WATCHTOWER.
85
him into the Catholic religious system. In this connection have in mind the words of the Almighty God, that “religion is a snare”, because religion is of the Devil. (Deut. 7:16) From time immemorial the Devil has used religion and religious practices to ensnare men. Men teach religion and falsely hold before the people religion as a means of escape from the Devil and death; and fearing to go contrary to the teaching of religious men, such fearful ones fall into the snare of the Devil, even as the Lord foretold. —Prov. 29: 25.
10	Religion has never been a safeguard against death. Even the so-called “Christian religion” has long been the chief means used by the Devil to entrap men in his snare that leads to destruction. The beginning of the practice of religion was a desire on the part of man to escape death and to become wise like demons. The Almighty God plainly stated to the first human pair that the penalty of death would be inflicted upon those who willfully disobeyed his law. (Gen. 2:17) That great deceiver, the old Serpent and Devil, who is the chief of the demons, offered his religion to Adam and Eve as a means of escaping death. He said to them: “Ye shall not surely die; for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof [in violation of His law], then your eyes shall be opened; and ye shall be as gods [the demons associated with Satan].” (Gen. 3:4,5) That is to say, if man would adopt Satan’s religion and practice the same he would escape death and be as wise as the Devil’s wicked associates, which in the Scriptures are designated “demons”. But religion furnished no protection to Adam and Eve, and has never been any protection to any man. Fear and the ambitious desire to be wise as the demons led Adam and Eve into the snare, and they died, and by reason of their sin all their offspring inherited death.—Rom. 5:12.
11	The dominating nations of earth now practice the so-called “Christian religion”, and the leaders among men urge upon the people “more religion” as a means of protection and salvation. Religion, however, will furnish no protection or means of escape at the battle of the great day of God Almighty, which is now rapidly approaching. In that great fight at Armageddon no nation will find protection because of religion, neither will God spare individual persons of any nation because of their religion, whether they be sincere religious practitioners or bad religionists. Religion has never at any time safeguarded any man against death. A great religionist, backed by the religious system of the Roman Catholic organization, prosecuted the war in Spain from 1936 to 1939, in which great multitudes of persons died. Almost all the people of Spain were then the practitioners of the Roman Catholic religion. That religion did not spare any of them or protect any of them. Religion fur
nished no protection for the people of Poland or Czechoslovakia, and which people held steadfastly to the Catholic religious system and the practice thereof. God’s Word plainly declares that the practitioners of religion, and religion itself, shall be destroyed at the battle of Armageddon.
AFTER DEATH
12	All persons can now see that religion does not safeguard men against death. To further deceive the fearful peoples the Devil by means of religion, which his representatives teach, imposes upon mankind a further fraud, inducing them to believe that religion is a safeguard after death and that religion opens to them future protection and endless happiness. Is religion a passport to unending bliss * Is religion a safeguard and means of escape from torments of the Catholic “inferno” of hell or “purgatory ' taught by that religious system? Where can the coi-rect answer be found to these questions? No man has ever returned from “purgatory” or hell to give testimony7 concerning the matter. The doctrine of “torment in purgatory or hell” is taught only by iinpei-fect men. The doctrine is not found in the Bible Cardinal Gibbons, a noted Catholic authority, in hi-book The Faith of Our Fathers, pages 205 to 208. says: “The Catholic Church teaches that, besides a place of eternal torments for the wicked and of evei-lasting rest for the righteous, there exists in the next life a middle state of temporary punishment, allotted for those who have died in venial sin, or who have not satisfied the justice of God for sins already forgiven. She also teaches us that, although the soul?, consigned to this intermediate state, commonly called purgatory, cannot help themselves, they may be aided by the [prayers] of the faithful on earth The existence of purgatory naturally implies the correlative dogma—the utility of praying for the dead. ' “His soul will be ultimately saved, but he shall xiffei. for a temporary duration, in the purifying flames of Purgatory. This interpretation is not mine. It is the unanimous voice of the Fathers of Christendom."
” Set over against the traditions or teachings of men, consider now the commandments of Jehovah God and the words of Christ Jesus, who spoke with full and complete authority from Almighty God. Addressing religious teachers, who were teaching the traditions of men, Jesus said: ‘Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? . . . Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. Ye hypocrites! well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honour-eth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.”—Matt. 15 : 1-9.
86
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
14	Do you care to believe and follow the traditional teaching of imperfect men who practice religion for hire, or do you prefer to follow the authoritative words of the Lord Jesus Christ? Remember, then, the words of the scripture: “And this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”—John 17: 3.
DESTINY
15	Some religionists insist that Almighty God has predestinated the end of all human creatures and that therefore some of them must go to “purgatory”, some to heaven, and some to “hell”, which they interpret as “eternal torment”. Those doctrines, however, are entirely false. God has not predetermined the end of any individual. God has predestinated or predetermined that a fixed and limited number taken from among human creatures, who maintain their integrity toward God, shall be forever with the Lord Jesus Christ in heaven as spirit creatures; and he has provided for another company of individuals, but without a fixed number, who receive God's approval for their faithfulness under the test applied, and which faithful persons shall live forever on the earth. What shall be the end or destiny of individuals, God does not predetermine. God sets before men his fixed rules, and those who obey him enter into everlasting life, and those who disobey him die and remain dead. God is no respecter of individuals. (Acts 10:34) Man, therefore, has much to do with fixing his own destiny or end. To those who agree to serve Almighty God he says: “See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live.” (Deut. 30:15,19) “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.” (John 3:36) “And this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”— John 17: 3.
10	God permits men to choose either life or death; hence man fixes his own destiny by the course he takes. “The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.” (Ps. 34:15,16) Almighty God is the fountain of life. (Ps. 36:9) ‘Salvation belongs to God,’ by and through Christ Jesus. (Ps. 3:8; Rom. 6: 23) There is no other means of salvation to life.—Acts 4:12.
” Will you take a chance by following the traditional teachings of religious men, or will you be guided by the Word of Almighty God? Religion is
the product of the demons, used by them to ensnare men and turn them away from God and into destruction. Those who embrace and follow the traditional and religious teachings of men will find that they will end in destruction, because religion is contrary to and in defiance of the Word of Almighty God. Choose for yourselves whom you will serve, whether the Lord or the demons. That same proposition was put up to the Israelites, who had covenanted to do God’s will; and that is the fixed rule of God concerning all persons who will live. Joshua, who was devoted to Jehovah God and had God’s approval, under inspiration from Jehovah said to the Israelites: “Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth; and put away the gods [ the gods or demons who by means of religion debauched the people and from which demon-controlled land God brought his faithful servant Abraham] which your fathers served on the other side of the flood [that is to say, the other side of the river Euphrates (vss. 2, 3)], and in Egypt; and serve ye die Lord."—Josh. 24:14.
18	What, then, is the safe and sure guide for man i The answer is, The Word of God, which is the truth. (John 17 :17) “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.” (Ps. 119:105) The time is here, therefore, because the greatest crisis is at hand, that all men must choose whom they will serve, whether religion taught by the Devil, or Almighty God and his King Christ Jesus.
“PURGATORY" AND HELL
18	Religionists teach the doctrine of “purgatory" and “eternal torment”. That such religious teachings originated with the Devil, mark the Scriptuial proof that follows. The wily foe of God well knew that ii must be made to appear before men that religion L consistent, that it must appear to men that no one could be conscious in “purgatory” or in hell-torment unless that person continues to live and is conscious. It was the Devil who announced the doctrine to man, ‘There is no death.’ (Gen. 3:4) Following that lead, the religious teachers informed the people that every man has an immortal soul. “Immortality” means that such soul cannot die; that therefore the soul must continue to exist some place after what is called “death”. But the Bible shows that every man is a soul, because a soul is a living creature. God made the organism or body of man of the dust of the earth and then breathed into that body the breath that living creatures breathe and which breath animated the body, and man “became” a living soul: “And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.”—Gen. 2: 7.
March 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
87
20	AU animals are souls, that is, all are living creatures. (Num. 31: 28) It was man, the soul, to whom God said: ‘In the day you sin you shall die.’ (Gen. 2: 17) The man or soul sinned, and death resulted. As Jehovah plainly declares, ‘The soul that sinneth shall surely die.’ (Ezek. 18:4, 20) “What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.”—Ps. 89:48.
21	The religious doctrine of “immortality of all souls” was introduced by Satan, and which doctrine is a lie; and concerning him, the Devil, the Lord Jesus says: ‘He is a liar, and the father of lies, and there is no truth in him.’ (John 8: 44) It follows that the doctrine of “inherent immortality of man” is still a lie, regardless of who teaches that lie; and since religious men teach such doctrine of “inherent immortality”, that doctrine is absolutely false. The reason it was introduced was to support the Devil’s original lie, that there is no death, and the “immortality” doctrine has been the means of deceiving numerous persons. That doctrine cannot be safely followed by anyone.
THE DEAD
22	Are the dead conscious after death? The Word of God answ ers as follows: “For the living know that they shall die; but the dead know not any thing, i either have they any more a reward, for the memory of them is forgotten. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.” (Eccl. 9:5,10) “For in death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave who shall give thee thanks?” (Ps. 6: 5) “The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence.” -Ps. 115:17.
23	The fact that religious traditions taught by all religious leaders flatly contradict the Word of God, as set forth in the Bible, is proof conclusive that such religionists teach the lie of the Devil. There is not one scripture in the Bible supporting the doctrine of consciousness of man after he is dead. “Man is of the earth” and is the highest of the animal creation. (1 Cor. 15:47; Gen. 1:26) Men die because of sin committed by Adam, and which death, by inheritance, comes upon all men. Men die like other animal creation : “For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them; as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast; for all is vanity. All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.” (Eccl. 3:19,20) This statement is in exact harmony with the judgment of Almighty God pronounced against Adam: “Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.”—Gen. 3 :19.
TORMENT
“ Religionists teach that hell is a place of eternal torture or torment and that in the “fires of hell” souls suffer torment without any possibility of escape. Exactly contrary to and in contradiction of that religious, traditional doctrine, the Bible says that hell is a condition of darkness, nonexistence, where mon know nothing, and where they all go at death. The Hebrew word sheol is translated in the English “hell” and is also many times translated “grave”. Also the Greek word hades is translated into the English “hell” and “grave”. “Hell” and “the grave” mean the condition or state of death where there is no consciousness or life whatsoever. Some Scriptural examples follow: Job, a servant of God, and who had God's approval, was suffering bodily pain and mental anguish from which he desired to be relieved, and he prayed to Almighty God in these words: “0 that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou would-est keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me!” (Job 14:13) “If I wait, the grave is mine house; I have made my bed in the darkness.” (Job 17 : 13) In these and many other Scriptural texts the words “grave” and “hell” are translated from the same original word sheol.
28	As to the Greek word hades, which is also translated “hell” and “the grave”, note the following: The Lord Jesus was put to death and was buried in the grave, tomb or sepulcher. (Matt. 27 : 60) Jesus was therefore dead and was in “hell”, sheol, hades, the grave. The apostle Peter, after having received the holy spirit, spoke authoritatively under inspiration from Almighty God. He quoted from the prophecy written at God’s commandment (Ps. 16: 10). applying the same to Christ Jesus. “Because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.” “Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; he, seeing this before, spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption.” (Acts 2:27,30.31) Furthermore it is written: “This Jesus hath God raised up [out of death], whereof we all are witnesses.”— Acts 2:32.
28	Without a doubt Jesus was in “hell”, that is, the grave, the condition of death, and remained there until God raised him out of death. Thus “hell” has been wholly misrepresented to the people by the teachers of religion.
2T	Torment or torture originated with Satan the Devil, and the Devil then caused men to charge Almighty God with tormenting men in the fire. Yet such a thought never entered the heart of the Almighty
88
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y
God, as stated in the Scriptures. (Jer. 7: 30, 31) The doctrine of eternal torment or torture is the doctrine of demons, that is, of the Devil, or chief of demons, and his associated demons, and taught by those men who practice religion on the earth. The first instance of torment set forth in the Scriptures is directly charged to Satan, the prince of demons. (Job 1 :ll-22; 2:1-13) Also the Scriptures show that the purpose of torment was and is to induce men to curse Jehovah God. That was the reason that the Devil and his religious representatives tormented Job. Because the religionists have for a long while taught the doctrine of eternal torment, many persons who are ignorant of God and his Word have cursed God, thus carrying out the Devil’s purpose. Seeing that the Scriptures conclusively prove that none of the dead are conscious in hell or “purgatory” or anywhere else, it is impossible therefore for the soul or creature to suffer in unquenchable flames. The religious doctrine of “purgatory” and “hell” as taught by religionists being false, it is clearly seen that these religious doctrines constitute a snare of the Devil to those men who fear and who flee to religion as a place of protection or safety. Furthermore, it is seen that religion is a racket, particularly with reference to “purgatory”, because men teach the people that they must pay over their money to religious priests in order to have prayers said for “those who are in purgatory”, and the fearful people yield to such inducement and part with their money to the religious teachers to have prayers said for their friends who are dead. Thus the religious teachers collect money from the people by means of false representations. Obtaining money by false pretense is a crime under the law of the land; therefore the religious teachers of “purgatory” are guilty of a great crime. The greatest crime committed by teaching “purgatory” and “torment” is that of defaming the name of Almighty God. Are you willing to risk your eternal existence by accepting and following false doctrines taught by men? YTou can properly decide that matter by gaining a knowledge of God and Christ Jesus, as set forth in the Word of God. (John 17: 3) It is the purpose of the demons to keep the people in darkness or ignorance concerning God’s means of salvation. The religious teachers have long been the instruments of demons, and they ensnare the people and keep them in darkness. For that reason in this very day the prophecy is fulfilled, to wit, 'Darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people.’—Isa. 60: 2.
HOPE OF LIFE
28 All the dead would perish for ever if God had made no provision for them to have life. All human creatures are born imperfect because of Adam’s sin resulting in death, and which all of Adam’s offspring
have inherited. “Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.” (Rom. 5:12) “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” —Rom. 6: 23.
28 God’s provision for the giving of life to man is by and through Christ Jesus. The lifeblood of the perfect man Jesus was poured out in death and constitutes the ransom price or purchase price for the human race, and therefore Christ Jesus by purchase becomes the owner of the human race. All men who believe on and obey the Lord may have the benefit of that ransom price; as it is written: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.”—John 3:16.
80 The sum of the three scripture texts last above mentioned is this: All men by inheritance are born sinners; all sinners must perish unless God provides for their salvation; God made such provision b\ sending Christ Jesus into the world to save those who believe on Jesus, who, as God’s representative, gives life to those who do believe and obey the commandments of Almighty God. It follows that man must hear of and learn of God’s provision for salvation, and thus the way is opened for man to determine his own end or destiny. Those who do hear and obey receive life, while those who refuse to believe and obey remain under condemnation and perish forever. (John 3:36) Belief on and obedience to Christ Jesus are therefore conditions precedent to receiving life as a free gift. Before a gift can become effective the receiver must be willing to accept that gift. The free gift of life is offered to man, and only those persons who accept it can receive it. “Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one [Jesus] the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.”—Rom. 5:18.
31 Because Jesus was fully obedient to God’s commandment even unto death God raised him out of death and made Jesus “the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him”.—Heb. 5: 9.
RESURRECTION
12 As God raised up Jesus out of death, even so he has given his promise to raise up out of death those who were of good will toward him at the time of death. From Abel to the coming of the man Jesus there were some men on earth who were entirely faithful to God, and which men will have “a better resurrection”. (Heb. 11:35) Such men will be made princes in the earth and act as representatives of The Theocratic Government. Some of those men are named specifically in the eleventh chapter of He
March 13, 1940
WATCHTOWER.
89
brews. Also, these are, at Psalm 45:16, called “princes”, who shall rule in righteousness under the direction of the Lord Jesus Christ. (Isa. 32:1) The faithful Christians who follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus, such as the apostles and other faithful spirit-begotten ones, have part in “the first resurrection”. (Rev. 20:4,6) Others who have died without an opportunity of learning of God’s purpose to give life to man will be awakened out of death and afforded an opportunity to prove their integrity toward God and, proving the same, will live. (John 5: 28. 29) As to the willfully wicked, they have no hope of resurrection. (Pss. 145: 20; 9:17) If any of the persons above described were in “purgatory” or “eternal torment”, and were there conscious and alive, they could not be resurrected, because resurrection is foi “the dead”. (1 Cor. 15:4,12-24) The Scriptures, therefore, conclusively prove that the religious doctrines of “human immortality”, consciousness in “purgatory”, and “everlasting torment in hell”, are absolutely false. Religion holds out no hope of life before or after death. To follow religion and willfully practice the same, after learning of the truth, means everlasting death from which there is no awakening or resurrection. The Scriptural proof of the ransom and resurrection are fully considered in the book Salvation, which you will read with real p rolit.
REFUGE FOR REFUGEES
33	The record in the Bible concerning the Israelites and God’s dealing with them constituted types or prophecies foretelling of greater and more important things to come to pass at the second coming of Christ Jesus and his kingdom. (1 Cor. 10:11; 2 Tim. 4:1) God led the people of Israel by the hand of Mot.es, and by Moses he gave command that “cities of refuge” must be set up by Israel, which place provided a refuge of safety for all persons who unwittingly, unawares or without malice, killed a human creature. Such slayer must flee to the city of refuge and remain there, and, so doing in obedience to God’s command, was safe: “Then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares.” (Num. 35:9-12) The cities of refuge pictured or foreshadowed God’s organization under Christ Je->us, made available for human creatures living on the earth at the second coming of Christ Jesus, and which organization of Jehovah furnishes refuge or a place of safety for those who seek safety therein. The subject matter of “cities of refuge” is treated in detail in the books Jehovah and Riches, which you should read. The members of “the body of Christ” (1 Cor. 12:12,27) are those whom the Lord finds faithful at his second coming and judgment, and who are made part of Zion, that is, the capital organiza
tion of God, and over which organization Christ Jesus is the Head. (Ps. 2:6) At the time of his coming and kingdom there are others on the earth who are of good will toward God, but who cannot be made members of the heavenly class, that is. Zion, and which heavenly class is known as God’s “little flock" of sheep and to which the following promise is made : “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.”—Luke 12: 32
34	Jesus then said that he had another class of pei -sons called “sheep” that he would call, and to whom he would give salvation: “And other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.”—John 10:16.
35	These “other sheep” of the Lord are the persons of good will toward God, and vho are symbolically designated in the Scriptures as Jonadabs or Jonathans, that is, those who are represented by Jonadab and Jonathan, and which persons, proving faithful under the test, will form the “great multitude” and proclaim the name of God and Christ (Rev. 7:9,10); and such persons have the piomme that they shall live forever on the earth and fill the earth with a righteous people.
3	,1 The Scriptural proof is that Christ Jesus wib enthroned as King in 1914. (Pss. 2:6; 110' 1.2) In 1918, three and one-half years after his enthronement, and corresponding with the three and oim-half years of the ministry of the man Jesus on earth, the capital organization of God called “Zion” is set up, of which capital organization Christ Jesus is the Head. The organization of God thus constitute.-, the place of refuge pictured by the “cities of refuge"; and those persons of good will toward God, and who desire protection and salvation at Armageddon, min flee to the organization under Christ and there find protection and refuge until God's wrath at the battle of Armageddon is past.
37	Referring now again to “cities of refuge" : What is meant by the words in the scripture, to wit, “the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares”? In brief, the answer as set forth in the Scriptures is this: The everlasting covenant of God given to the people through Noah forbids the slaying of men or animals except as authorized by the Word of the Lord. (Gen. 9: 5, 6) The nations of earth or the wicked world are made up of religious, political and commercial elements, of which Satan is the head (2 Cor. 4:4; 1 John 5:19) All the nations of the world have broken God’s everlasting covenant by wrongfully shedding human blood. (Isa. 24 : 5, 6) All the nations have wrongfully indulged in cruel wars causing the suffering and death of many human creatures. All these nations have willfully persecuted the true and faithful followers of Christ Jesus. Apt
90
STie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
examples are such as the Hitler government, and the Russian government under Stalin, and other governments, such as the present one of Spain. In fact, all the nations are guilty of unjustly killing human creatures. When war is declared the clergy or religious teachers urge men to go to war and kill, and many persons who are directly or indirectly supporters of religious organizations are in fear of men and they are forced into war and engage in killing other human creatures, but without malice toward their fellow creatures. During the World War many men were forced to thus engage in killing, and also many have been blindly induced to persecute God’s faithful witnesses. Those persons who are later enlightened, and who have good will toward God and who desire to serve God and Christ Jesus, turn to the Lord and seek protection and safety.
38	Where will they find refuge and safety? Such persons of good will are known in the Scriptures as the Jonadabs. They must flee to the antitypical “cities of refuge”, that is, to the organization of Jehovah God under Christ Jesus; they must thereafter obey the Lord’s commandment and seek righteousness and meekness; they must be diligent to do what is right and diligent to seek meekness by studying and learning from God’s Word what is his will concerning them. They must serve God and Christ and therefore devote themselves wholly and entirely to the support of The Theocratic Government. They must refuse to indulge in religion and must stand firmly on the side of God and his King, Christ Jesus. They associate themselves with God’s anointed in the service, announcing The Theocratic Government. These are the ones who constitute the “other sheep”, which the Lord declares he is now gathering unto himself. (John 10: 16) They are the sheep class mentioned by the Lord in Matthew 25: 31-46. If they remain faithful and true to God’s organization they shall be ultimately saved.
38	Armageddon is now drawing near. Everyone who thinks can see that the great time of trouble is just ahead. Those persons of good will toward God are hated by the demons, and are hated by those rulers who are supporters of and under the influence and control of the demons. How may these persons of good will find a place of refuge and safety? God’s Word answers: “Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, 0 nation not desired [not desired by the rulers of this world because they have taken their stand on the side of God].” (Zeph. 2:1) These flee to the antitypical city of refuge, that is, God’s organization, gathering themselves together with those of the “little flock” on earth who are fully devoted to God and his kingdom, and together with them they serve God.
40	Such gathering or fleeing to the antitypical citv of refuge, that is, God’s organization, must take place before the battle of the great day of God Almighty, the expression of God's wrath. Then the Lord says to such: “Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord's anger come upon you. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness; it may be ye >hall be hid, in the day of the Loid's anger."—Zeph. 2: 2, 3
41	To “seek righteousness” means to ascertain w hat is right before Jehovah. To “seek meekness'' means to desire to learn God’s will and then to diligently apply yourself to the study of the Bible and Bible help-that you may ascertain the will of God and serve him with approval. ‘Study to show yourself approved unto God [not unto men], a workman [foi God’s kingdom] that is not ashamed.’ (2 Tun 2. 15) Such Jonadabs must remain absolutely neutral concerning wars between the nations and must be w holly devoted to God and to His government. The organization of the Lord is the place of refuge and safety for the refugees. There is none other.
42	Religion has never furnished protection or safe ty for human creatures at any time, because leligion is the product of demons Religion will end m the destruction of all who knowingly and willfully follow religion and the teachers thereof. Religion will provide no protection or safeguard at Annageddon Religion offers no safety whatsoever aftei death Protection and salvation are given by the Lord, because salvation belongs to God alone. (Psalm 3:8) Men of good will toward God are diligent to study the Bible and endeavor to understand the same. It: this day of great world distress God has provided the Bible and Bible helps explaining the same, that thus, of good will may study and understand it. and to those of good will who would find salvation the Laid says : “This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”—John 17 : 3.
43	All persons of good will, therefore, must now shun religion. They are not to feai men, but to make God their fear and their refuge and sanctumy. (Isa. 8:8-16) They are to trust in the Lord, and not lean to their own understanding or the opinion.-, of men “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.”— Prov. 3: 5, 6.
44	They must have always in mind the admonition of the Scriptures that 'he that trusieth in the Lord shall be safe’. (Prov. 29: 25) The religious organization, ruled by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, possesses great material wealth. The exceedingly
March 13,1940
3Te WATCHTOWER.
91
earthly rich support that religious organization and pay to the priests serving therein fabulous sums of money as protection or a kind of insurance against the wrath of Almighty God now and to “save them from torment or torture in purgatory or hell”. That religious institution and the principal of its flocks say: ‘The gates of hell shall not prevail against us. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come nigh unto us.’ (Isa. 28:15) Those who are rich in political influence and power, and those who hold great material wealth, trust in their wealth and rely upon religion and their wealth, and in this time of distress they cry out in their fear: "What we need is more religion.” They will soon find, however, that neither wealth nor power, influence or religion will furnish them any protection in the day of Armageddon. Concerning such Jehovah says: “All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water. They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels; because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity [(marginal reading) because their iniquity is their stumbling block].” (Ezek. 7 : 17-19) Their “iniquity” or lawlessness is their fear of man and their seeking protection and refuge in religion, and thus they stumble into Satan’s pit of snare and are destroyed.
45	The Catholic religious system, ruled by the Hierarchy, has acquired untold material wealth and in consideration of which money, paid them by the poor, they have promised and guaranteed safety to the gullible people who have for fear fallen into the religious n ap. But at Armageddon none of such will escape God's wrath: “Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock; for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel. And the shepherds [priests] shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.” (Jer. 25:34,35) The saying of masses will accomplish no good for them and no protection against God’s vengeance. None of them shall escape. —1 Thess. 5: 3.
4fi The nations of the earth are ruled by the elements religion, politics and commerce. These rulers, sensing a great crisis rapidly approaching, and being in the dark concerning God’s purpose, blindly cry out to each other, “Give us more religion.” Thus they further prove that all the nations are against The Theocracy, which shall rule the world in righteousness. (Isa. 9: 6, 7) The indisputable proof is that all the nations have forgotten God and have yielded entirely to wicked demons, and therefore the nations are wicked. Concerning their end the Lord says, "The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands.” All such have determined their own destiny by choosing the course of religion or demonism. “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.” (Ps. 9:15-17) All such will perish at Armageddon.
47	The people are now browbeaten, regimented and oppressed by the harsh rulers, but the end of wicked dictators is near. The day of deliverance for those refugees who are of good will toward Jehovah is also near. Jehovah God has set his throne of judgment, and Christ Jesus, the great Judge, is proceeding with his work of judgment. To those persons of good will toward God and whose devotion is to God and his organization, and who continue faithful, God has promised refuge and safety in the time of trouble-“The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble. And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee ; for thou. Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.” (Ps. 9: 9, 10) The refugees must now flee to the Lord and serve him.
48	These faithful ones of good will now have a work to do, and the commandment concerning them is “Sing praises to the Lord, which dwelleth in Zion ; declare among the people his doings.” (Ps. 9:11) Fully trusting in the Lord and knowing that he i--their hope and salvation, they are abiding under hi" organization, and continue to sing: “I will love thee, O Lord, my strength. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised; so shall 1 be saved from mine enemies.”—Ps. 18:1-3.
49	Refuge is provided for the refugees, for those who trust in the Lord, and who serve him faithfully. If they learn the truth and obey the Lord the refugees will find protection and shall live.
JEHOVAH is righteous in all Ais ways, and gracious m all his works Jehovah is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him m truth. Jehovah preserveth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.
—Psalm 145:17,18,20, A.R.V.
PARADISE: DESTROYED AND RESTORED
THE earth was created and made fit to be inhabited.
Upon it were placed the plants and the herbs, the beast and the fowl, the fruits and the flowers. But there was no man to till the ground nor to enjoy the produce thereof, as stated at Genesis 2:4-6. God must have spoken to someone of his purpose to create man, and it is reasonable that God's only begotten Son would have been the one to whom he spoke; as recorded: “And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.’'—Gen. 1 ■ 26-28
God did not create the first man and then give him an immortal soul, as religion has induced many to believe As used with reference to humankind, the words “soul”, “creature,” and “man” apply to the same thing. Every man is a soul, but no man can possess a soul as a thing separate and distinct from his body. The statement or method of God’s creation of the human soul is plainly set forth in the Scriptures, to wit: “And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into Ins nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul.”—Gen. 2 7.
Thus man was the handiwork of Jehovah God and was perfect therefore. “Ascribe ye greatness unto our God He is the Rock, his work is perfect.” (Deut. 32.3, 4) God then caused all the beasts and the fowl to pass before Adam, and he gave each one its name. Each beast and each fowl found its mate or kind. “But for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.” “And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone, I will make him an help meet for him.” (Gen. 2:18-20) Then the woman was made and brought unto man.
That part of the earth where man first saw the light must have been surpassingly beautiful. The name of the locality is called “Eden”, and “Eden” means “delight”, "pleasantness.” It was on the eastern side of Eden that God planted a garden, and there he put man, whom he had formed, to dress and to keep it. This was the home of Adam and his wife. The inspired Record of this, according to the Catholic Douay Version Bible, reads: “And the Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure from the beginning ■ wherein he placed man whom he had formed. And the Lord God brought forth of the ground all manner of trees, fair to behold, and pleasant to eat of: the tree of life also in the midst of paradise: and the tree of knowledge of good and evil And a river went out of the place of pleasure to water paradise, which from thence is divided into four heads . . . And the Lord God took man, and put him into the paradise of pleasure, to dress it, and to keep it. And he commanded him, saying: Of every tree of paradise thou shalt eat: but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat For in what day soever thou shalt eat of it, thou shalt die the death.”—Gen. 2: 8-17.
On the earth now was the perfect man. wrong, vigorous and handsome; with eyes so keen that they knew no dimness, and with the agility and swiftness of the hind And with him was his wife, possessing grace and surpassing beauty such as no man now on this earth has ever beheld for she was perfect The man and the woman were given a mandate from God, therefore a “divine mandate”, to "be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it”, and hence they’ were endowed with power and authontv to bring forth children and to fill the entire earth with their descendants. There is no evidence that any of the heavenly creatures were endowed with power to produce any offspring. The propagation of the race on earth was then new and novel, and all the heavenly hosts must have wa led and watched with deepest concern for the time to come when man would “fill the earth” with a joyful race of people, all of whom would worship and praise the great Jehovah God Happiness reigned in heaven and happiness reigned on earth The environment was beautiful, pleasing to the eye, a joy to the heart, and all to the praise of the Eternal God. the Creator
The glory and beauty of the heavenly creatures, the perfection of the human pair in their paradise home m Eden and the power and authority of man to fill the earth w ith his kind, furnished the opportunity for exercising either selfishness or love. The test came, and some of the mighty creatures of heaven fell under the test. The joy of heaven and earth was turned into great woe The ti needy of Eden ha> never known a parallel. In fact, all other crime'' and tiage dies may be traced to the one there committed To the mighty’ spirit creature who is now Satan the Devil, and whom Jesus called “the prince of this world" and who then fore was the invisible ruler of the worldly city of Tvie. Jehovah God directs these words: “Thou wast the seal of resemblance, full of wisdom, and perfect m beauty Thou wast in the pleasures of the paradise of God Thou a cherub stretched out, and protecting, and 1 set thee m the holy mountain of God, thou hast walked m the midst of the stones of fire Thou wast perfect m thy ways from the day of thy creation, until iniquity was found m thn (Ez.ek 28 12-1,5, Douay) This “anointed J-.eitib that cn ereth” (Autk I'cr.) is named "Shining tine”, or "Momnig Star-’, or “Lucifer”, at Isaiah 14-12 Selfidi meditation in his heart led to the terrible crime of treason against God and all the baneful effects thereof since
Lucifer employed the serpent to carry out his scheme, because the serpent was more subtle than any other beast of the field which the Lord God had made Lucilu therefore spoke through the serpent and said "Why hath God commanded you, that you should not eat of every tree ol paradise?” “And the woman answered him saying- Of the fruit of the trees that are in paradise we do eat - but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of paradise God hath commanded us that we should nut eat, and that we should not touch it, lest perhaps we die And the serpent said to the woman No, you shall not die the death For God doth know that in what day soever you shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened and you shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. And the woman saw that the tiee was good to eat, and fair to the eyes, and delightful to be
92
March 15, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
93
hold ■ and she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave to her husband who did eat.’’—Gen 3: 1-6, Douay.
God had given his word that this tree produced a fruit that would increase the knowledge of those that ate it The result was that when Adam and Eve did eat this forbidden fruit their knowledge was increased in harmony with God’s announced law. They were now conscious of the fact that they had done wrong, because they hid themselves amongst the trees in the garden from the presence of the Lord. He brought them before him. They entered a plea of guilty, confessing that they had done wrong, and thereupon God entered against them his just and righteous judgment.
The Scriptures mention, at Genesis 2 : 9, three classes of fruit-bearing trees in the garden of Eden, to wit: (a) every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food; (b) the tree of life in the midst of the garden; and (c) the tree of knowledge of good and evil. God told Adam that he might eat of all the trees that were good for him. (Gen. 2: 15-17) There is no evidence that Adam knew anything about the tree of life that was in the midst of Eden. On the contrary, he must have been ignorant of it, because there was no specific command given to Adam concerning it. Lucifer, the “covering cherub”, as the officer in charge, being clothed v, ith the "power of death” and entrusted with the high office of overlord of man, would, of course, know all about the tree of life The fact that God gave Adam command about other trees in the garden and said nothing about the tree of life is evidence that man knew nothing about this tree. The eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil doubtless would open the way so that Adam would shortly know about the tree of life. But now comes the proof showing conclusively that Adam had had no opportunity to eat ut the tree of life and that therefore he must have been m ignorance of it until immediately before his expulsion from Eden.
God summoned the guilty parties before him, and, upon a full hearing of the facts of the case, he pronounced judgment against the woman and against the man and against the serpent which Satan had employed to deceive Eve. The final judgment against the rebellious Lucifer or Satan is set forth at Ezekiel 28:16-19. and it provides that in due lime Satan the Devil is to be destroyed and never shall be again Immediately following the pronouncement of the judgment against man Jehovah God addressed someone else, then and there present, and it seems almost certain that he was speaking to his true and trusted Son, "his only begotten Son.” “And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever." (Gen. 3: 22) Knowing the situation was critical, God seemingly acted immediately, before man had an opportunity to get to the “tree of life” and cat of it, and even before rebeliious Lucifer had time to Liiform man of the location of the tree. Jehovah God’s words addressed to his only begotten Son were cut short; the sentence seemingly stops in the middle, without being finished, as God says: “And now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:—” God did not speak another word, but, according to the Record, acted immediately; and his action is recorded in the next verse, which reads: “And the Lord God sent
him out of the paradise of pleasure, to till the earth from which he was taken. And he cast out Adan., and placed before the paradise of pleasure Cherubims, and a flaming sword, turning every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.”—Gen. 3: 23, 24, Douay.
It was doubtless God’s purpose at some time to permit man to partake of the tree of life and live forever, and, had he proved faithful under the test and maintained his integrity toward God, that would have been his reward The traitorous “covering cherub”, Lucifer, therefore caused Adam to fail in the test, caused him to fail to retain life, and caused him to bring upon himself and all his progenx the great sorro w and distress that have afflicted humankind down through the centuries.
Lucifer had manifested his unfaithfulness and treachery and doubtless intended to act as quickly as possible and lead man to the tree of life and let him eat of that fruit He knew that God had given his word that the fnnt of that tree was a fruit of life, and that if man should cal of it he would live and not die Lucifer therefore ie.i-.uned that he would be able to prove to Adam and Eve that Go.l was purposely deceiving them and keeping them m ignorance and keeping them away from the opportunity for life, and that he, Lucifer, was telling them the truth and was bringing them a great blessing, and tha* hence he was entitled to be worshiped by them and by ail their oftsprmg
Had Adam eaten of that fruit of the tree of life immediately he eould not have been put to death, by Jeho\ah himself, because God cannot be inconsistent God had given his word that this was a “tree of life” , and for him to permit man to eat of it and then put him to death wo .re. make void God’s word, which is impossible for God to do IE 138:2; Isa 46:11; 55.11) Therefore, in order ttiat God might keep his word inviolate and enforce his judgment against Adam he immediately expelled him from Eden and set a powerful officer on guard with a flaming sword turning in every direction, to keep man out of Eden and aw..\ from the tree of life
Sixteen hundred years thereafter, when man had multi plied upon the earth. "'God looked upon the eaitn. ..i.d benold, it was corrupt; for ah flesh had eorruptid his w.n upon the earth And God said unto Noah, The end of .dl flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled witn cloleir <■ through them, and. behold, I will dcstiov them with tin earth And, behold, I, even I, do bring a Hood of wateis upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breatn of life, from under heaven, and every thing that is in the earth shall die But with thee will I establish my covenant " (Gen. 6.12,13, 17,18) In the flood “every living subst nice was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark”. (Gen. 7.23) After the flood no mention is made of paradise existing upon the earth, but references back to the glory of the one-time paradise of Eden are found at Genesis 13 .10 and Ezekiel 31.8, 9 (Douay Version)
Then, four thousand years after Adam’s expulsion from the paradise in Eden the definite promise is given of the restoration of paradise on the earth For more than three years before his crucifixion Jesus had been pre..clung to
94
SfteWAFCHTOWEK
Brooklyn, N. \
the Jews concerning the kingdom of God. He had told them tb.at God had sent him to tell this message and that in due time Jehovah God would establish the long-promised kingdom. Practically everybody in Palestine knew that Jesus claimed to be the King. The men that accused him and persecuted him and were responsible for his mock trial and his wicked conviction were the religious elergy of that day, and they knew he was the King. (Klatt. 21: 37-45J Pilate offered to release Jesus, but the clergy insisted that instead he should release Barabbas, a notorious criminal, and that Jesus should be crucified. Then they hanged Jesus between two thieves, and a sign was written and put over the tree, in these words: “This is Jesus the King of the Jews.” One of the thieves concluded that Jesus was an unusual man, that lie was entirely innocent, and that he was m fact the promised King. Therefore this thief said to him: “Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom ” Quoting now from Rotherham’s Emphasized Bible concerning Jesus’ reply: “And he said unto him—Veiily T say unto thee this day: With me shalt thou be in Paradise.” (Luke 23 32-43) Or, according to the original Greek text of the Bible, which is without any modern punctuation marks, such as commas, etc.: “I say unto thee today shalt thou be with me in paradise.” Jesus did not say, You shall go to heaven this very day, nor even to paradise this day. Jesus made the statement that day, at that time, while he was on the tree
“Paradise” here has reference to the restored cailh The work of making this earth a glorious place will be done
by Christ Jesus during his reign. All obedient ones of re deemed humankind will then have an opportunity to maintain their integrity toward God and live in paradise on the earth The promise of Jesus to the thief was. T say to thee this day shalt thou be with me in paradise? You are exercising real faith to be with me or on my side this day, when the clergymen and all others arc against me Shall you be with me and for me and on my side when I come into mv kingdom and establish paradise on earth1! if so, you w.11 have a splendid opportunity.’
On the day that the thief died he went wheie Jesus went to hell, or the grave, and the thief is still there When tl.i kingdom of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus has destroyed Satan’s organization at the battle of Armageddon, then in God’s due time, the general resurrection of “all that are in the graves” will take place, including the thief (John 5:28, 29) He will be given an opportunity to prove h.s integrity. Jesus’ words to the thief suggest that paradise on earth will be in existence before the thief is awakened out of death, who will then have opportunity to prow whether he is on the side of Christ Jesus, the King, or rm God planted the garden of Eden, making it a paiadise. and then created man and put him in Eden That appears to fix the order of action concerning men and paiadise Thai being so, it seems that the filling of the earth with a : iirl.t eous race by the earthly survivors of the battie of Airia geddon will have progressed and paradise will have bevn established in the earth before the general resanettion of the redeemed dead
HOW OFTEN AND WHEN TO CELEBRATE
NOT his birthday! Jesus gave no command to celebrate his birthday, but he did command his followers to celebrate his death, which death occurred on the fourteenth day of the month Abib, or Nisan. Fifteen centuries previously God made that the first month of the year “This month shall be unto you the beginning of monthsit shall be the first month of the year to you Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying. In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts, and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it ... it is the Lord’s passover. For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast, and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the Lord. In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread . . . And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever. And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the Lord will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service,”—Ex. 12: 1-3, C-12, 18, 24,25.
The natural Isiaclites must observe their passover in the spring, in the month of Abib, or Nisan, each year, according to the commandment of Jehovah That was a tv pc or prophetic pattern, using a literal lamb In God’s dm time John the Baptist appeared. “John seeth Jesus eommg unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, winch taketl. away the sm of the world ” (John 1 29) When Christ Jesus was put to death on a tree on Calvary he fulfilled the type and became the real passover of those who exetrisi nuth in him and in Ins sacrifice Therefore the apostle wioli “Christ our passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the feast, .	. with the unleavened bread of simeritv
and truth.”—1 Cor. 5-7,8
During the three and one-half years following Ins anointing with the spirit of Jehovah Christ Jesus faithfully observed Israel’s passover each fourteenth of Nisan, because it was incumbent upon him to obey Jehovah’s law giver, to the Jews. By his human birth Jesus was a Jew, or Israebte and must keep the law perfectly ; which he did. Jesus knew that he was the antitype of the lamb slam, but he must continue to observe the type until God’s due time lor him to die and thereby fulfill the type. When he was put to dearl: on the tree, there he completely fulfilled the picture or tyjx . and for that reason never thereafter would it be proper foi anyone to observe the typical ceremony of Israel’s passover “Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree” (Gal 3: 13) By his death Christ
Mauch 13, 1940
WATCHTOWER.
Jesus put an end to the ordinances relating to Israel's passover, nailing them to his tree.—Col. 2: 14.
Before the complete fulfillment of the type, Jesus instituted a new thing, to wit, the memorial of his own death. This he must do, if at all, before he actually died upon the tree Religionists commonly call that memorial “communion” or “the Lord’s supper”. The religious catechism in-stiucts the “Catholic population”: “To make a good Communion it is necessary to be in a state of sanctifying grace and to be fasting from midnight Midnight—that is, twelve o'clock at night; but you should not take anything, especially solid food, for a little while before twelve, so as to be sure of the time, and also not to have little particles of food in your mouth after twelve. If you find some little pieces of food m your mouth in the morning, when you are going to holy Communion, spit them out, and your fast will not be broken. One drop of anything taken even in necessity or by mistake after twelve will prevent you from going to holy Communion.” Did Jesus ordain such a fast upon Ins disciples immediately before partaking of the bread and wine’ No. According to the Bible the day began at six o’clock in the evening; and after that hour, on the fourteenth day of Nisan, he together with his disciples ate the passover. The apostle Matthew writes:
“And they made ready the passover. Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I? And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me The Son of man goeth as it is written of him : but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed 1 it had been good for that man if he had not been born Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I ? He said unto him, Thou hast said. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom ’’—Matt. 26 ■ 19-29.
{Continued from page 82) tamo a Reference Index very convenient in locating the desired lectuie record on any particular subject of vital interest today. There are 64 pages of material, enclosed in a sturdy cover, and Ilie booklet wi.l be supplied on your contribution of 5c a copy. Those in organized companies should send in their orders in combination through the local company servant.
MEMORIAL
Saturday, March 23, after six p.m., is the date for 1940 for the yearly feast in celebration of Jehovah's name and to the sacrifice of tne Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each company, therefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 23, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the Jonadabs being present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately pieceding the partaking of the emblems, that short article ap-
95
The Jewish passover was eaten once each year, on tic fourteenth day of the month Nisan, regardless of what da_> of the week the fourteenth fell on. At the death of Jesus that type ended and was fulfilled. As the death of Jesus took place once, therefore once during the cycle of each yevr the memorial of his death as the antitypical passover Lamb must be observed by those who exercise faith m his Gied blood. “So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of manv " “But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sms for ever, sat down on the right hand of God ; from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.” (Heb. 9:28, 10:12-14) Following the divine rule, it is proper that the followers of Christ Jesus who .ire members of His body celebrate the Memorial once each v ear, and not oftener.
From Pentecost of A.D. 33 forward such followers have annually observed the Memorial after sundown on the fourteenth day of Nisan, regardless of what day of the week this occurs, and they have done so propeily They have not done this as a type or prophetic pattern of things to come, but have done it as a memorial of the death of Christ Jesus. It has enabled them to ever keep in mind that his death is God’s provided way for the reconciliation of man to Jehovah and to the granting of everlasting lite, .'.nd it further reminds them that all who will shaie with Christ Jesus in his kingdom must likewise share with him in lus reproaches and death. The apostle emphasized this f.i 't when he wrote: “The Lord Jesus, the same night m which he was betrayed, took bread : and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood this du ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till he come”—1 Cor. 11 23-26.
The death of Christ Jesus was not typical His death was the great fact upon which all mankind must rely who ever receive life everlasting. When a type is fulfilled the type ends. For this reason it has never been piopcr to observe the passover of Israel since Jesus’ death The value of the death of Christ Jesus never ends; therefore it will be for ever proper to have in mind the sacrificial dcith or the Lord Jesus Christ in vindication of the name of bis Father, Jehovah.
pearing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled before partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. Jesus and his apostles usi-d real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 21: “Refuge,” fl 1-23 inclusive, The Watchtower March 15, 1940
Week of April 28 : “Refuge,”
fl 24-49 inclusive, The Watchtower March 15, 1910
FIELD EXPERIENCES
OVERHEARD BETWEEN LAWYERS
“One lawyer telling another ‘what a wonderful address he had read; written by some fellow called Judge Rutherford, guess he had been on the bench at some time’. He vent ahead to explain: ‘He backed up every statement with Bible references. I tell you it was good.’ The other lawyer: ‘Does he cite any prophecy that is being fulfilled?’ The first lawyer (with emphasis): ‘Oh, yes' Yes, I’ll say he does!’ As lawyer No. 2 disappeared out of the door No. 1 turned to me and remarked that he liked to read good addresses like that. I inquired where he obtained the booklet, its name, and if he had read the book Salvation. I told how he could obtain a copy for a small contribution of 25c that would be a part of a ’revolving fund’ to help print more and put them in the hands of the people of good will toward the Lord and His kingdom; it didn't cost anybody very much, but when the revolving fund got to turning nicely every time it turned os er it brought good news, the glorious gospel, the Truth, to some honest heart. Well, he just exclaimed: ‘Wonderful! I want to read more.’”
DEFENDING THE RIGHTS OF THE "LAZARUS” CLASS
“Some ex-f’atholic relatives agreed for me to come play some records for them. Later another relative, once a Protestant minister, whom I had not seen for twenty years, came in. We greeted each other. He turned and noticed my open phonograph and records on the table. He blurted out. ‘If sou play that I’ll go out of this room I know enough about it. I’ve heard the phonograph and I have some of the books too!’ I told him: ’You’re ujt only embarrassing me, but also the people in this house, by the svay you’re acting. I came here on their invitation to play these records. If you insist you’ll leave the room if I play these, they may, in order not to let you leave, stop me from playing, not to displease or offend you. But if you do that, you’ll be spoiling it for them. Do you want that? Besides, this is not your house, that you can tell other people what to do’’ lie appeared quite taken aback by this. ’The best thing for you is to stay in the room and sit quiet. . . . Don’t spoil it for the others who would like to hear, and don’t stop them from hearing.’ He replied quite meekly, ‘All right” While I was talking a bit m between records (on ’Government and Peace’) he once spoke up, this time to say : ’Put on another record.’ ’How do you like Judge Rutherford?’ to which he replied: ‘He is a good speaker.’ The record playing over, I pulled out two Watchtowers from my pocket and made pointed references. He eagerly accepted them and put them in his pocket. A Consolation, then Safety, and Uncovered, they too went the way of the rest, into his pocket. I mentioned Salvation; he said: ‘Send me one by mail.’ Finally I slung mj last shot: ‘How would you like a study meeting in your house?’ Right off the bat: ‘Sure! . . . Any night except Thursday night.’ There is now a model study at his house, his wife and twelve-year-old son participating also. I made this remark to him: ‘Now you will know and maybe be one of the great multitude who will live on this earth in perfection.’ He answered with a big smile: ‘I hope I will be one of them.’ Incidentally, the people in whose home we met the first night are also now attending a model study in another home near them.”
PHONOGRAPH SAVED HIS JOB
“I am an employee of a mill in this town Some representatives of Satan hurled accusations at me, branding me as a Communist, that way trying to have me fired After sonicconfusion I decided to go to the superintendent’s home, which I did, taking my phonograph ammunition, consisting of many records. The one that he enjoyed most was ‘Snare and Racket’. At first he said: ‘You all have Communistic ideas.’ After hearing the lectures, I spoke to him and cleared the fact of our being far different from Communists, and exactly the work we do. He offered me a seat and asked questions. The result was that he took Salvation, Enemies and several booklets, also subscribed for Consolation I also explained the series we have, and he said he would like tc hear them provided we leave them a week at his home that he might hear the lecture regularly I think the ’Victor} ’ series is the best thing to start with, which I am going to take tomorrow. He also told me that my job was safe.’’
RELIGIONIST SNAPS UP “A BARGAIN”
“Sunday he played the phonograph for the superintendent of a TJnited Brethren church’ and his family, then presented literature. They said Salvation was a \ery nice book, and asked if the publisher carried Bibles too. So he presented a Bible: ‘You get the book and the Bible for onh $1.00 contribution. You see, I am not a Bible agent, but one of Jehovah’s witnesses. Judge Rutherford is the writer of the books and speaker on the records, and the Watchtow it is doing the publishing.’ ‘That’s O.K., and you say if I take twelve or thirteen Bibles I can have a book with each Bible?’ ‘That’s right.' ‘I’ll let jou know in the morning ’ Early next morning an order came for thirteen Bibles and thirteen books. The publisher delivered them and played more records. Next Sunday, while serving in the same territory, he played the phonograph for a family, presented the literature, and immediately they said; 'Why, we hase that book and got a Bible too, over at the church ’ "
BEATING "PAPA” ON THE DRAW
"She warned me: ’I am Catholic.’ I returned at 4 p m The room was filled: all Catholics. Six records of ‘Government and Peace’, when the door opened and papa, collar in reverse, appeared: ’What's going on here?’ I said - ’Please be quiet, sit down and listen.’ All the people pi esent sort of cringed, showing fear, and remained quiet. He listened to two records, then began to make trouble, telling me to get out. I said: ‘I was invited here. I am going to play the full series, and if you don’t like it, you can step out.’ None of the people present dared say anything. Finally he wanted to ask me one question. He remarked that after I had answered it I wouldn’t want to remain 'How long have there been any of Jehovah’s witnesses?’ I knew he wanted me to say ten, twenty years, and then he would have pointed out, with his chest out, how old the Catholic church was I replied : ‘About 5,800 years” He roared ’What’’ I replied ‘Don’t you read your Bible? Hebrews 11 points out that Abel, long ago, was a witness to Jehovah, and that was wh} he was killed. You see, Mr. Priest, the Catholic church is onh a baby compared with the long line of Jehovah’s witnesses ' He ups and rushes madly out of the room The people had seen their priest on the run. I had to tell them about the long line of witnesses, and they were very much impressed, each taking a book to study ”
96
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W, E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ In glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the random or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his pui poses toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun , that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the es’ablisliment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloi ed King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptuies. It does not indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, JI 00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 ."0. Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Gs. American rvrni tancea should be xnade by Postal or Express Money Order or be Bunk Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittaiuis should be made direct to the respective branch offices Remittances •imu countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brook Ij u oime, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian............... .	40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontano Ciinad.i
Auatiaiasmn............ 7	Beresford Road. Stratlifield, NSW. Austin 111
South African ..........-	... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in everj case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible wbo by reason of tnfirmitj, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price mai liait The Wat'A-torcer free upon written application to the publislieis, made once e.n li year, stating the reason for so requesting it. W e are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment or a new or a renewal miI>-scription will be sent only when requested Change of address, »h,n requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one Tn.mtti A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with tin journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at lirooKlgn, k 1 , under the -Act of March 3, 1ST:
THEOCRATIC CONVENTION OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
The mamiest leadings ot the Lord indicate that all lotets of the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God should assemble in general convention in 1940, Columbus. Ohio, has been selected as the key city for a five-day convention of Jenovah’s witnesses The dates will be July 24-28 inclusive Announcement is made this early in advance in order that Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will may have ample opportunity to arrange their affairs so as to be at Columbus, Ohio, or other cities tied in by direct wire communication and loud-speaker equipment By the Lord’s grace, the president of the Watchtower Society will be in attendance in person at the key assembly in Columbus Further details will be published later.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 5: “Instruction” (Part 1), JI 1-17 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1940.
Week of May 12: “Instruction” (Part 1), 18-32 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1940
"BATTLE SIEGE" TESTIMONY PERIOD
Spring’s opening is mrrked by the “Buttle Su-ge” iHimci,, Penod, during the whole month of April it is a pressing of tin siege against religion by a campaign to increase yet moi e tic subscription list of The Watchtower. The unusual offer in effect during the campaign will operate greatly to that result, to wit. one year’s subscription for The Watchtower together with tl 1 premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covered booklet on a contribution of but one dollar; foreign countlies, $1 50 Tin-Testimony Period, which is vvorld-wude in scope, is the first ot ,1 three-month campaign with The Watchtower, anil, Gue to tile in stant importance of what this magazine contains, the campaign was actually launched on March 23, the date of celebrating tu> Memorial. Now is not too late to arrange for some part theicin as to territory, equipment, time, supplies, distributor’s copies, ci. If unacquainted with an organized company of publishers 111 y mi' locality, notify this office of your wish to get in touch with mu I for this Testimony. Those in foreign lands should vvnte the bianel. office having supervision. The /nformant (which is free) goe-into greater detail on this
SeWMCffTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	April 1, 1940	No 7
INSTRUCTION
(PART 1)
"Take fast hold of instruction;
JEHOVAH provides a complete course of instruction for all who are teachable. A meek person is one who desires to be taught the right way and who is diligent in seeking true information. To such Jehovah’s unfailing promise is: ''The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.” (Ps. 25 : 9) To begin to receive instruction and to acquire true knowledge one must fear Jehovah God. that is to say, greatly desire to have Jehovah’s approval and be fearful that such approval might not be granted. (Prov. 1: 7) “What man is he that fear-eth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he "hall choo>e. His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth.”—Ps. 25:12, 13.
2 True instruction proceeds not from man, but from Jehovah, the Almighty God. Men assume to be instructors, but their instruction and words of supposed wisdom are only foolishness in the sight of God. (1 Cor. 1:20-27) Jehovah God is the Fountain of life and is therefore the Father, or Life-giver, of all who shall have and enjoy everlasting life. (Ps. 36:9) His organization is revealed under the name of “Zion”, his “woman”, or the one who nurtures the children of life. Jehovah grants life by and through Zion, over which Christ Jesus is the Head and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah: ’And all tin children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” (Isa. 54: 13) The teachers of persons who seek true knowledge are Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. The present is the time or day when the great Teachers, Jehovah and Christ Jesus, are giving instruction to those who are seeking the true and right way. “And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall we thy teachers.”-—Isa. 30:20.
’Jehovah gives instruction by and through his Word, written by his direction and inspiration granted to his faithful servants and by them recorded in the Bible long years ago, and now7 at the end of the world he is pleased to make clear to those
let her not go; keep her; for she is thy life."—Proverbs 4:13.
who are diligent in seeking knowledge the meaning of his prophetic Word. (Rom. 15:4) “'Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path." (Ps. 119:105) It is that sacred Word of God that makes one wise unto salvation through faith in Jehovah's Anointed One. “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works '—2 Tim 3:16,17/
4 The mission of The Watchtower is to publish Bible instruction, to aid all people of good will to learn Jehovah’s purpose toward and his provision for those who love him. “And this is life eternal, that they might know’ thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.”—John 17:3.
"'By bringing to pass and revealing the physical facts God makes known to the teachable the meaning of his prophecies written long ago in his Word. It now appears that Jehovah often uses his devoted people by permitting them to pass through ceitnin experiences and thus to have some part m the fulfillment of his prophecy, and then later he Glows them how the prophecy has been fulfilled and how his faithful people are related thereto. Such knowledge, because it proceeds from Jehovah, i.- pine and true, and gives great comfort and hope to those who worship Jehovah in spirit and in truth. With this issue of The Watchtower the study of the prophecy of Zephaniah is begun, which prophecy was not written by the will of man, but as Zephaniah was moved by the spirit of Almighty God. (2 Pet. 1: 21) It now clearly appears that the proph-ecy of Zephaniah relates to and begins to haw fulfillment from and after the year 1914, when Jehmah enthroned Christ Jesus the King. Every person consecrated to do the will of God, including the remnant and the Jonathan class, should now in the fear of God pursue this series of studies w’ith the keenest interest, because they are involved in the fulfillment of this prophecy. It discloses that the day of ee
100
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
vindication of Jehovah’s name at Armageddon is at hand, that the battle of the great day of God Almighty is very near, and shows to everyone who hopes to receive Jehovah’s approval that he is now in need of the instruction that is contained in that prophecy. Read carefully the prophecy of Zephaniah and consider the same, together with the facts which directly relate thereto. Such careful study will give courage and hope to those who truly love and serve Jehovah and his King, Christ Jesus.
6 Zephaniah was a witness of Jehovah, and he properly gave to Jehovah all credit, honor and praise. The meaning of his name, together with the meaning of the names of his ancestors, well and fitly describes the conditions of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses on the earth from and after 1918, when Christ Jesus appeared at the temple. Jehovah’s faithful people on earth now, like Zephaniah, give all credit, honor and praise to the Almighty God and to his King Christ Jesus for the revelation and understanding of the prophecy. No man should take credit therefor, nor could he take credit therefor and be pleasing to the Lord. The prophecy is introduced with these words: “The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah.” (Zeph. 1:1) This introduction should get the instant attention of all who profess to serve Jehovah.
1	Zephaniah, the spokesman, is quick to declare that the prophecy is not of his or any other man’s origination nor is it his or any other man’s message. He takes no credit for being wise and educated so as to be able to forecast events with dependable certainty. He plainly makes known that the uttered prophecy is not man’s, but that it is the message of Almighty God sent to those who desire to be instructed. The message came to Zephaniah by inspiration, he being moved by Jehovah's holy spirit. Since 1918 a message identical with that delivered by Zephaniah has come by and through Christ Jesus, the great Teacher at the temple, and through the written Word of Almighty God, and which message has been revealed and made clear by fulfillment of prophecy and by the leading of the Lord through his angels, with him at the temple and who act under the Lord’s instruction and direction.
MEANING OF NAMES
8	In the study of prophecy every word should be carefully considered, because there are no superfluous words written in the prophecies. It is well known by the remnant that a name given by Jehovah is of deep significance relating to a prophecy. The name “Zephaniah" means “hidden of Jehovah”.
Manifestly those included in the class “hidden of Jehovah” are hidden for their own protection, and this is shown by the following scriptures. ‘They [the enemies of God’s people] have taken crafty counsel against thy hidden [(Hebrew) zaphan] ones.’ (Ps. 83:3) “For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a rock”. (Ps. 27:5) “Thou slialt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man; thou shalt keep them secretly [zaphan] in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.” (Ps. 31:20) Thus it is seen that the name “Zephaniah” exactly fits God’s faithful remnant on the earth at the time the kingdom is set up. Those faithful ones are ' The Seed' of God’s “woman”, Zion, and are the ones pictured in the symbolic scripture, to wit: “And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne. And the woman fled into th<-wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God. that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days.” “And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought foith the man child And to the woman were given two wimrs of a uieat eagle, that she might fly into the wildcrne-s, into hei place, where she is nourished for a tune, and tune-, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.” “And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have tin testimony of Jesus Christ.” (Rev. 12: .">, 6, 13. 14, 17) The life of each one of God’s faithful ones is h:d with Christ Jesus.— Col. 3: 3.
’The ancestors of Zephaniah were given -pc< ili< names and manifestly were recorded in tlii- pioph ecy for the enlightenment of those who are now on earth and who are of God’s devoied people The meaning of the names of such ancestors full) -imports what is above stated concerning Zephaniah The prophet was the son of “Cushi”, which po~-ibly means “chaos or confusion”. Zephaniah’s fathei \\a-not an Ethiopian, and this gives strength to tin' conclusion that his name is used symbolically and refers to that class of sin-blackened ones who are brought out of darkness into the kingdom of light All who have become God’s witnesses were born in sin’ and hence sin-blackened and “were by nature the children of wrath, even as others”. (Eph 2.3) After being spirit-begotten the improper coniM> of such brought upon them defilements during the World War and caused them to receive the disapproval of Jehovah, and hence caused them confusion. The name, therefore, well describes God’s peo-
April 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
101
pie immediately preceding the time when the Lord came to the temple.
10	“The son of Gedaliah.” That name means “whom Jehovah has made great (or powerful)”. This meaning well applies to Jehovah’s faithful remnant after they were released from “Babylon” in 1919; as stated in Psalm 126:2, 3: “The Lord hath done great things for us; whereof we are glad.” The Lord lias made his people his witnesses of power since 1918 in delivering his message against the entrenched forces of Babylon. The message of God, which it has been the privilege of his witnesses to deliver since that time, has exhibited a powerful force and influence against religion and hypocrisy.
15 “The son of Amariah.” That name means “said by Jehovah”, or, “whom Jehovah said (that is, promised).” Jehovah has said or designated the remnant on earth as his visible mouthpiece to declare what things he has said or promised, as published in his Word. These faithful witnesses never take credit to themselves, but always refer to their authority, to wit: “Thus saith Jehovah.” They publish the Word of God, not the word of any man. Therefore the meaning of the name Amariah well fits the course such faithful witnesses take.
12	“The son of Hizkiah [or, Hezekiah].” That name means “strength of Jehovah”; that is, “strength from Jehovah.” The remnant have no strength within themselves, but they are “strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might”. (Eph. 6:10) The words uttered by the prophet of God exactly apply to them, and they say: “I will love thee, 0 Lord, my strength.” (Ps. 18: 1) “And David is stronger than the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smiteth the Philistine, and putteth him to death; and there is no sword in the hand of David.” —1 Sam. 17:50, Young’s.
13	The message from Jehovah came to Zephaniah “in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah”. Hence Zephaniah describes the condition then found in the land of Judah and also the danger that threatened the nation as a result of that condition. That message from the Lord also foreshadowed that He would favor his faithful remnant. The message also disclosed what was coming on the nations round about Jerusalem. The name Josiah means “whom Jehovah heals”. The name suggests reformation. King Josiah's cleansing and reformation in Judah was likely the result of Zephaniah’s prophecy, the message which God sent and to which Josiah gave heed. The first chapter of the prophecy shows a special need for reformation. It appears that Zephaniah began to prophesy before Josiah began to seek the Lord, which Josiah did in the eighth year of his reign. The king was a “son of Amon”, which
name is derived from the same Hebrew root word as is the word “Amen”. The word “Amon” means “architect” or “builder” as used in the following text: “Then became I [Jesus] beside him [Jehovah] a firm and sure [builder].”—Prov. 8: 30, Rotherham.
“ Zephaniah’s prophecy, being delivered during the reign of Josiah, together with the surrounding circumstances, as stated therein, seems to indicate that in this prophetic picture Josiah, the king, represented or pictured Jesus Christ after he began his reign, and that specially with reference to the remnant of his faithful followers yet on the earth, and whom he heals, approves and builds up into Zion. This would show that the prophecy began to have fulfillment after 1918 A.D., and discloses that the prophecy holds a peculiar interest for the remnant and also their “companions”, the Jonathan class. It therefore appears not only proper but advantageous in this study to take note of certain historical facts and dates, as shown by the Scriptures and which are related to the time of the reign of Josiah. The figures below, at the beginning of each sentence, refer to the date or years before Christ Jesus, to wit:
667 B.C. Josiah born to King Amon of Judah.
664 B.C. Nebuchadnezzar born to his father Nabo-polassar of Babylonia.
659 B.C. Josiah, 8 years old, enthroned over Judah. Nebuchadnezzar now 5 years old.—2 Chron. 34:1; 33: 25.
1 Zephaniah begins prophesying.—Zeph. 1: 1.
631 B.C. Josiah begins to‘seek the Lord’.—2 Chron. 34:3.
647 B.C. Josiah begins to “purge Judah and Jerusalem”.—2 Chron. 34: 3-7.
646 B.C. Jeremiah begins prophesying. (Jer. 1 : 1, 2; 25:1-3) Nabopolassar begins ruling Babylonia, for 21 years.
641 B.C. The book of the Law is found in the temple and read to King Josiah. He celebrates the greatest Passover of Jewish history.—2 Chron 34:8-33; 35:1-19.
628 B.C. Josiah, favoring Jehovah’s executioner, Nebuchadnezzar, goes to battle against Pha-raoh-necho and is killed. Jehoahaz succeeds to the throne of Judah.—2 Chron. 35:20-25.
After three months Jehoahaz is deposed and Jehoiakim succeeds to the throne.—2 Chron. 36:1-5.
625 B.C. General-Prince Nebuchadnezzar defeats Pharaoh-necho at Carchemish.—Jer. 46:2.
Nebuchadnezzar succeeds Nabopolassar to the throne of Babylonia, at 40 years of age. (Jer.
102
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
25:1) He destroys Nineveh in Assyria.—Nahum 1-3.	’
620 B.C. King Jehoiakim of Judah comes under Nebuchadnezzar.—2 Ki. 24:1.
617 B.C. Jehoiakim rebels against Nebuchadnezzar and is killed. (Dan. 1:1, 2) Jehoiachin his son succeeds him, for three months. Then Nebuchadnezzar removes him and puts in Zedekiah as king over Judah.—2 Ki. 24:1-19.
608 B.C. Zedekiah rebels against Nebuchadnezzar. —2 Ki. 24:17-20; 25:1.
606 B.C. Nebuchadnezzar destroys Jerusalem and deports Zedekiah to Babylon.—2 Ki. 25:2-7.
582 (581) B.C. Nebuchadnezzar dies at the age of 83, after reigning for 43 years.
COMPARISON
15 It is interesting and instructive to note the comparison of events that came to pass during the reign of Josiah, and which correspond with the reign of Christ Jesus; and the relation of the activities of the remnant members of “his body” from and after the year 1919 (A.D.). Below are set out in parallel columns some of the corresponding events, to wit:
B.C.
Josiah the king:
659 Josiah enthroned. During Josiah’s reign Zephaniah prophesied.
651 Josiah, in the eighth year of his reign, began to seek Jehovah and began a work of reformation.
647 The twelfth year of Josiah’s reign he began to purge
A.D.
Christ Jesus the King:
1914 Christ Jesus is enthroned and sent forth to rule.
1919 Jehovah’s witnesses, released from Babylon’s organization, begin, under the direction of Christ the King, the “Elisha work”, preaching “this gospel of the kingdom”.
1922 Jehovah’s witnesses, in convention at Cedar Point, witnessed the outpouring of the holy spirit and then began their part in connection with the work of pouring out the “seven last plagues” or vials of wrath of Jehovah, even though at that time they did not understand the purpose or meaning thereof.
1926 May 1, The Watchtower published as its leading article an expose of the so-
Judah and Jerusalem of idolatrous worship.
called “character development”, by which it was claimed men could make themselves perfect and ready for heaven ; and showing that such claim is wholly unscriptural, delusive, and creature worship. During that same year the following further important events took place:
May 15, The Watchtower published the article “Holi-nessuntotheLord”, showing the absolute necessity foi uncompromising and complete devotion to Jehovah.
May 28, that year, at London, England, the convention of Jehovah's witnesses adopted the Resolution “A Testimony to the Rulers of the World”. At this point the 1335 days of Daniel’s prophecy (Dan. 12-12)ended, and the period of blessedness began.
June 1, The Watchtower published the article "Sacrifice and Service”.
June 15, published the article “Sacrifice ard Obedience”.
July 1, the book Deliverance was released, which was a departure from the Scripture Studies methods
August 1, The Watchtowei published “The Temple of God”.
August 15, “The Servant and Service.”
February 1 and 15, following, The Watchtower published “The Son and Servant”; and, “Servant—Good and Evil,” which articles exposed the fallacy and evil effects of creature worship Surely the Lord at the temple directed these publications, for the reason that the remnant are members of his body and under his direct supervision.
April 1,1940
5He WATCHTOWER
103
646 was the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah the king, at which time Jeremiah the prophet began preaching or prophesying. That was 40 years before the fixed tune for the fall of Jerusalem. (Ezekiel 4: 6-8)
1927 In the month of July, the date of the Toronto convention of Jehovah’s witnesses, there was delivered the lecture “Passing of the World Powers". (Dan. 2:35) At that same convention, and for the first time, by a nation-wide radio-broadcast, over fifty-three radio stations, also there was delivered and broadcast the lecture “Freedom for the Peoples", and at the same time the convention adopted a Resolution addressed “To the Peoples of 'Christendom’ ”, Thereafter there was published in The. Watchtower in the months of October and November the aforesaid lecture and Resolution. Shortly thereafter the public witness work took on a larger scope after the Society issued for the first time a five-cent booklet containing the lecture “Freedom for the People".
December 15 that year The Watchtower published “One Reason for God’s Vengeance”, emphasizing the breaking of the everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of the blood of life, and pointing out how the nations had broken this covenant. According to the scripture at Revelation 16:13-16 the marching to Armageddon was then in progress.
641 This date marks the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah the king and corresponds with the year 1932 (A.D.). During that eighteenth year of Josiah’s reign the repairing of the temple
1932 March 20, Memorial day of Jehovah’s witnesses. On that day began, by Jehovah’s witnesses, the first International Thanksgiving Testimony Period and continued for eight days.
In July the same year Vindication, Books Two and Three, were released to the public, and which books exprogressed, and in that year the book of the law was found by the high priest Hilkiah. Shaphan read the book of the law to Josiah the king, who, upon hearing the reading thereof, humbled himself before Jehovah and received from J ehovah theprom-ise that he would personally escape from Jerusalem’s destruction. Then King Josiah made arrangements for and held the greatest Passover in Jewish history.
plain the Jehu-Jonadab picture, and also gave an explanation of the temple of Ezekiel’s vision.
August 15 Watchtower and September 1 Watchtower published articles on “Jehovah’s Organization.” exposing the fact that “elective elders" in the temple of God are unscriptural.
October 15, The Watchtower offers notice suggesting and indicating that ‘the sanctuary has been cleansed’. (Dan. 8:14)
November, the book Preparation was published and released to the public.
” Such corresponding events did not come to pass-by chance, nor by the design or the work of men, but certainly were directed and arranged by the Lord for his purposes. God’s people, having devoted themselves to Jehovah and his King, in harmony with Jehovah’s promise, are guided and directed by him through the Head of the temple company. Christ Jesus was enthroned in 1914 as the everlasting King over all those who praise Jehovah (that is, the spiritual house of Judah, the Judeans, which name means those who praise Jehovah) and all others who find protection under God’s organization. Those who will not praise Jehovah will be destroyed at Armageddon The first eight years of Josiah’s reign he was a mere boy, from eight to sixteen years of age, and during that time conditions in Judah were not good. Evidently during those eight years of his boyhood reign Jehovah raised up, commissioned and sent forth Zephaniah his prophet to prophesy, and then, as the name “Josiah” means, “Jehovah healed” Josiah from his improper course of action that he had previously taken. So likewise up to A.D. 1918 Jehovah’s witnesses, serving on the earth, were not in the best condition as to the worship, service and praise of the Almighty God. There was much religion and creature-worship among them from which they must be cleansed. They needed cleansing that they might offer unto God an acceptable service. With the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple in 1918 he began the fiery work of cleansing the temple class. (Mal. 3:1-3) In the year 1918 Jehovah had raised up the
104
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y
approved temple class constituting the “faithful and wise servant” class, which class was foreshadowed by Zephaniah, and which class the Lord cleansed and admitted to the temple; and thereafter he has used that class, and those who continue faithful are now to look after promoting the kingdom interests on the earth. (Matt. 24: 45, 46) It is such, as a class designated by the Lord as that “faithful and wise servant” and which is made up of individuals who have continued faithful in obedience to the Lord’s command, that have carried out the work assigned to them and have done so in the name of and to the glory of the Lord. The class includes only those who are approved by the Lord at the temple judgment and who thereafter continue faithful.
17	Then Jehovah began to instruct his faithful ones by and through Christ Jesus, the Head of the temple, concerning His purpose toward the world, and this is shown by the prophecy of Zephaniah: “I will utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the Lord.” (1:2) According to other translators this text reads: “I will take clean away everything from off the face of the ground.” {Rotherham; Revised Version; Young) This Jehovah will accomplish at the battle of the great day of God Almighty, which battle shall be waged successfully by his great Executioner, Christ Jesus. By that battle Jehovah will clear off and take away all abominable and defiling things on the earth and will make Satan’s domain a vast desolation. This destruction particularly relates to “Christendom”. In the picture the cleansing or destructive work was extended to the nations bordering on Jerusalem. In the fulfillment of the prophecy the destructive and cleansing work will extend and relate to all the earth, and especially to “Christendom”, because it has been in “Christendom” that the greatest amount of hypocrisy has been practiced and where the greatest reproach has been cast upon the name of Jehovah God. The truth concerning Armageddon has been repeatedly and thoroughly drilled into the minds of God’s people since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple. Thus they have been instructed what to expect.
18	Further making known his purpose to completely clean up all the earth Jehovah caused his prophet Zephaniah to prophesy thus: “I will consume [take away] man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, [I will take away] and the stumblingblocks with the wicked; and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the Lord.” (1:3) Prior to the coming of the Lord to the temple God’s people had understood that the battle of Armageddon would be a conflict between the radical and conservative elements of the peoples of earth. But having received instruction
from the Lord since that time, by God’s grace, the\ have learned and now clearly see that the battle of Armageddon will be Satan’s visible and invisibh-organization on the one side, with Christ and hi> mighty host on the other, and the battle will reduce Satan’s organization to a lifeless thing without an\ form of life. Another prophet adds: “Yea, the fisbe-of the sea also shall be taken away.” (Hos. 4:3) That does not mean that every man, the lower animals, birds and fishes on the literal earth shall be wiped out. Rather the Scriptures show that every thing and every one of Satan’s organization, and which Satan uses to carry on the organization on the earth and which have been doing and do his nei'ai-ious work, shall be completely wiped out, that the earth might be clean and a fit habitation for righteous men. Concerning this the apo.stle Peter under inspiration wrote: “But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth [meaning Satan’s organization on the earth] also, and the works that are therein, shall be burned up.”—2 Pet. 3. 10.
18	In the sky and on the earth, and in the sea, there will no more be room for anything identified with Satan's organization. God will completely clear up the earth. Jehovah now reveals to his faithful people the meaning of his prophecies, that their courage and hope may be made strong. He makes them to understand the meaning of his declaration that he has made the earth for man, and made man for the earth (Isa. 45:12, 18), that is, that His creation of the earth is for those who faithfully serve and obey him, and that all creations that fail or refuse to obey him are wicked, and that “all the wicked will he destroy” at Armageddon. He also make-, clem that then the great multitude upon the < leansed earth will, in obedience to his command and under tie immediate direction of Christ Jesus, "lill the earth” with a righteous race that shall forever praise the name of and joyfullv serve Jehovah, the Almightt God.	'
20	Then the prophet of God speaks of the stumbling-blocks. The “stumblingblocks” which have caused men to err must be taken away, and therefore Jehovah says: ‘I will take away ... the stumblingblocks.’ What are those stumbling-blocks? Religion and religious paraphernalia, used in connection with idol worship which has been carried on in defiance of God’s plain command, constitute the chief stumbling-blocks laid in the way of men. (Ex. 20: 3-5; From the day of Nimrod onward such stumblingblocks have been placed in the way of the peoples of the earth. This the Devil has done in tiefiance of Jehovah and in his effort to carry out his wicked
April 1,1940
3Ee WATCHTOWER,
103
challenge to Jehovah. Many religions have been brought forth, and the people have been induced to practice those religions. Such stumbling-blocks have reached the climax in the idolatrous religion used and practiced by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and upon such stumbling-blocks many have stumbled and been caught in the snare of the Devil, and remaining in that snare they will be destroyed at Armageddon. Today Satan and his host of wicked spirits invade the minds of millions. Today multitudes of deceived ones are caught in that religious snare and the wicked spirits seize the mind of such individuals and induce and compel them to commit al] manner of wickedness. Such multitudes of persons thus influenced, embracing and practicing religion, are now under the control of the wicked one and his horde of wicked spirit creatures, which wicked creatures operated prior to and since the deluge. Those deluded ones thus ensnared have become fanatics and are induced to call themselves by such names as “Christian Front”, “Christian Mobi-lizers,” and other names similar, while having and exhibiting at the same time only the spirit of the Devil, and none whatsoever of the spirit of Christ. Thus it is shown that the names they take are taken at the instance of the Devil to reproach the name of God and Christ. The Roman Catholic Action, put into operation by the Hierarchy, has laid the great stumbling-block before the people that has put fear into the minds and hearts of multitudes, deluded them, and caused them to fall into the snare or pit of the Devil. Such stumbling-blocks God declares that he will take away and destroy by the hand of Christ Jesus before or at Armageddon. These poor, deluded people are the victims of the Devil’s chief agents on earth, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. These multitudes of deluded ones have been induced bv fear of men to walk directly into the snare of the Devil.
21	Money, or “the love of money” and what it brings, otherwise called “commercialism”, is another of the stumbling-blocks. Says Jehovah’s prophet, Such is ‘the stumbling-block of their lawlessness’. Having their heart fixed upon money and what it can bring, they have stumbled over the same, have been caught in the Devil’s snare, and will be destroyed at Armageddon : “They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed; their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord; they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels; because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.” —Ezek. 7 :19.
” In the present way of great peril upon the earth the commercial giants are aiding and abetting the
religious leaders in causing multitudes of people to stumble and to be ensnared by the Devil’s machinations. In proof of this, mark the following: The organization called the “Chamber of Commerce” is created and organized and maintained because of men’s “love of money” and the power that it gives: and which men rely upon commerce or money to accomplish their desires. That commercial element of society has become a part of the religious organization now seeking to rule and control the things of the earth. These men and women have been blinded by fear of losing what they have. Blinded by the fear of men and fear of losing control of men, the organization called the “Chamber of Commerce” is led straightway into the snare of the Devil and becomes allied with religion, and the mouthpiece of Satan, to further ensnare the unsuspecting peoples of the earth. In a statement issued by “The Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York”, with offices at 65 Liberty street, New York city, the commercial district, and released to the public propaganda press, the ally and tool of the Roman Catholic religious organization, it issues a report, which report is released to the public press on the 13th day of August, 1939. The press publishing that report, amongst other things, says: “That religion should be an integral part of public education in the state’s schools is the first recommendation made by a special committee of the New York State Chamber of Commerce, appointed in February, 1938, to inquire into the efficiency and economy of the educational system of the state. The committee warned that if the nation does not uphold its religious foundation its whole structure will fail.”
“At this time the state and nation find themselves in different conditions and with different needs from those which our country has ever heretofore know n, and our educational system must be adjusted to meet these present-day needs,” the report said. “This committee is convinced that the great lack in oui homes and in our national life, is the lack of true, simple religion.
“In these work-a-day, warring, strenuous times, we have been paying less and less attention to our religious convictions and feelings. Those convictions and feelings still exist—they are more important today than they ever were—and it is vital that in our education they be honored and promulgated rather than subordinated or excluded. If this nation does not maintain its religious foundation, its whole structure will fail.
“When we say religious, we do not mean any particular church or sect. We do not want church differences mixed up in our schools; but we do want our scholars to appreciate and understand the impor-
106
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y
tanee of their fc’lowing and making the most of the faith with which they are identified. We want them to know and to live by the basic rules of life which each will find in his own religion. Integrity, kindly human understanding and true morals are found in each, and those our scholars must know and follow all through their lives if they would build high characters and play the part we need them to play in the future of this nation.
“The United States cannot have or maintain a right system unless it is based on true, religious principles, and, therefore, in spite of the fact that some hesitate to include religion in our educational program, we place it first.”
23	Mark with emphasis this fact: That the report of the Chamber of Commerce above quoted stresses the necessity of some kind or any kind of religion to save the nation from ruin, but not one word is uttered concerning the kingdom of God. The name of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are studiously omitted. Although this nation, by its fundamental law and by the earlier decision of the courts, declares America to be a Christian nation, the facts show that the nation as such has entirely forgotten God. The fact that the nation is not Christian is proved by the fact that the teachings of Christ are entirely ignored. Jesus instructed all of his disciples to pray to Jehovah: ‘Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven.’ (Matt. 6:10) He thus instructed because Jehovah had declared through his prophet: “Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles [nations], . . . And in his name shall the Gentiles [nations] trust.” —Matt. 12: 18, 21.
24	Instead of following the Word of God the Chamber of Commerce stresses the fact that any kind of religion is all right to the salvation of the nation; thus showing that the men making that report are blind to the truth and have wholly forgotten God And what shall be the result and the end of the nations that forget God? Here the scripture recorded long ago and applying to the nations at the time of Armageddon is appropriate and exactly fitting: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.” (Ps. 9:17) That will mean that all nations having forgotten God will be completely taken away. The commercial organization brings before the people the idols and images of religion, which God declares to be a snare of the Devil. (Deut. 7:16) The Chamber of Commerce urges upon the peoples of the nations the necessity of serving idols, which is exactly contrary to God’s Word. All religions serve idols. The leaders in such
religious organizations are called “elders”, and others who work with them, such as the commercial giants, are the principal of their flock. Concerning such Jehovah God, by his prophet, says: “Son of man, these men [elders and leaders, and the principal of the flock that attempt to guide the people] have set up their idols in their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face; should I be inquired of at all by them? Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God, Every man of the house of Israel [‘Christendom,’ falsely claiming to be a Christian nation] that setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet, I the Lord will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols; that I may take the house of Israel [‘Christendom,’ falsely claiming to be a Christian nation] in their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their idols.”—Ezek. 14 : 3-5.
23	In connection with those who place before the people the stumbling-blocks, Jehovah says he will take them away “with the wicked”. Those are put in the class of the wicked, all of which God declares he will destroy. (Ps. 145:20) Such ‘wicked” ones specifically refer to those who have received some enlightenment concerning the purpose of Jehovah God, and who in the face of such knowledge and opportunity to further increase that knowledge have refused instruction and have ignored what knowledge they have previously received, and then continue to do despite to or contrary to the knowledge which God has granted to them. Concerning such the Lord first gathers out and marks them for destruction : “The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that cause stumbling, and them that do iniquity | do contrary to God's law].” (Matt. 13:41, A.Ii.r.) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy have had opportunity to know the purpose of Jehovah. They ha\e heard Hie warning from Jehovah as he has set foi th in hi> Word the Bible and delivered time and again bx Jehovah's witnesses. In the face of such information and warning the Roman Catholic Hierarchy carry on their work of fraud and deception and racket. Men who have received some knowledge of the truth and been privileged to have some service within and for Jehovah’s organization, and who have also heard the warning from his Word and to some extent have engaged in the sounding of that warning, are also included in the class above mentioned because such have become members of the “evil servant” class. Such become offended and withdraw from God’s organization and return to the service of Satan’s organization, smite the servants of God and Christ,
April 1, 1940
WATCHTOWER.
107
co-operate with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and thus make themselves of the “evil servant”, “the man of sin,” “the son of perdition.” Their offense, which by them is claimed to be toward and against men of God’s organization, is in fact an offense at the Lord, and they stumble and cause others to stumble, and they fall into Satan’s pit.
2	G Concerning all such Jehovah says by his mouthpiece Zephaniah (1:3): “And I will cut off man from off the land [off the face of the ground (R.F.)], saith [Jehovah].” The warning is being sounded,and Jehovah’s witnesses must continue to sound the same until God says, Cease sounding. Then every human that has not gotten out of Satan’s organization after hearing the warning and before the battle of the great day of God Almighty begins will be cut off at Armageddon from life. Satan’s visible organization will be utterly depopulated. Jehovah now makes clear his purpose, and, having purposed it, he will do it. Therefore to thus carry out his purpose to execute his judgment already written and declared, Jehovah says, “I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Cheinarims with the priests.”—Zeph. 1:4.
27	Such stretching out of his hand will be after the manner of God's doing at the Red sea, as recorded in his Word: "Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, [and] the earth swallowed them [up].” (Ex. 13: 12) Mark the Scriptures by which Jehovah foretells the stretching out of his hand and what will follow. Concerning and against commercial Tyre that forms an alliance with religious leaders, Jehovah says: “He stretched out his hand over the sea; he shook the kingdoms: the Lord hath given a commandment against the merchant city [Tyre], to destroy the strong holds thereof.” (Isa. 23: 11) This includes the commercial element, such as the organized commerce or Chamber of Commerce, that would further stumble the people by insisting on more religion and insisting that the youth of the land should be taught some kind or any kind of religion. All kinds of religion dishonor God, and all are against his kingdom by Christ Jesus. This further proves the fact that the real fight now is, Satan and all other elements of his organization aligned against the Theocracy by Christ Jesus. Concerning Babylon, which embraced the combined elements of Satan’s visible organization, Jehovah says: “Behold, I am against thee, 0 destroying mountain, saith the Lord, which destroyest all the earth; and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain.” (Jer. 51:25) All of these elements are allied together and against the
Theocracy by Christ Jesus, and God declare- they shall be wiped out.
28	The people of Judah and Jerusalem were those who had received God’s favor and his covenant. Had that people practiced the ‘pure worship of Almightx God, and undefiled’, as commanded by the law of the Most High, which was given unto them for then guidance and protection, his hand would not haxe been against them. Instead of holding faithfully to their covenant and to the true worship of Almighty God, that typical people turned to and practiced conscienceless religion, even using the things which God had provided for them, to reproach his holy name. In so doing that nation pictured the religionists of today, who claim to serve God and Christ and who falsely call themselves by the name Christian, as “Christian Front”, and who practice what they call “the Christian religion”, but all of whom dishonor God’s name. In proof of this, botl in the picture and in the reality or fulfillment thereof, note what immediately follows herein.
29	God caused Zephaniah to utter these xxord.- m His name: “I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place”; that is, from Judah and Jerusalem In that time King Manasseh, the grandfather of Josial. the king, reared up altars for Baal. (2 Ki 21 • 3. 4 ) Manasseh’s son, King Amon, “walked in all the wa> that his father walked in, and served the idol- that his father served, and worshipped them." (2 Ki 21 :21) Baal worship was practiced by tho.-e people, which religion was introduced amongst them by the Devil. That Baal worship continued m Judah and Jerusalem until the twelfth year of King Jo-iah i-shown by the following scriptures : “For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father; and m the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jeru-alem from the high places, and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the images that were on high above them lie cut down: and the groves, and the carved imago, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made du<t ■ >! them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them. And he burnt the bone- of the priests upon their altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.”—2 Chron. 34: 3-5.
30	Josiah went outside of the limits of Judah and into the territory of Israel and did a like work o*' reformation and cleansing. (2 Chron. 34: G. 7) After the death of Josiah Baalism was revived in Judah under the succeeding kings, as the prophecies ot Jeremiah and Ezekiel show.
31	At the present time the King, Christ Jesus, ha.-cleansed God’s temple of all of modern Baalism or
108
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
religion. But among the many professors of Christianity, Baalism or religion still persists, and they indulge in religion in fact more than ever. Baalism or religion openly claims its friendship to and with the world, which is Satan’s organization, and Satan is the great Baal, lord, owner and husband of that organization. Now Jehovah is making it clearly to appear to those who will receive instruction what constitutes his own organization and what constitutes “Christendom”. The Baal-worshipers or practitioners of religion not only turn away from the truth, but openly oppose God’s organization and persecute those who bring the message of Jehovah to their attention. In “Christendom” the religionists continue to worship with great admiration the religions of Satan, and these leaders urge upon the rising generation to embrace the same, and thus all are marching into the pit of destruction.
3S Furthermore God declares that he will “cut off .. . the name of the Chemarims [the priestlings, idol-priests (Rotherham, margin); the idolatrous priests (Young)]”. In the type or picture Josiah the king did put down these idol-priests. (2 Ki. 23: 5, margin) In the fulfillment God will surely, by Christ Jesus, cut off such priests of idolatry, even as he has declared. The word Chemarims, according to its derivation, means "blackness, sadness", and accordingly the name means those who go about in black,
hence ascetics, priests of a religious organization, and such as the nuns, who collect the money from the ensnared ones. Faithfully this description fits the “blackbirds” of ecclesiasticism, the gloomy groups of the priests and preachers and others of today. Also the name fitly describes the “evil servant” class. All of such mark themselves in order to be seen of men and recognized and approved by men. The priests referred to in the prophecy are those who lead in religion, and particularly the so-called “Christian religion”, in which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy takes the lead but which is in fact Devil -ism in disguise. All such shall be taken away, God declares. Even now the names and the titles of such begin to go, as the people are learning that religion is hypocrisy in the extreme. The people of good will are becoming enlightened, and they are shunning religion and their religious leaders. Soon the clergy will seek to hide their identity as ecclesiastics by claiming to be herders of swine, and that will be a slander on the swine, which no doubt will, in disgust, slowly walk away from the presence of their claimed herder* (Zech. 13:5, 6) At the beginning of Aimageddon everything pertaining to such religious, hypocritical practice will be taken away by the Lord T.et those who love the Lord continue to receive instruction.
(To be continued)
WRONG ATTEMPT TO 'TILL THE EARTH”
WHAT became of the married “sons of God” on earth at the time of the Flood forty-four centuries ago? (Genesis 6: 1, 2) Their existence dates from before the creation of earth and of man and woman upon it, according to God’s own words: "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof ; when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy ?” —Job 38 ■ 1-7
In the universal organization of Almighty God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” there were many holy angels devoted to his service and who did not participate in the rebellion of the ‘morning star’, Lucifer. All of such faithful angels are the “sons of God", because they received their life from Jehovah God: “who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire; who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever.”—Psalm 104:4, 5.
About 1500 years had now passed since the rebellion in Eden, and Adam and Eve had had children and grandchildren, and the human race was continuously on the increase, in unrighteousness. At this point begins the inspired account concerning the debauchery of the human race, to wit: “And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face
of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they tool; them wives of all which they chose.” To do so these spirit “sons of God” must materialize in human bodies as men. (Gen. 6-1,2) The account quoted says nothing about wickedness of these angelic "sons of God”, not that they were wicked at the time they materialized as men It could not be said that the ones here called "the sons of God” were any part of the fallen Lucifer’s organization at that time, if ever. All who had allied themselves with him. now Satan the Devil, were then and are his “seed”, and hence the sons of Satan This is proof that the ones here called the “sons of God” are a class or company cntireh different from the ones that joined Satan in his rebellion at Eden. The fact that 1,500 years after the rebellion angels are called the “sons of God” shows that they had been serving Jehovah God all of that time. They were spirit creatures or angels having life from Jehovah God, and, continuing in His service, they are designated as “the sons of God” All of Adam’s children had been born sinners, and hence none of them could be designated as the “sons of God” (Rom 5: 12) Noah was a servant of God
The Devil had set himself up as equal to or superior tn Jehovah God, and the Devil had evolved schemes to reproach and to oppose Jehovah. He knew that Jehovah had
April 1, 1940
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
109
commanded Adam in Eden to multiply and “fill the earth” with a righteous offspring and that God had declared that his purpose must be accomplished. The Devil concluded that he would prevent the carrying out of God’s declared purpose. Although Adam had joined the Devil’s organization, some of Adam’s offspring maintained their integrity and devotion toward God, and such included Abel and Enoch and Noah. In order to gain his wicked ends the Devil set about to debauch all the human race by the use of angels to displace human husbands and produce a race that would rebel against God. No doubt the Devil tried thus to seduce all the angels, expecting to provoke God to wrath and to bring about the destruction of all the human race and to turn all the angels against the Almighty.
The Devil uses deception and fraud to entrap human creatures that become negligent of their duty toward God. It is entire!)’ reasonable that the Devil employed a like manner of fraud and deceit to turn the spirit “sons of God” away from the Creator. It was a part of his wicked scheme to defraud angels as well as men and to induce them to go contrary to God’s law. The “daughters of men” were fair, and the “sons of God” saw these and observed that they were attractive By fraud and deceit Satan had 1,500 years before entrapped first the beautiful Eve, which furnished Adam an excuse to join the Devil; and now he uses the beautiful daughters or granddaughters of Eve to entrap others, even the “sons of God”. Those angelic “sons of God” had power to materialize in a human organism, and doubtless did materialize There is no evidence that by materializing they violated God’s law, because the Scriptures show that long after this, in the days of Abraham, angels ma-teualized and appeared as men. (Consult Genesis chapters 18 and 19.) While the “sons of God” did not materialize at Jehovah’s command, nor were sent as his messengers, yet their sin does not appear to be that of materialization. Appearing in human form they would necessarily be handsome and attractive men that would be pleasing to the women of that time. The Scriptures do not say that they were giants, and it would not be at all reasonable to conclude that they materialized as giants, but that they materialized as attractive men. Thus “the sons of God . . . took them wives of all which they chose”. The result of this marriage relationship between “sons of God” and “daughters of men” wound up in greatly increased wickedness among the human race, and this of itself is conclusive proof that Satan was the prime mover in bringing about this condition.
The presumption is that the fathers of the “daughters” consented to their daughters’ marrying the materialized spirit creatures, they reasoning that such a course would make the human race great as compared with God and would give them a better standing with the Almighty. It would be the Devil that would instil) just such a thought into the minds of men, his purpose being to mock God and bring reproach upon God’s name.
Besides the “sons of God”, the “seed” of ‘that old Serpent, which is the Devil’, were then in the earth. Says the Sacred Record: “There were giants in the earth in those days.” Or, according to the American Revised Version reading: "The Nephilim were in the earth in those days, and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them: the same were the
mighty men [(Hebrew) Gihborwi] that were of old, the men of renown.” (Gen. 6:4) That the Nephilim materialized as human creatures there is no doubt, because the Scriptures say they “were in the earth”. Doubtless the Nephilim were the very ones who, together with Satan, induced the “sons of God” to leave their proper place in the service of Jehovah and seek pleasure with the daughters of men, and this the Nephilim did to turn those “sons of God” away from Jehovah that they might receive his disapproval and at the same time bring greater reproach upon his name. These Nephilim materialized and “were in the earth", but the “sons of God” married the “daughters of men”. It was “after that”, after those Nephilim first appeared on earth, that the “sons of God” and the daughters of men had children. These Nephilim were, according to the meaning of their name, “fallen ones” or fallen angels, because they had fallen entirely away from God, or “fellers”, who treated others in a tyrannical manner.—See Strong’s Concordance.
By the marriage of the “sons of God” with the “daughters of men” children were born, and “the same became mighty men, which were of old, men of renown”. Those “men of renown”, the offspring of the “sons of God”, were not called “Nephilim”, but are termed gibborim, according to the Hebrew text. The Devil’s scheme seemed to be progressing well toward accomplishing his purpose If he succeeded, such, the Devil concluded, would prove his own supremacy, bringing great reproach -upon Jehovah’s name and preventing God from carrying out his purpose toward the earth. The result of that devilish scheme was that almost all the human creatures became corrupt. (Gen. 6 - 12) Noah had at all times maintained his integrity' toward God, and Noah and his family were the only ones on earth at that time that were faithful to God. The mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race, and which God gave to tin perfect Adam, could be carried out only b\ men m full harmony with Jehovah, and in order for tins to be done the wicked must be cleared out before God’s purpose could be accomplished. A flood or deluge would result in preventing Satan’s scheme to corrupt every creature on the earth The clearing off of the wicked and corrupt generation and the preserving on the earth only righteous men would open the way to begin anew to carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth”. In the great deluge that came upon the earth the gibborim, or “mighty men”, were destroyed, but there is no Scriptural evidence that either the “sons of God" or the wicked Nephilim were destroyed. On the contrary, the evidence shows that both classes are yet alive. Jude G and 2 Peter 2:4, 5, and Ephesians 6: 12, and other senn-tures describing the activities of the demons, the familiar spirits, the unclean spirits, the wicked spirits, indicate what became of the Nephilim, who dematerialized at the flood
The question, then, is, What became of these married “sons of God” at the time of the flood, and what is their present condition! Jehovah’s name having been reproached both by angels and by men, he duly sent Jesus to earth for the purpose of vindicating Jehovah’s name and bearing witness to the truth. In doing this Jesus must preach and did preach both by word of mouth and by his consistent course of action Whatsoever preaching Jesus did, that preaching was done in the performance of his commission from God “For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for
no
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N’. Y.
the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit [(Am. Rev. Ver.} made alive in the spirit] ; by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime [ (A.R V.) aforetime] were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water.”—1 Pet. 3:18-20.
According to the Scriptures those “spirits in prison” were prior to the flood the ones designated in Genesis chapter six as “the sons of God”. Their wrongdoing consisted m their leaving their assigned duties in God’s organization and marrying the daughters of men and thus devoting themselves to that which was in disobedience to God’s law concerning them. When the ark was completed and the flood came, there the “old world” ended. That means a change in spirit conditions as well as earthly conditions. Hence, “the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished.” (2 Pet. 3:6) It was at that time that the spirits were imprisoned ; which shows that they were not destroyed. It was to those imprisoned spirits that Jesus preached. Noah, “a preacher of righteousness,” preached to them prior to the flood and they had not heeded his preaching, and for that reason they did not escape imprisonment. Those spirits could not have been killed at that time, because they were alive in Jesus’ day ; otherwise Jesus could not have preached to them It is quite certain that those disobedient spirits, “the sons of God,” are still alive, but under restraint or imprisoned.
Who imprisoned them? There is no reason to conclude that God imprisoned them. Since they were disobedient to God, would He not be the one to imprison them? Not necessarily so. Those angels once in God’s service and organization had fallen to the wiles of the Devil, and God would deliver them up to His enemy Satan and permit the enemy Satan to imprison them Similarly, centuries later, the Israelites were once in the typical organization and service of Jehovah, and the Israelites fell away to Satan’s wily influence, and God gave them over to His enemy and their enemy, Satan, and permitted many of them to be held in captivity and in prison. (See Hosea 11:8; Jeremiah 12:7, Isaiah 47 6 1 The disobedient “sons of God” in Noah's day likewise did not heed his preaching, and when the flood came they found there was no protection for them regardless of whether they desired to return to God’s organization at that time or not. They had been disobedient and walked into Satan’s trap. Had God imprisoned those disobedient “spirits” the manifest purpose would have been to restrain them from further disobedience, and this supports the conclusion that God did not restrain them. If Satan is the one who put them in prison his purpose would be to keep them under his control and thus prevent them from returning to God. After the flood came, teaching these disobedient spirits the supreme power of God and vindicating his word and name, such spirit creatures would be restrained by Satan and his wieked allies to prevent them from breaking away. Since those “sons of God” did not take advantage of God’s long-suffering during the 120 years and hearken to the preaching of righteous Noah, God’s witness, Jehovah would let them go and would give them no protection and did give them no protection in the flood. Their disobedience in dis
regarding his organization and service would separate them from him, and their fear would bring them into Satan’s snare. (Prov. 29:25) Thus Satan and his Nephilim bullies would hold these “sons of God” in restraint or in prison, not permitting them again to return to the Lord God and his service.
Since the purpose of preaching is reformation, if possible, of those who hear, that must have been Jesus’ purpose in preaching to these disobedient spirit “sons of God”. (Rom. 10:14,15) How did Jesus preach to them? Not necessarily by word of mouth, but by his consistent conduct and unyielding devotion to Jehovah under the most severe test while on earth. At the time of his consecrating himself to God, at the Jordan river, Jesus was counted as dead in the flesh, and, the spirit of God there descending upon him. there began his quickening in the spirit. For three and one-half years he was preaching the truth by word of mouth and by his constant devotion to Jehovah God. He refused to yield to the temptations presented to him by Satan, and amidst all the persecutions heaped upon him by Satan he remained faithful and true to Jehovah. This, together with his continuous course of consistent action even unto death, and then his being raised out of death, was the manner m which he preached to the spirits in prison, as is staled at 1 Peter 3:19 (A.R.V.) : “In which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison.” His preaching to them was by their observing his faithful devotion and consistent holding to God’s organization; which course would in effect say to them: ‘If you had remained true and faithful to God’s organization where he placed you. you would at this present time not be in prison and away from God’s favor ’
From the prophecy of Ezekiel (38: 1, 2) it appears that “the land of Magog” is the place where the angels that sinned in Noah’s day are imprisoned, especially since they were imprisoned by Satan. When Jesus was resurrected he was a spirit divine, clothed with all power and authority and ability to go and come at will. During the three davs that Jesus was dead, he, to be sure, did not go anywhere After his resurrection to life as a spirit creature divine and between then and his ascension into heaven, forty days elapsed. Several times he materialized and appeared in human organism to his disciples, but only for a few minutes on each, occasion There seems to be no reason why he might not have gone to the “land of Magog” and there addressed a message directly to the spirit creatures restrained in prison by the Devil since the flood. He certainly had the power to do whatsoever he might choose to do in harmony with God’s will. He was certainly able to go, and there was surely ample time for him to do so between the tune of his resurrection and his ascension into heaven.
His preaching to them, even indirectly, would imply that there is hope for the deliverance of those imprisoned spirits who take their stand boldly on Jehovah’s side in the day of judgment. What Jehovah has in store for them the Scriptures do not reveal; but if, at the battle of Armageddon, any of them do take a positive and unequivocal stand on His side and gladly leave it to Jehovah where to place them, they may be recovered and return to some place in his universal organization, but not to “fill the earth”. That will be assigned to the righteous “men of good will” who survive on earth through the battle of Armageddon.
“COUNT THE NUMBER OF THE BEAST”
NOW is the time to count the number. The suggestion of certain anti-Catholic religionists that the number refers to the pope of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is not correct. It could not apply to the office of pope, the number refers to the “beast’’, because the Master says. “Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man” (Revelation 13: 18) If the number referred to the pope, we must agree that the pope is the beast, and no one seriously believes that the pope is the beast described m The Revelation. In the visions of Daniel the prophet (Daniel, chapter seven) beasts were used to symbolize beastly human governments, anti-theocratic. From the days ofjhe first organized human government by Nimrod, at Babel, governments by men have included three elements, religious, political, and commercial When we see that “the beast” consists of a government made up of different elements exercising power by force and violence to accomplish a common purpose, then we can see that the number must be applied in harmony with what constitutes the beast.
The beast is Satan’s organization visible to human eyes, the ruling factors wherein are made up of men who are imperfect “And his number is six. hundred threescore [sixty] and six ’’ In Bible symbolisms six is a symbolic number representing imperfection. Six hundred and sixty and six (three orders of six) names or represents the three ruling elements in the beastly organization, to wit, religious, commercial, and political power. The text does not say that it is the number of one human creature; and since the beast is not one human creature, the number could not be that of a man or of an office held by a single individual. It is t'.e number of the organization of imperfect men, who form the Devil's beastly visible organization, all under the control of the demons of which Satan is the prince. Man’s plans are inadequate, imperfect, deficient, and incomplete. They tall far short when compared with God’s arrangement. From man's viewpoint the “beast” numbered 666 and would i epresent absolute completeness, the last word that could be said in favor of a man-made arrangement for ruling the world
Note how the Scriptures place the three elements of Satan’s beastly organization ; and the placing of them seems to indicate the degree of reprehensibility. The “number of the beast” reads (1) six hundred—600, and (2) three-store—60, and (3) six—6, the three numbers being denoted by three different alphabetic letters or symbols in the original Greek text of the Bible. According to the order ob-xi'rved in the text, six hundred represents the religious i Drgv , threescore, the financial giants or profiteers or commercial traffickers; while six represents the professional politicians. In the Scriptures the number seven is used to designate that which is spiritually complete. Six being a symbol of imperfection, which is abominable from God’s xexx point, therefore reprehensible, it is to be seen that six multiplied by a hundred (600) shows that the clergy are a hundred times as reprehensible before God. Why? Be-i-ause it was their obligation to teach the truth concerning Jehovah God's Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus instead of linking their hands with the “abomination of desolation”, Satan’s substitute or counterfeit for that Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Today the religious
clergy are the bitterest opposers of Jehovah’s witnesses who proclaim that Theocracy.
The six multiplied by ten (60) shows that the commercial element are ten times as reprehensible as the politicians, because money is power and the commercial traffickers exercise power and influence by reason of their use of money . whereas six represents the willing, loud-talking political class. We therefore see an unholy triple combination of imperfection, resulting in a thing that is abominable in the sight of God.
It must be concluded, therefore, that when Jesus said of the beast’s number, “It is the number of a man,” he meant to convey the thought that the thing brought forth by man in lieu of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ would constitute the “beast”, whose measure (number) would be the number or designation of man and not of God The 666. therefore, instead of referring to an individual, seems clearly to have reference to the combined elements of earth, ecclesiastical, financial and political, with their hangers-on and supporters, constituting a rule of earth which is determined to control at any cost, which is beastly in operation, and which, therefore, is a rule by violence The “number” suggests selfish gain, mammon, because in olden time the value of King Solomon’s annual revenue of gold was 666 talents. (See 1 Kings 10:14.) The ancient giant of Gatii, who fought against the typical theocracy under King Dax id of Jerusalem, had six digits on eaeh hand and each foot, and he is therefore a picture of the Devil’s dictatorial organization (See 1 Chronicles 20:6.) The dimensions of King Nebuchadnezzar’s golden idol image, which the three faithful Hebrews refused to salute and adore, were sixty cubits high by six cubits broad. (See Daniel 3- 1.) Thus the number six represents secular completeness, that is. completeness according to man; and is the designation of man, in contradistinction to the divine designation
The description given in the fourteenth chapter of The Revelation is of the Theocratic organization m exact contrast to the foregoing The apostle John there describes the Lamb Christ Jesus, the Theocratic King, and “with him an hundred forty and four thousand” faithful followers, who have Uis name and the name of his Father written in their foreheads. These 144,000 members of the composite “bodj’ of Christ” belong to the royal family of Jehovah God , they are the spirit-begotten children of God ; and therefore they bear his name and the name of their Elder Brother, who is the Head of the royal house. These do not have the “mark of the beast” in their foreheads, nor in their hands, nor anywhere else. (Revelation 15:2, 20:4) They are not in sympathy with the beast, they are not children of it, and they do not support it. The man-made arrangement, the beastly system, as measured by man, is symbolized bx 666 (600 plus 60 plus 6), or three degrees of six, whcieas the divine arrangement, Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, is symbolized by seven The one is arraxed against the other.
The war is on between the “beast” and the Lamb, the Theocratic King. (Rev. 19: 19,20) Those described in The Revelation (14:1-5) are on the side of the Lamb, Christ Jesus, and amidst all the confusion and tumult are singing the praises of Jehovah God and his Theocracy. On whose side do you stand? and whose praises will you sing?
in
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PRIEST REACTIONS AT OAKLAND, CALIF.
“One priest came to the Convention assembly. After hearing the talk he went home, laid off his garb, donned civilian clothes, went to the grocery store in his community and said to the storekeeper: ‘I just heard Judge Rutherford. That man has the truth, and I’m done with this religious racket.’ At a doorstep setup: After the record was run for a lady, who held open the screen during the recording, a priest stepped out from behind the inner door and said: 'What right have you to go about playing this record?’ ‘Well,’ said I, ‘that’s just fine; I’m glad you’re here, and I see by your face that you are an honest man. So we’ll just let the other side of this record answer your question.’ The lady stayed the door while the priest sat down in a chair in the center of the room, side view. When the record finished I said: ‘There you have it.’ He rose and came toward the door, saying seriously: ‘Well, where are the dead?’ I, in all kindness, popped him over with a few of those sharp-cutting scriptures as to where the dead are. Then I bent over to take up my faithful sweet-voiced servant (phonograph) and, turning to the lady, offered her just a booklet ‘Oh. no,’ came the response from her, rather fearfully ; but the priest, with an expression of determination, said: ‘Give it to me; I’ll read it.’ Thirty minutes later he came out while my ‘servant’ was at work on a doorstep across the street. I caught his eye; with a grin he waved.”
CENSUS-TAKER VISITS UTAH PIONEER TRAILER
“My trailer is parked in back of the Kingdom hall. While I was home sick a car drove up beside it. Went to door. It was a young man taking a census of the business (commercial) houses in the block. ‘This is not a business place. We have Bible studies here.’ ‘Oh, a church ?’ ‘No, just Bible study.’ I presented the booklet Government and Peace and briefly explained it. He: ‘I’m interested. I’ll read this.’ I invited him in and played ‘Snare and Racket’, then displayed Salvation, Enemies and three-book combination. He: ‘My wife got that book Salvation. I’ll take the book Enemies for my mother, and the three books, Light One and Two and Prophecy.’ He was also given the Watchtower containing the ‘Theocracy’ article. He expressed his desire to attend some meeting and said he would bring his mother and wife. A bookmark was included! . . . I believe there is nothing in the world so important as the good news of the Kingdom. Yet these poor Mormons here say: ‘We have our own prophets.’ Wasn’t it John who said: ‘Add not to the words of the book of this prophecy’? The magazine is very easy to place Many take it who do not want the books. I stress the point that it contains uncensored world-wide news: some of it that newspapers are afraid to publish.”
FUNERAL INCIDENT AT TAWATINA, ALBERTA
“The house being too small to accommodate the crowd there, the Outdoor Public Address was used. For music one of the Society’s quartet recordings. A man two and a half miles away was shingling a roof of a building. When be heard the music he stopped and looked around to see from where it was coming, and remained there and listened to the entire discourse. He was afraid to mention what he had heard out of the air to anyone, for fear they would think he was insane. A few days later, when he went to town, he heard that Jehovah’s witnesses had conducted the
funeral and used the loudspeaker. Then it dawned on him what he had heard coming through the air The discoui-c so impressed him that he got in touch with the pioneer in that territory and requested more information on the Bible Since then a Model Study has been started in his home.”
ECCLESIASTICAL ANTICS IN PUERTO RICO
“In a drugstore. Two behind the counter Thev understood English. I gave them a good witness, but eou'd not get a word out of them. At last I said, ‘Oh. you are not interested. I am sorry’.’ But I thought they looked kindly at me, and yet would not give any opinion. Well, I packed up my books, turned around, and a priest was standing be hind me. White with rage, he said, shouting (’an you prove those things you said?’ ‘Yes, sir, I can proce it all by the Bible ’ Said he: ‘I hold a title of Reverend, cal! me by that.’ I said: ‘Oh, no, you arc all sirs to me, nothin” else [Pointing my finger at him] At Matthew 23-9 Jesus s.id “Call no man father,” and you are all “fathers” Tin how he denounced Judge Rutherford1 said we neeer paid for any’ books, that is why they are gnen nuai I said ‘Yes, if I find people too poor to give a contribution I gludl give them, if they are hungry for the truth of the Bi.de He said : ‘Do you think that solves the problem 1' Hi w anted badly to argue. I said: ‘Sir, you are angry I b.axe no turn to argue with you. I have much work to do, calling on tnv people with God’s truth ’ By that time I had a crowd Hi said. ‘Don’t talk to me in Spanish. I understand Englisl ' ‘No, sir, I prefer Spanish, because I want these people to hear what I am saying!’ Was he mad! I was glad he tiled to hold me. I thought maybe he would follow me 1 wen: right on placing books that day, easily I warned them thei that maybe the priest wmuld hinder them from reading’
MAGAZINE ROUTES
A boy of 13 and his sister of 11: “We wanted to w riti and let you know how’ much we appreciate and thank Jeho vah and Christ our King for the privilege of working in the service of the Lord, and also the new branch ot the work, of having a magazine route We took adxantage of the holidays of last month and got three hours m even day, and also we work two hours in the evening after s. haul Last month, in December, we placed 90 magazines ”
A New York city pioneer: “Wish to report 50 magazines placed in a route, many members of which have been taking the copies quite regularly for two years Most of these d< liveries have been made within four blocks adjacent to one another. The three-book combination went well and often was a surprise. Had 52 setups from door to door with phono graph. One Catholic woman had just finished the book Enemies in French, and said she was through with the pope and his potten religion. On the strength of this I placed an other Enemies with her neighbor who also is of the same mind. Having gone to church the other week for mass, she accidentally left her pocketbook at home As she went ml-> the church 15c was requested, which amount she did not have. She exploded and told the fellow at the monei b<i\ he could just go to h----: ‘I will never come back ag.nn ’
Later she told the priest at his home that the whole business was a racket and he would never get another cent from her Of course, the priest was angry, in which state of mmd she walked out and slammed the door. My wife had 43 setups ”
112
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street *	• Brooklyn, N .Y., U. S. A.
orriCERs
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Ambuboh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” • Isaiah S4:I3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ In glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 6, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W , Australia
South African ......„..........Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The WafcA-tower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y , under the Act of March 3, 1879
THEOCRATIC CONVENTION OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
The manifest leadings of the Lord indicate that all lovers of the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God should assemble in general convention in 1940. Columbus, Ohio, has been selected as the key city for a five-day convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. The dates will be July 24-28 inclusive. Announcement is made this early in advance in order that Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will may have ample opportunity to arrange their affairs so as to be at Columbus, Ohio, or other cities tied in by direct wire communication and loud-speaker equipment. By the Lord’s grace, the president of the Watchtower Society will be in attendance in person at the key assembly in Columbus. Further details will be published later.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 19: “Instruction” (Part 2), fl 1-25 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1940.
Week of May 26: “Instruction” (Part 2), fl 26-47 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1940.
“BATTLE SIEGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Spring’s opening is marked by the “Battle Siege” Testimony Period, during the whole month of April. It is a pressing of the siege against religion by a campaign to increase yet more the subscription list of The Watchtower. The unusual offer in effect during the campaign will operate greatly to that result, to wit, one year's subscription for The Watchtower together with the premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covered booklet on a contribution of but one dollar; foreign countries, $1.50. This Testimony Period, which is world-wide in scope, is the first of a three-month campaign with The Watchtower, and, due to the instant importance of what this magazine contains, the campaign was actually launched on March 23, the date of celebrating the Memorial. Now is not too late to arrange for some part therein, aa to territory, equipment, time, supplies, distributor's copies, etc. If unacquainted with an organized company of publishers in your locality, notify this office of your wish to get in touch with such for this Testimony. Those in foreign lands should write the branch office having supervision. The Informant (which is free) goes into greater detail on this.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	April 15, 1940	No 8
INSTRUCTION
PART 2
"A wise son heareth his father’s instruction.”—Prov. 13:1.
JEHOVAH is the Father of those who are devoted to him and instructs those who are diligent to ascertain and to do his will. The son is the one who has the promise of life everlasting conditioned upon his knowledge of God and his obedience to the law of God. He must prove his love for God and maintain his integrity toward the Most High. A person is wise only when guided by the Word of God. It is essential, therefore, that the person who would be wise must study God’s Word and sincerely endeavor to receive God’s approval. Tn harmony with this conclusion the faithful servant of the Lord, Paul, admonishes as follows: “Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.”—2 Tim. 2:15.
2	The prophecy of Zephaniah contains instruction from Almighty God to those who would be wise and who would receive the Lord’s approval. In this issue of The Watchtower consideration is given to that prophecy, chapter one, verses five to thirteen. To aid one in the study of this prophecy a brief statement is here given as to what is contained in this issue: Jehovah warns of his purpose to clear out all things of Satan’s organization, and particularly all who remain in that organization after having been warned. The religious leaders and associate worshipers, who try to mix the things of God and the things of the Devil, will find no way of escape from God’s wrath. The “evil servant” class will find no way of escape. Only those who fully devote themselves to Jehovah and who remain faithful will be spared at Armageddon.
3	Jehovah warns that this is the time to listen to him, and particularly to his present-day message, because the day of sacrifice of the wicked is near. The Lord gives notice that he will punish the religious, political and commercial rulers, and all who identify themselves with religion and who pretend to represent or serve God. A great howl will go up from the principal ones of the religious flock; and also in this howl the political higher-ups, as well as the lower-down ones, will join, and all who have
heaped up treasure for the last days will suffer destruction of their treasures and themselves.
4	Jehovah causes his Word and name to be proclaimed throughout the earth, and by the light of his Word he searches out “Christendom”, and at Armageddon that which the worldly ones will rely upon will be suddenly taken away, to their great chagrin and disappointment.
5	In the preceding issue of The Watchtower Zephaniah’s prophecy, chapter one, verses one to four, was considered. The prophecy continues : “And them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops ; and them that worship and that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham.” (Zeph. 1:5) In the day of King Manasseh the Israelites indulged m demon-worship; that is, they practiced religion. (2 Chron. 33: 1-6; 2 Ki. 21:1-5) Such devil-religion practice by the Israelites continued down into the reign of Josiah and even after his death. Attention was called to this practice of demonism by another prophet after the death of King Josiah. (Jer. 8:1, 2 ; 19:13) Jehovah had expressly commanded that his people should not indulge in demon-worship, such as that of stargazing or worship of the sun -and moon and like idolatrous practices. (Deut. 4: 15-19; 17:3) This divine rule applies at all times. The practice o: so-called “Christian religion” continues to violate this divine rule. Men who are designated by the people of the world as “great lights”, or shining ones, receive adoration, praise and worship, which belongs alone to Almighty God. There are great ecclesiastical “lights”, so called, who ‘have a show of godliness but deny the power thereof’. (2 Tim. 3:5) Men praise and serve them contrary to God’s Word. Jehovah God is the great Light, “dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto.” (1 John 1:5; 1 Tim 6:16) Instead of worshiping the Almighty God humans indulge in the worship of creatures, which worship is an abomination in the sight of Jehovah. Men worship the state or corporate ruling power. They call the League of Nations “a great light” and give praise and worship to that abortive organization. (Rev. 13:14,15) Advocating the support, a 115
116
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
noted writer of the League of Nations, Incorporated, recently said:
’ “In a world as dark as this, why blow out the only light [League of Nations] there is!” In this manner the light of God is entirely ignored and all light attributed to men. Stargazers and creature-worship God declares he will completely cut off. Political dictators indulge in this kind of demonism, and hence their time is short, because the day of final reckoning approaches. It is Satan, the prince of demons, who has influenced the people to give their praise and worship to creatures and inanimate objects rather than to Jehovah God.
7	At the present time “Christendom” claims to serve the Almighty God, but does the very opposite. They go through a formalism, which they call “wo ship”, to be seen of men.
8	The prophecy then adds: “And them that worship and that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham [their king-god (margin, Rotherham)].” Malcham was the name of the chief idol of the Ammonites, who, in the type, foreshadowed the political element now indulging in religion and who employ religion in their rule of the nations of the earth. Such in ancient times was, and likewise now is, political worship. (1 Ki. 11:7,33; 2 Ki. 23: 13) The religious politicians in this present time swear by Malcham and God in the same breath.
8	As the American Catholic leaders put it, they are “For God and country”. Such is an effort of the religionists to compromise by claiming to worship Jehovah God an<j the state at the same time. That is vainly seeking the name of Jehovah God and having his name upon their lips, while at the same time attributing salvation and protection to the state. Thus the religionists practice what they call “the Christian religion” and at the same time proclaim their political relationship with the governments of this world, of which Satan is the prince. The ecclesiastical and political powers exchange ambassadors and together carry on the politics of the land. They hail the state as supreme and speak of that which is the puny creation of man, “League of Nations,” as being “the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth”. Also at the same time they teach that the political rulers are the “higher powers” and “ministers of God”. Thereby many persons are turned away from Almighty God and taught to serve creatures. Those who swear by the Lord, and by the political power at the same time, make mention of Jehovah God, but not in sincerity and in truth. This they do for effect upon the people, that the people may be kept in subjection to them and in ignorance of what God’s purpose is toward them. Concerning such Jehovah by his prophet says they “swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in
righteousness”. (Isa. 48:1) All the religionists herein described God declares he will cut off.
” Jehovah then considers that class of persons that are properly known as “quitters”, that is, those who have claimed to be servants of God and have induced themselves to believe thereafter that they have a good cause to withdraw from the service of the Lord: “And them that are turned back from [following after] the Lord; and those that have not sought the Lord, nor inquired for him.”—Zeph. 1: 6.
11	The Lord specifically names such class of persons as those who have covenanted to serve Jehovah and who then turn back from that service, and by the Lord these are called the “evil servant” or “wicked servant” class, which form a part of the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” and who oppose God, his government and his King. Such class turn to the wicked world and are opposers of The Theocracy and opposers of those who publish the name of Jehovah and his government. In striking contrast to the “evil servant” God foretold by his prophet a “remnant” that now serve him and who receive great persecution, and he puts these words into the mouth of his “faithful servant” class: “All this [reproach and persecution] is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way.” (Ps. 44:17,18) “Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man whom thou madest strong for thyself. So will not we go back from thee; quicken us, and we will call upon thy name.”—Ps. 80: 17,18
12	The religionists, the “evil servant”, the "man of sin” class, have turned away from God; but the “faithful servant” class, although sorely persecuted by the religionists, remain faithful and do not turn back. God has made his faithful remnant class to clearly understand now- that religion is demonism; and when they suffer persecution at the hands of religionists, that does not prevent them from remaining faithful and true servants of the Most High. The faithful remnant, devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom, are designated as purified ones, the “saints”, by virtue of their being in the temple with Christ Jesus. Concerning these it is written in the Psalms: “Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness; for God is judge himself. Selah.”—Ps. 50: 5, 6.
18	In 1918 Christ Jesus at the temple began the inspection of “Christendom”, which religious crowd have claimed to serve God but have not: and through his prophet he declares that these shall be cut off: “Those that have not sought the Lord, nor inquired for him.” (Zeph. 1:6) During the progress of Jehovah’s “strange work”, and before Armageddon, God
April 15, 1940
3Tie WATCHTOWER,
117
sends his message to “Christendom” by his messengers to give them information and warning, and particularly to the leaders of “Christendom”, but such leaders and practitioners of religion refuse to hear or to seek after God, and put themselves in opposition to the Theocrat and his government. Although claiming to be Christians, they fully support Satan and his organization and manifest great pride in supporting the “corporate state”, always seeking the approval of such rather than to have the approval of God and his King. Being willingly against God and his government, such religionists are proud and arrogant and wicked. Concerning such Jehovah says: “The wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor; let them be taken in the devices that they have imagined. For the wicked boasteth of his heart’s desire, and blesseth the covetous, whom the Lord abhorreth. The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek aftei God: God is not in all his thoughts.” (Ps. 10:2-4) Thus the prophet of God exactly describes the religious-political leaders of “Christendom”, all of which are against God and The Theocratic Government and the servants of that Government who now represent God on the earth.
14	Jehovah sends his faithful servants to the proud religionists, and which witnesses call attention to the presence of the King, Christ Jesus, and that the day of his government is here; and his witnesses point out to them that the only hope of humankind is in The Theocracy, but such wicked ones completely ignore the admonition of Jehovah. Such obstinate class, although receiving the witness, refuse to give heed to the commandments of the Lord as set forth in Revelation 22:17. They do not seek righteousness and meekness; and the judgment of the Lord therefore written concerning such is that they shall be “cut off”. Those who seek Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government before Armageddon and remain faithful thereto are the only ones who find protection and safety.
15	Jehovah’s work, “his strange work,” is progressing. He is causing his servants on the earth to proclaim his great and holy name and his government. The nations of the earth “rage” in opposition to The Theocracy, and the people supporting them “imagine a vain thing”. (Ps. 2:1, 2) A great amount of talk is being made by the political, religious rulers of the earth who prognosticate, announcing that soon they will make the earth a fit place in which to live. Thus they set themselves against God and his government. The people who support those religious, political leaders vainly imagine that men who talk loud and boast of what they expect to do are able to bring about a desirable condition in the earth. The physical facts that now exist, and that are apparent to all
persons who think, fully support the statement here that the rulers rage against Jehovah and his government, and that the people imagine a vain thing. To all such Jehovah by his prophet says: “Hold thy peace [(Rotherham) Hush] at the presence of the Lord God; for the day of the Lord is at hand; for the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid his guests.”—Zeph. 1: 7.
10	Why are these commanded to hush and keep quiet? Because Jehovah, by his King Christ Jesus, is present and thus Jehovah is representatively sitting in judgment. All the world should now keep silent and hear what the Almighty God has to say. He spoke through his prophets long ago, and now he brings to pass the fulfillment of the prophecy. Jehovah now sends his witnesses among the people to speak his message, and thus the Lord Jesus by his servants is delivering the command to the people from the Most High to keep still and listen. All should keep silent, and not attempt to speak against Jehovah or against his message now, and thus to prevent others from hearing. The message of Jehovah to them is to cease spreading propaganda in support of Satan’s rule. Concerning this very time the Lord says through another of his prophets: “The Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.” (Hab. 2:20) “Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord; for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.”—Zech. 2:13.
Why was that command given through his prophet Zephaniah! and how does it apply in these modern days! The answer is, because now is the day of Jehovah God. The Almighty raised up Zephaniah his prophet and caused him to announce God’s purpose to destroy Jerusalem, which had become unfaithful; and which foreshadowed the destruction of the antitypical or hypocritical Jerusalem of today, that is to say, “Christendom,” which shall be destroyed at Armageddon. The notice of warning was given to ancient Jerusalem, and likewise a notice of warning is given to “Christendom” today, and all are commanded to be quiet and hear what Jehovah has to say to them. It appears that Zephaniah began to prophesy before the day when Josiah began to seek the Lord and to purge the country of idolatry, and from that time it was only a few years, that is, about forty years, until the destruction of Jerusalem took place; but at that time the exact date of Jerusalem’s destruction was not known by the prophet or others. In the thirteenth year of King Josiah’s reign Jehovah raised up, commissioned and sent forth his prophet Jeremiah, and in that thirteenth year was the beginning of the forty-year period of warning to Jerusalem. From that thirteenth year onward Jerusalem’s iniquity began to count, sealing her doom, as is declared in the prophecy of Ezekiel,
118	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
to wit: “And when thou hast accomplished them, lie again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee each day for a year. Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt prophesy against it.” (Ezek. 4:6,7) The symbolic forty days or actual forty years in the antitype include the Catholic and other religionists and their practice. (For a more detailed discussion of this see Vindication, Book One, pages 46-55.)
19	In the prophecy of Zephaniah the words “the day of the Lord is at hand” antitypically refer to the destruction of antitypical Jerusalem, that is, to the religious systems of the world and particularly “Christendom”. Therefore the command to all, including “Christendom”, is to cease the announcing and boastful prognostication and to give ear to what the Lord God has to say. The prophecy is therefore a warning to all the world and particularly to “Christendom”.
19	Silence having been commanded, the prophetic words announce: “For the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice.” That means a great slaughter and the flowing of blood, which will take place at the battle of the great day of God Almighty. This prophecy is directed against religion and religionists. Another prophet of God tells of the great slaughter in these words: “And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll; and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven [where the religionists perch themselves in the high rocks]: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood ; it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams; for the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.”—Isa. 34:4-6.
20	The declaration of the Lord concerning the great sacrifice, which is prepared, is also directed to and against that highly commercialized and political body in Satan’s organization, and is announced by another prophet in these words: “Against Egypt, against the army of Pharaoh-necho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah. . . . For this is the day of the Lord God of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries; and the sword shall devour, and it shall be satiate and made drunk with their blood; for the Lord God of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates.” (Jer. 46:2-10) Thus
God discloses his purpose to destroy this class that have associated themselves with the religious teachers to turn the people away from God and his righteous government.
11 The declaration of Jehovah’s purpose is then directed against the demons, all of which are under the command of Satan and under his chief prince, Gog, and concerning such the Lord says : “And I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel. Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field, to be devoured." “And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God, Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood. And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.”—Ezek. 39: 2,4, 17, 19.
22	That great “sacrifice” or slaughter, which Jehovah has prepared, is described by the Lord Jesus at Revelation 19: 17-21: “And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great God; , . . And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth; and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.”
23	Jehovah’s High Priest, Christ Jesus, does the slaughtering work, and this in vindication of Jehovah’s name. He offers an acceptable sacrifice before Jehovah, not of the bodies of the unclean, nor the bodies of creatures who are God’s enemies; but the “sacrifice” is the act of the great High Priest, Christ Jesus, in executing Jehovah’s commandment, the faithful performance of the duties assigned to him, and which slaughter work he does in vindication of Jehovah’s holy name. This will prove to all creation that Jehovah is the Supreme One.
24	The tremendous and unparalleled events about to take place, and which are announced by the Lord, should be sufficient to cause all nations and peoples of the earth to cease their senseless prattle and to give ear to the warning that conies from the throne of the Most High. The day of God’s judgment and the vindication of his name is at hand. Many centuries ago the angelic host of heaven looked forward to these coming great events and they were announced by the faithful prophets of God on the earth. The great events are now about to come to pass. All
April 15,1940
2Jiie WATCHTOWER
119
creation, therefore, should stand in silence and hear the message of Jehovah concerning what is about to take place. That will be a slaughter such as never before was known and never again will come to pass.
25	That great sacrifice is a holy service devoted exclusively to righteousness. To that great sacrifice the Lord bids his guests to come. “He hath bid his guests [he hath sanctified his guests (R.F.); hath hallowed his guests (Rotherham') ].” Jehovah’s guests, or his called ones, he has invited in order that they may have a part in the vindication of his name. Those who are invited must come unto him with clean hands, that is, fully devoted to and in support of his King. Such participate in the sacrifice, that is, “eat the flesh of lungs,” by partaking of the joy of the Lord Jesus Christ in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. These guests have been called or invited to the kingdom service and now must devote themselves exclusively to that service in order to have a part in the vindication of his name. Those who are today devoted to Jehovah and his service can readily see how God caused his prophecy to be written long ago concerning that great sacrifice and brings about the facts in these modern days disclosing its fulfillment; all of -which he does that the “man of God” may be fully equipped to participate in the service and have part in his “strange work”, and thus have a part in the vindication of his name.
lb Religion has been and is the chief thing employed by the demons, led by Satan, in defaming the name of Almighty God. The earthly leaders of religion, and particularly that religious institution which stands at the head, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, are the chief ones on earth that defame the name of Almighty God. Hence these are the ones named as princes”, chief ruling ones, among the religionists on the earth. It appears from the prophecy that the daughter of the religionists comes first; and other prophecies fully support that conclusion. “And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lord’s sacrifice, that I will punish [(margin) visit upon] the princes, and the king’s children [(margin) sons], and all such as are clothed with strange apparel [foreign apparel].”—Zeph. 1: 8.
27 In this prophecy (verse eight) the words “in the day” mean at and during the actual battle of Armageddon, which takes place after or at the conclusion of God’s “strange work”, during which time this gospel of the kingdom has been preached to all the world for a witness’; and the time has arrived for the execution of the judgment of Jehovah upon Satan and his supporters. The punishment will fall upon the leaders, or ruling ones, of “Christendom”, that is, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, “whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth.” (Isa. 23:8; Ezek. 28: 2) Such are
the.modern-day “princes of Tyre” described by God’s prophet. Concerning the unfaithful princes of “Christendom” it is written: “Her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain.” —Ezek. 22: 27.
28 There could not be a more accurate description of the members of the “Hierarchy of Authority” than that given in this prophecy. The men of the Hierarchy, like wolves, devour the substance of others, shed innocent blood (as did Franco in Spain), and destroy souls for selfish gain. Who dares dispute the fact that religion is a racket? Those princes or great men of the Hierarchy have the reputation amongst others as the honorable men of the earth. (Isa. 23: 8) Mark how plainly God has described those religious racketeers who have rebelled against the Most High, spurned his Word, and who hold out their hands for gifts from the people and follow after dishonest gain, and who do so upon the false representation and pretext that they are God’s servants and that they can pray to God to relieve suffering human souls in “purgatory". Thus they deceive the credulous ones, blind them, and then rob them blind : “Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves; every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of Israel. Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.”—Isa. 1: 23, 24.
28 Let this be considered: that the doctrine of “purgatory” has been taught only by that religious system, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and that, as stated by Cardinal Gibbons, himself a leading Catholic, the “purgatory” doctrine is based solely upon the tradition of the “fathers” of the Roman Catholic system. The language of Cardinal Gibbons concerning “purgatory” is: “It is the unanimous voice of the fathers of Christendom.” Such “fathers of Christendom”, the priestly class of the Roman religious company, have been the only ones that have induced the people to believe that the dead are in “purgatory’’; and this they have falsely done at the dictation of the Devil in order that they may get dishonest gam. which gain they receive by inducing the people to pay into their hands large sums of money. Is that a racket? Let the honest and sincere persons who have been duped by the Catholic system answer the question honestly before themselves and before Almighty God: Is it safe to follow such racketeers? Is it not time for all honest persons to seek instruction at the mouth of the Almighty and study to show themselves approved by him?
50 Almighty God foretold the acts and conduct of such religious princes that the people of good will at
120
STie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
this day might see the snare into which religion.has led them and to afford such honest people an opportunity to flee from religion and seek refuge in the organization' of the Most High under Christ Jesus.
81 King Josiah had three sons and a grandson who, one after the other, succeeded to the throne of Israel, and each of them was unfaithful to God. They were removed from office by violence, and concerning them the prophet Zephaniah says: “I will punish . . . the king’s sons.” (Vs. 8, Am. Rev. Ver.) The religious leaders claim that they are the sons of God, but Jesus declares that they are the sons of the Devil. (John 8: 44) Such religious princes of the religious systems exercise spiritual rulership over the organization specifically called “the Christian religion”, and these are the princes the prophet describes that shall be punished at Armageddon. It is these religious princes that teach the people that their dead are in “purgatory” and which princes claim a royalty for looking after those whom they have claimed to be in “purgatory”. Such religious princes on earth are the direct representatives of the demons and under demon control, and are therefore the “sons” of the chief of the demons, that is, Satan, and these are the children of the Devil, or the sons of the Devil, that God declares he will punish.
32 There are those who openly identify themselves with the Devil’s organization, and these are designated or pictured by “such as are clothed with strange apparel” or “foreign apparel”. This scripture shows that they are not identified as God’s servants, but they are clothed in apparel showing themselves as foreigners to God’s organization and which apparel they wear is provided by the Devil, like the vestments worn by the princes of Baal when Jehi) slew them. (2 Ki. 10:22-25) Such men don the unii form that is strange or foreign to God and identify themselves as a part of Satan’s organization and as those who uphold it. Have in mind the unmanly, strange apparel worn by the princes or ministers or clergy of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. When the message of God is presented to them they reply: “I am a minister; I am a priest; I want nothing from you.” The supporters of the Hierarchy, when the truth is presented to them, usually say: “I am satisfied with my religion.” The official apparel of the clergy or Hierarchy is very strange. It makes the wearers thereof very conspicuous amongst men, by which such wearers claim to be “more holy” than others. Now God, by his prophet and the evidence showing the fulfillment of the prophecy, makes known that the wearers of such strange apparel shall be completely punished at Armageddon.
‘LEAPERS’
” The destruction of religionists will not be limited to the so-called “Christian religion” practitioners,
but all kinds of religion will be disposed of at Armageddon. This is clearly indicated by the prophecy: “In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the threshold, which fill their masters’ houses with violence and deceit.”—Zeph. 1: 9.
“ In this verse of the prophecy the words “in the same day” mean in that day of Armageddon, which is now near. According to Rotherham’s rendering: “I will punish every one who leapeth over the threshold.” “Which fill their masters’ houses with violence and deceit.” The Devil is their master; therefore the house is the house of the Devil. He is the master of religion. It appears that the key to the meaning of the expression “leapeth over the threshold” is found at 1 Samuel 5:4,5: “And when they [the Philistines] arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the Lord; and the head of Dagon [the idol] and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the threshold: only the stump of Dagon was left to him. Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagon’s house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day.”
35 At the battle of Shiloh the Philistines defeated the Israelites, which defeat God permitted to come upon the Israelites because of their hypocrisy and unfaithfulness to their covenant. The priests and worshipers of Dagon, when they discovered that his head was broken off, did not tread upon but leaped over the threshold of Dagon’s house. The leapers, therefore, foreshadowed those who worship demons or practice demonism and who help to destroy the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and all other religions, and who then defy Jehovah God as the Supreme One and openly express their rebellion against Jehovah. Those demon-worshipers must be punished before the end of Armageddon, and God declares his purpose to punish them. Many of such have at some time tied themselves up with religion for political, business or professional gain or for social purposes. They then openly appear and fill the Devil’s house with deceit and violence. There are only two masters that anyone can serve: Jehovah God and the Devil. These leapers serve the Devil, and they fill the Devil’s house with deceit and violence.
” “That day” is Jehovah’s day, during which he executes his vengeance against the enemy and proves His own supremacy and makes an end of wickedness: “And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing from the hills.” (Zeph. 1:10) God himself will cause the evidence or facts to come to pass which are foretold by this prophecy. Now he makes known what he will do and tells that his work will be ac
April 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
121
companied by a great noise: “the noise of a cry from the fish gate.” This gate is mentioned also at 2 Chronicles 33:14, Nehemiah 3:3, and Nehemiah 12:39. The men of Tyre, who were merchants, brought fish and sold them at the gate to the people of Jerusalem. (Neb. 13:16) Manifestly the cry mentioned by Zephaniah is not the cry of the fish-sellers to sell for gain, but a cry of dismay because of the spoiling of the traffic in which they were engaged. The agents of Satan by means of religion have fished for and made big hauls of men who, as poor fish, have because of fear gone right into the net provided for them by the Devil. At Armageddon all fishing of that kind must cease. Such fishermen deal treacherously, and by their religious bait attract and lead many peoples into captivity. (Hab. 1:14-17; Eccl. 9:12) After Armageddon religious leaders will no more be permitted to take men like fish into their nets. Their commercial religion being done, they shall utter a cry of despair and dismay. The boasting Roman Catholic rule will then cease for ever. Their racket will be completely done.
” Another class of religionist is mentioned as “howling from the second [quarter (R.F.)]”. This second quarter seems to picture that part of the organization of religionists second to the “Hierarchy of Authority”, that is, the principal ones of the flock, which class God declares shall howl. The “howling of the principal of the flock shall be heard”. (Jer. 25:34-36) This howling is because their dealing in human creatures is finished for ever. Such men have laid hold upon and used religion for commercial and political gain. They are the principal ones of the flock of the Roman Catholic organization. They will come to see that religion is entirely in vain, and they will howl and shriek because it can do them no more commercial good.
38	The hills are the highest part of the mountains. (Ps. 2:6) In the Devil’s organization “the hills” represent the highest or lifted-up part of that organization on earth. Those of Satan’s organization who occupy the highest place in the earth will at the time of the battle of Armageddon be in such dismay that they will cry out for the organization to protect them, that is: “Cover us”; and “to the hills, Fall on us”-. (Hos. 10: 8) As stated by the prophecy of Zephaniah, there shall be “a great crashing [destruction] from the hills”. Armageddon will destroy all of those who occupy the high and exalted places in the world organization. Those higher-up ones in the commercial, political and military are usually austere and haughty; therefore says the scripture: “Before destruction the heart of man is haughty.” (Prov. 18:12) Such haughty ones who have relied on religion for insurance and on their wealth and position for protection shall be brought low. (Isa. 40:4;
Nahum 1:5; Hab. 3:6) The mountain of Jehovah’s house, The Theocracy, in that day shall be exalted above the mountains and hills of Satan’s organization. In the house or organization of Jehovah Gqd is the only place of safety, security and deliverance, and there is none other.—Isa. 2: 2-4.
38	Among those who practice religion are those persons who are looking for commercial gain and use religion for that purpose, but who make no pretense of serving God or Christ. Concerning such the prophet says: “Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the merchant people are cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off.” (Zeph. 1: 11) According to Young’s translation: “Ye inhabitants of the hollow place.” In this part of the prophecy is pictured the low place occupied by a commercial, materialistic class. They associate themselves with the religion of “Christendom” for purely commercial purposes or gain. The Lord says all such shall howl. The reason is that all merchant people are cut down, “all the people of Canaan” are cut down. (A.R.F.) In times of old the Canaanites had commercial relationship with the Israelites and were at Jerusalem when the Lord smote the city, and He did not spare the commercial business of the Canaanites. At Armageddon those who have used the so-called “Christian religion” for material gain shall be destroyed. (Jer. 25: 29) Further the prophet says: “All they that are laden with silver are cut off.” (Vs. 11, R.F.) Such have heaped up treasures for the last days, but have done so in vain. (Jas. 5:1-3) The wealth, represented by silver, cannot deliver them or obtain for them a ransom in the day of God’s wrath. (Ezek. 7:19; Zeph. 1:18) The Roman Catholic organization, ruled by the Hierarchy, have formed the most momentous, commercial organization on earth. The material riches of that organization are fabulous. They have piled up silver and gold and other material wealth or treasure while falsely claiming to serve God, and have obtained that treasure by false pretenses; hence they are cut off.
‘““Christendom” is the antitype of ancient Jerusalem, which corrupted herself with demonism or religion. Such prefer darkness to light, and their desire is to keep the people in darkness as to what is God’s purpose and what is his provision for obedient men. Therefore, says the Lord by his prophet Zephaniah: “And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees; that say in their heart, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.”—Zeph. 1:12.
41	God is light, and his Word is that which guides one in the right way. Light dispels darkness and makes known that which is in the dark, to clearly be seen. “The commandment is a lamp” to guide men.
122
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Prov. 6:23; Ps. 119:105) In this day, when Jehovah is doing his “strange work”, he causes his lamp, that is, his Word, to plainly guide his servants. By the proclaiming of God's Word of truth among the people religion and the practice thereof are exposed to view and the people who are of good will learn the truth that religion is a snare and a racket, and they learn what is God's purpose toward them that obey him. God's light, therefore, discloses that religion practiced by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is concealed or hidden by lies and that such hiding place of lies will be swept away by the truth. (Isa. 28:15-18) The light of Jehovah causes the enemies of the Theocratic Government to be exposed, and hence the enemies are forced right out into the open. Thus the Lord searches out “Christendom''. During the period particularly from 1922 onward Jehovah has caused his faithful servants to carry about his Word of light, and that work has caused the religionists to show a great dislike for the Bible and its teachings, and also caused them to exhibit their anger against those who proclaim the Bible truths. The great Judge, Christ Jesus, at the temple is causing the division of the people, and doing so by using his servants to proclaim the truth exposing to view the “goats”, who are the enemies of God. Such searching out must continue until Armageddon. No dark places will be long unexamined or unexposed. “And though they hide themselves in the [wooded] top of Carmel, I will search and take them out.” (Amos 9: 3) “How are the things of Esau searched out! how are his hidden things sought up!” (Obadiah 6) “Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies; thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee.”—Ps. 21: 8.
42	When searched out the enemies will be punished: “Punish the men that are settled on their lees [dregs or settlings].” (Zeph. 1:12) The religionists, and the leaders particularly, appear to think that they are everlastingly fixed and that they are settled down, and have not, as the wine is, “been emptied from vessel to vessel.” These religionists have long been left undisturbed, and therefore their perverted taste remains in them and their scent is unchanged. (Jer. 48:11) The time has come when the Lord visits them and stirs them up, causing their vile and impure settlings to rise up and spoil the taste, and that upsets their “thickened” or hardened, self-complacent condition. This prophecy aptly describes the condition of the religious leaders, pictured like wine settling down. These leaders have settled on the lees of antiquity. Everything with them is hardened into immovable creeds and ceremonies, with made-to-order prayers and ceremonies, and in the collection of money for such prayers. They desire to stay right where they are, and object to having their religious susceptibilities disturbed. When the light of God’s
Word is brought to their attention it disturbs them. This is particularly so when the truth is declared to the Catholic practitioners and interests the “children” of the organization who are of good will toward God. When the past history of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is made known in connection with the divine prophecy this greatly stirs up the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The light of truth really torments those religionists, and then God visits them with “his act, his strange act”, which means their destruction at Armageddon. The religious Hierarchy think themselves so secure that they say in the language of the prophet: “The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil” to us. Now they are being called to account by the Lord, who is causing his message to be delivered among them, yet they make themselves believe that they are so thoroughly fixed that they cannot be moved. They conclude that the Lord is satisfied with their course of action and will let them stay put, and will do no good to them, meaning that he will not improve their condition or the condition of the people to make them free from dictators, both religious and political; and that he will do them no evil, but let them stay where they are. Those religious racketeers say: We are on solid rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against us.’ (Matt. 16:18) Jehovah turns the light on them, and is doing that now. And when that is finished, then what?
43	What today is the great ambition of religious and political leaders? To rule the earth arbitrarily; to control all the material wealth of the earth; to regiment the people and make them obey the will of a few selfish men, and for themselves to rest in a condition of ease. Such constitutes the material interest of the aforementioned rulers, that is to say, “their goods.” They have failed to give heed to the Word of Almighty God, but have readily yielded to the influence and power of the demons. They feel secure in what they have builded, and they boast of their power and wealth. To such Jehovah says: “Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation; they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof.”—Zeph. 1:13.
44	Just at the time these crafty, religious and political rulers have gained control of the nations they say, “Now we have peace and safety.” Their accumulated, great wealth and power become a booty, that is, a prey, or that which is taken forcibly, or by violence. The wealth, power and position of the boastful combine above mentioned will now not be theirs for long to enjoy. “The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath.”— Ps. 110:5.
45	Jehovah’s host will suddenly snatch away from
SEe WATCHTOWER,
April 15, 1940
them their arbitrary rule and everything they have, and that to their great disappointment, chagrin and humiliation. Their dreams for ever shattered, they will know that the power of Jehovah God is being expressed against them. The Almighty turns them upside down by the hand of Christ Jesus, and these religious, political rulers will see that they are completely done for. “The wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.” (Prov. 13: 22) “Their houses a desolation.” Their place of ease and of living wantonly does not last long. Their religious houses have long been filled with the “children” of the religious systems. Suddenly these children disappear, and no longer will their palatial church buildings be patronized. Their revenue is cut off. The places of exclusive dwelling for political, totalitarian rulers, and commercial bosses, will be quickly taken away. Just now it is seen that the ruling elements of the earth have builcled many houses, palaces, and cathedrals; and of them the Lord says: “They shall . . . build houses, but not inhabit them”; that is, they shall not control them, but their rule shall quickly end. An example is that of the dictator of Germany, who has repeatedly said: “We are building now that which will endure for a thousand years.” The Word of God shows that suddenly the bottom drops out of everything for all such rulers. All their work is wasted. Jesus prophesied that they would build right up until the very outbreak of Armageddon. (Matt. 24:37-39; Luke 17 : 26-30) That prophecy must be fulfilled.
46	In all the totalitarian-ruled nations the dictator is now causing the people to yield to his selfish will as to what they may buy or sell or what they may do. Mark the rapid drift of events to that same end in
123
the United States since 1933. All power is being concentrated within the hands of a few. The rulers, religious and political, think they are laying the foundation for an everlasting “good time”. Mark this also that such builders take all the credit to themselves and Jehovah God is not in their thoughts. They give to men, and particularly to themselves, all the credit for the building and for all the wealth and for all the prospects of the future. They boast of what the rulers shall soon do. Jehovah and his kingdom they do not take into account at all. They know not the day of their visitation.—Luke 19: 44 ; Jer. 8 : 6, 7.
47	The year 1940 sees the fulfillment of the prophecy proving that all nations of the earth have forgotten the Almighty God and have turned entirely to religion, that is, to demonism. They have fallen completely into Satan's snare. The corporate state, ruled by dictators, takes away the liberties of the people, and the selfish rulers revel in what they have. But such rule will not long stand up. Jehovah’s “strange act” will mark the end of all such. Oppressive rule will increase, and at the same time the suffering of the people will increase. Only those who have devoted themselves to Almighty God, and who steadfastly support the great Theocratic Government, will find reason for rejoicing and will rejoice. (Hab. 3:17,18) While the faithful servants of God have great reproach heaped upon them, being hated by all nations, these faithful ones have their confidence fully anchored in the Lord and they, in the face of all opposition and persecution, continue to sing unto the Lord: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”—Ps. 13: 5.
(To be continued)
HOW SACRED IS HUMAN LIFE?
APRIL 1, 1939, Eugene Pacelli, then recently elevated to the most exalted religious position in “Christendom”, telegraphed to General Franco, saying: “Lifting up our heart to the Lord we give sincere thanks with Your Excellency for Spain’s desired Catholic victory. We express our vow that your most beloved country, with peace attained, may undertake with new vigor the ancient Christian traditions which made her great. With affectionate sentiments we send Your Excellency and the whole noble Spanish people our Apostolic blessing.” That “desired Catholic victory” eost the lives of around 1,200,000 men, women, boys and girls, and infants of that unhappy land How sacred is human life to religion?
God is the fountain of life: “For with thee is the fountain of life; in thy light shall we see light.” (Ps. 36:9) That means that all life originates with Him, and none can have and enjoy life without his permission. No one can take life contrary to God’s expressed law and at the same time be exempt from responsibility. God’s “everlasting covenant”
first mentioned is his emphatic declaration concerning the sanctity or sacredness of life.
A “covenant” is a binding agreement or promise to do or not to do a certain thing. Jehovah’s expressed purpose to do a certain thing is an unconditional or one-sided covenant. When Jehovah gives his word of promise he unconditionally binds himself to carry out that purpose. He declares : “I have purposed it, I will also do it.” “My word . . . shall not return unto me void ; but it shall accomplish that which I please ” (Isa 46 : 11; 55 : 11) A covenant made by Jehovah with one or more of his creatures is a bilateral or two-sided agreement to do certain things, and the other parties to the covenant must do the things mentioned Jehovah God always faithfully performs his part of his covenants. “Know therefore that Jehovah thy God, he is God, the faithful God, who keepeth covenant and lovingkindness with them that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations.”—Deut. 7 : 9, American Remsed Vision.
124
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
The Almighty God, the creator of human life, brought the first world that had to do with man to an end by the great deluge, which destroyed all flesh upon the earth, including the mighty “men of renown” who were the offspring of the marriage of the angelic “sons of God” with the “daughters of men”. (Gen. 6: 4) The only survivors of that catastrophe were those in the ark which Noah had built at Jehovah’s command. 2 Peter 2:5 relates: “[God] spared not the old world, but saved Noah, the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly.” Those who were destroyed were wicked and an abomination in the sight of Jehovah God. Following the flood the population of the earth consisted of Noah and his three sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth, and the four other members of Noah’s household. Then Jehovah God restated to Noah and his sons the divine mandate originally given to Adam and Eve in Eden “And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.” “Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and unto them were sons born after the flood.” (Gen 9:1; 10:1) Over a thousand years previous Cain slew his righteous brother Abel, and Jehovah God said to Cain. “And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood from thy hand. . . . Whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold.” “And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.” (Gen. 4:11,15) Thus no man could appoint himself as the executioner of the assassin Cain. But what now after the deluge?
At the end of the great deluge Noah and his family went forth from the ark. Then it was that God declared to Noah the divine covenant concerning the shedding of blood, that is, concerning the sanctity of life. This covenant is called “the everlasting covenant” between God and living creatures, for the reason that that covenant is the expression of God’s purpose that He will never change. The statement of God’s everlasting covenant is found in the following: “And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him. saying, And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you; and with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth : and I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.
“And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you, and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations: I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth. And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud • and I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you, and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh. And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth. And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.”—Gen. 9: 8-17.
In connection with this “everlasting covenant” Jehovah God declared that under certain conditions and at certain times human life may be taken in the enforcement of God’s law. At verses five and six, preceding the above quotation. God said: “And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every [killer] beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man’s brother will I require the life of man. Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.” This could not mean that any individual could appoint himself as the executioner of the wrongdoer; because the commandment of God is: “Thou shalt not kill.” (Ex. 20:13) At times God designates certain ones or bodies of men to act as his executioner to enforce his judgment against the wrongdoer. The “everlasting covenant” was stated to Noah at the time that Noah was righteous in the sight of God because of his faith and obedience toward God. and Noah was made God’s executioner of the murderer This establishes the rule that all execution of wrongdoers must be done in righteousness, that is to say, in harmony with God’s law. (Refer to Exodus 21:12-25, Leviticus 24:16-21.) The law of God designates only a few of the offenses for which human life shall be taken in harmony with the terms of the everlasting covenant To take human life contrary to God’s appointed way is therefore a violation of the everlasting covenant. The Scriptures and the indisputable facts show that today the earth is defiled because the inhabitants thereof have “broken the everlasting covenant” (Isa. 24:5), but the chief religious head in “Christendom” bestows his “Apostolic blessing”, and that “with affectionate sentiments”, upon slaughter of the innocents.
The words of God, at Genesis 9:5,6, in connection with the establishment of the everlasting covenant, constitute an emphatic statement of the fact that Jehovah God alone has the right to give life and the right to take it away and. if life is taken by man, this taking of life must be done strictly in accord with God’s law, and that law applies to both man and beast The decree which God announced to Noah was to this effect: “Ye shall not suffer a murderer to Ine " That decree is not contrary to God’s law “Thou shalt not kill”, but is in exact harmony therewith. The individual who assumes the right to kill his fellow man is a murderer, and hence a breaker of God’s law. God’s decree is that the manslayer shall be punished by death, which sentence must be executed by duly constituted authority The Lord’s words “whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man” could hardly refer back to the creation of Adam in the image and likeness of God. Rather those words mean that the duly constituted executioner of the wrongdoer acts as the representative of God and in so doing man acts “in the image of God”, that is, such executioner acts on the authority delegated to him by the Lord in executing the manslayer
Certainly no one who is in a covenant to do God’s will desires to break his covenant concerning the sanctity of life; but, on the contrary, he is diligent to avoid all such offense. But there are those who are “without understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy’ of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them [or, according
April 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
125
to the marginal reading, consent with them] that do them [as religion has consented with bloodguilty revolutionaries]”.—Rom. 1:31,32.
The nations called “Christendom” are in an implied covenant to obey God’s law, because these nations claim to be Christian and to take the Bible as their guide. Having God’s word and claiming to believe it, the obligation upon them is to learn the will of God as set forth in his Word and then do it. Instead of so doing, every nation of “Christendom” has willfully broken the everlasting covenant with reference to both man and beast. In the commission of that great sin Nimrod “the mighty hunter” took the lead among men after the flood. He did everything possible within his power to defy the Almighty God, and such proves that he was the instrument of the Devil. He became a great hero among the people because he was a killer. When he had done that he organized a religion and induced the people to practice that religion by adulating and serving men as a reproach to God’s holy name. Almost all killers practice some kind of religion. The two seem to go together. This is particularly true with those who after committing a crime hasten to the priest and make confession in order that they might receive absolution and forgiveness. At least, they are induced to believe that a priest can absolve them; which, of course, he cannot do. To kill is a great crime and i iclation of God’s law, and the practice of religion is likewise a great crime and a reproach to the name of Almighty God. Religion is a lie, because by religion men are wrongfully led to worship creatures or things as though such were god Religion results in murder, because those who knowingly and willfully induce men to practice religion induce ’Ihem to practice that which leads to death. The Devil is the author of religion and is a murderer, and for this reason Jesus said of him: “He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. . . he is a liar, and the father of it.”—John 8: 44.
Satan’s religious, political, commercial organization on the earth has willfully and deliberately broken the everlasting eovenant by wantonly and cruelly killing human creatures and dumb animals or beasts. God by his prophet (Isaiah 24:5,6) declares his purpose to destroy Satan’s official organization on the earth because of the violation of the everlasting covenant: “The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws [of God], changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.”
The commercial and political elements of Satan’s visible organization have deliberately planned and promoted cruel wars resulting in the wholesale shedding of innocent human blood. The religious element of “Christendom”, and particularly the clergy, have sanctified those wars and blasphemously declared them to be in harmony with God’s will. All such willful slayers shall perish at Armageddon at the hand of Jehovah’s great Executioner, “the Son of man,” Christ Jesus, earth’s new and rightful King. On the other hand there are those on the earth, and particularly in the realm of “Christendom”, who have worked for and supported the commercial and political systems of oppression; who have served in the armies and navies and have taken human life; have upheld the commercial and political sys
tems that have greatly oppressed the people, have associated with religious systems which have sanctified war and have hence been a party to the crime of breaking the everlasting covenant; and others who, as members of the “strong-arm squad”, have aided in the persecution of the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, and have persecuted those who serve God. During the World War many men participated in these wrongful doings, and especially in the persecution of God’s people, and did so without malice and without knowledge that they were violating God’s law Nineteen centuries ago the ruling elements in the nation of Israel were guilty of just such wicked things, and to them Jesus said that they had done such things “that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation”. (Matt. 23:35,36) The bloodguilty of the official element of the nation of Israel that winked at and oppressed and killed the witnesses and servants of God in particular, and that oppressed and killed the defenseless people in general, were visited by God’s vengeance That terrible punishment came upon Israel within a few years after the crucifixion of Jesus. Warning of that approaching trouble, Peter, filled with the spirit of God, said to the Israelites: “Save yourselves from this untoward generation."—Acts 2: 40.
The gross and flagrant violation of the everlasting covenant by the shedding of human blood must now be avenged, because this is the day of the vengeance of our God and the bloodguilty ones must fall by the hand of the great Executioner. Therefore the Devil “knoweth that he hath but a short time” (Rev. 12:12), and that soon the battle of the great day of God Almighty will be fought. Such will result m the meting out of justice to the murderers and in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Those who have unwittingly been associated with the devilish work against mankind, and in the heaping of infamy upon the name of Jehovah, and who would now escape to the place of safety which Jehovah God has provided and which was foreshadowed by the “cities of refuge” established among the Israelites, must hasten thereto. Such refugees must get away from the Devil’s organization and take their place with the Lord’s organization and remain there.—Numbers 35: 8-34.
For centuries the whole world has been under the dominating control of the wicked one, Satan, and his cruel and wicked organization. Not later than Armageddon Jesus Christ, the Revenger of blood wickedly shed, will slay the malicious clergy and their allies. It appears that such men, who have professed to serve God but who have willfully served the Devil, shall receive the severer punishment at the hands of the great Executioner. At Ezekiel 9: 5, 6 the plain declaration of the Lord is that “organized religion”, which has so greatly defamed his name, and those therein who have participated in the persecution of Jehovah’s faithful people and defamed his name shall be destroyed without mercy.
Who, then, are the ones that will escape? It is the “great multitude” of people of good will toward God that flee into the Lord’s “city of refuge”. They were once associated in some respect with Satan’s organization, but now, by reason of learning of the wickedness thereof, and of God’s loving-
126
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
kindness, they seek refuge in God’s organization, which organization was pictured by the ancient “cities of refuge” in Israel. They forsake Babylon, that is to say, Satan’s organization, and flee unto God’s organization, taking their stand on the side of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government
under Christ. Henceforth they must have no sympathy with or give support to the wicked organization, but must remain steadfastly on the side of the great Theocrat Jehovah and be in full sympathy with his organization and the work” He is doing.
IS “CHRISTENDOM” WORSE THAN SODOM?
JEHOVAH GOD put his name in Jerusalem, after King David moved his capital there and transferred the sacred ark of the covenant to Mount Zion. Its people he provided with his law defining sin; and by comparison between those that received the law and those not having it he shows that ‘by reason of the law sin became exceedingly sinful'. As it is written: “I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet.” By giving his law to Jerusalem God made known the exceeding sinfulness of sin, but Jerusalem went ahead in its wickedness nevertheless. (Rom. 7:7-14) Not by a creature’s observation of sin, but by knowing the law of God and doing it, he learns the needed instruction.
To self-righteous Jerusalem, and particularly her piousfaced clergy elders and leaders, it must have been a shock and jolt at the instance of the faithful prophet Ezekiel to have the notorious heathen Sodom called her “sister”, and then to be told that she, Jerusalem, was worse than Sodom
Jerusalem then and “Christendom” now have failed to learn Concerning them Jehovah by his prophet said: “As I live, saith the Lord God, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters. Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.” (Ezek. 16:48,49; Jer. 3: 6, 8, 10,14) Sodom represented the nations of the earth which are called “heathen”, while Jerusalem represented what is called “Christendom”. Immorality, debauchery, pride and idleness that prevailed in Sodom well apply to all the heathen nations. Sodom was a part of Satan’s organization, entirely under his control, and knew not Jehovah God.
The same is true of all heathen nations of today. The peoples of Sodom were exceedingly bad; but they did not know better, because they had not been instructed. The Jews, being God’s covenant people to whom were given the law and the prophets, knew better, and therefore their abominations were far worse than those of the Sodomites. This is made clear by the words of Jesus: “And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have been done in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.” (Matt. 11:23,24) Jehovah was justified in destroying the Sodomites because of their devilish practices. The rulers in Sodom, were-proud, well fed, idle, and made no proper provision for the-poor. “And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good.”—Ezek. 16: 50.
By the same rule of comparison “Christendom” todax is far worse and more reprehensible than the Jews, tin Sodomites or the heathen. The rulers in “Christendom” are proud, haughty, austere and harsh. Among those who rule are the idle rich, who live riotously. The food which thej use, and the things that are employed for their pleasure, they have never bestowed upon such one ounce of theii labor. They live upon the fruits of the labor of others. The ultrarich own and control the nations of “Christendom” They support the clergy of the church organizations, who in turn attempt to absolve the rulers or ruling rich from all future responsibility. They pay the clergy well, of course but get nothing therefor, in fact.
Among nations a striking example is the United States It is the leading and most powerful and richest nation m all “Christendom”. Its natural resources are fabulous, and the riches possessed by the few who control it far exceed the riches of Solomon in the heyday of his glory. Those who possess the riches of the nation made it not by honest laborious efforts on their part, but they have acquired it by smart and cunning manipulation and by defrauding thj^i people. The common people have bestowed their labor upon* the materials which God provided for man, in order that wealth might be produced, and the few selfish ones now possess the results of those labors of the common people
In the United States at present there is great distress There are millions of idle people, not seeking charity, but crying for an opportunity to work that they might ‘eat their own bread in the sweat of their face’. The ultrarich and selfish control the public press and the ruling powers of the land. In answer to the cries of the poor these say. ‘There is now an over-production, there is too much foodstuff and too much material for clothing, and you must not work until the present supply is used up.’ The rich live in ease and with fullness of bread and in abundance of idleness, while the poor who are idle sicken and die for want of food When some in the councils of the nation, feeling duty-bound to aid the suffering, attempted to appropriate funds to feed the starving poor, Big Business said, “No.” The commercial power, in fact, dominates and controls the political rulers, and the latter bow assent to the order from Big Business, and the clergy say, ‘This is a Christian nation , and what it decides the people must agree to, because such is correct, for the reason that it is a government by divine right.’
There are some men in political offices that are of tendei heart and have compassion upon the poor and an honest desire to help them. When millions of people in the United States were actually starving, an attempt was made by such men in the Congress of the United States to appropriate money to fed the poor and starving; but the whip from the
April 15, 1940
SEe WATCHTOWER.
127
executive was brought to bear upon the political pullers of the chariot, and the measure was voted down. Then a makeshift was brought forth and enacted into a law which really adds insult to injury. A large appropriation of money was voted and made available as a loan to feed the poor and starving provided the poor and starving furnish the required security for the loan. If men are so poor that they and their children are actually starving, then manifestly they are too poor to furnish security for the loan of money with which to buy food. Briefly, the law means that, if those in need can furnish security for a loan of money, they may eat and live; but if not, then they must starve and die.
A United States senator, in giving his reason for refusing to support the above-mentioned measure, said: “I cannot vote for a proposition which embodies, as a matter of policy, the theory that only those who have security are entitled to live. The Congress . . . purports to turn its back on the sick and the dying without giving them any relief whatever.”
Another senator denounced as infamous the policy of the United States to furnish aid only to those who can give security. A loan, as a rule, implies that interest must be paid. The United States, by claiming that it is a Christian nation, makes all of its citizens brothers, and the preachers boldly claim such brotherhood. By its own claim the law of God is binding upon the United States, to wit: “Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother.” (Deut. 23- 19) The farmers and laborers of the land produced the wealth, and Big Business acquired it by manipulation, and also controls the political policy; and by what law or reason or justice should the starving men who produced the wealth be required to give security for a loan to get something to eat?
It is the laborers in the fields that are today crying in vain for bread. The vast continuing army of the unemployed, would-be laborers, also cries for bread. Big Business and big politicians turn a deaf ear to the cries of distress, but Jehovah hears the cries of the oppressed. He now serves notice upon the oppressors in these words- “Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cneth , and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton, ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you.” (Jas. 5:4-6) The poor is pushed aside, and resists not because he cannot; but the God of justice will fight his battle for him. The prophecy of Ezekiel, supported by other scriptures of the Bible, shows that the punishment that God will inflict upon “Christendom”, and particularly upon such nations as the United States, will be far greater than that which befell Sodom and which later came upon Jerusalem. Notice of these truths set forth in God’s Word must be served and has been served upon the rulers and the people of the United States and other nations by those witnesses whom God has anointed to do this work.—Isa. 61:1-3 ; Matt. 24: 14.
Samaria, the city built by the wicked king Omri at the site he purchased, was the capital of the ten tribes of Israel. There the Devil religion was established, and Samaria became notorious for its idolatry. (1 Ki. 16:32,33; Hos.
7: 1-8) But the sins of Jerusalem were, because of her special privileges and advantages, far worse than those of Samaria, as Jehovah declared. “Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done.” (Ezek 16: 51) Because of the greater enormity of Jerusalem's sms. greater was her punishment; and thus Jehovah establishes his fixed rule which applies to all.
As there were two general divisions of the Israelites, even so there are two general divisions of “Christendom”, to wit, Catholic and Protestant. Samaria representatively pictured Catholicism, while Jerusalem more specifically applies to Protestantism, or the Protestant part of “Christendom”. Today ‘the two-horned beast’, the British-American imperial world power (Rev. 13:11-14), is the great bulwark of Protestantism. It is also the seventh world power, pictured by the seventh head of the beast that came up out of the sea. (Rev. 13: 1-3) The preceding world powers, except Rome, were heathen, like Sodom. Rome in its later days embraced the Catholic religion.
Rome is now a part of “Christendom”, and the major portion of the people in the confines of “Christendom” are Catholic. England and America, being the stronghold of Protestantism, or the Protestant branch of •‘Christendom”, are therefore more reprehensible before Almighty God. and subject to greater punishment, because of the greater opportunity to know God and learn of his kingdom The modernist clergymen thereof have turned to idol worship, they deny that God created man perfect, that he fell by reason of sin, and that redemption is provided by the blood of Jesus Christ; and deny the kingdom of God as the means provided for the uplift and blessing of the people and, above all, for the vindication of Jehovah’s name Like the powers of Samaria, Catholicism is an abomination in the sight of God. Even the Protestant wing of “Christendom” has harshly judged the Catholic population, and yet, judged according to the superior advantages, privileges and opportunities abused, neglected, or spurned, the Protestants arc even more abominable in the sight of Almighty God than Catholics, and this is proved by His words at Ezekiel 16.52- “Thou [Jerusalem] also, which hast judged th\ sisters, bear thine own shame, for thy sins that thou has' committed more abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou; yea, be thou confounded also, and bear t'i\ shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters ”
The deeper instruction here shown is this that in proportion to light, or opportunity of gaining light, so great is the responsibility; and that those who live under more favorable conditions and are favored with more light upon the Word of Almighty God, and who then become lawless, are more reprehensible before God and subject to the greater punishment. According to this rule, therefore, the Catholic branch of “Christendom” is an abomination in the sight of God, and the Protestant branch of “Christendom” is more abominable because of its greater light and opportunity According to the same rule, those in these latter days, whether Catholic or Protestant,-who have received a knowledge of the truth and embraced it and learned of God’s kingdom, and who have then become lawless, are even more reprehensible.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEERING IN ST. KITTS (WEST INDIES)
“He would not be able to get a book. So I asked if he would like to hear an interesting lecture on the Bible. I set up the phonograph and played ‘Victory’. As soon as I started he sent to call his neighbor. The poor man was so hungry for the truth that when he sat down I had to watch steadfastly to see if he had fainted. After I had finished he told me: ‘My dear lady, you have given me something I never got in all my life.’ Asked me to call back, took the book Enemies and asked me to wait until I call again and he would give me the money. I called two days ago and gave him the other part of ‘Victory’. He said: ‘Lady, I wish I was in town where you are.’ I told him: ‘Don’t need to be. Arrange with me and I will set up a Bible class in your home with your family.’ He is living very far in the country, but where good work is to be done it can’t be too far for one. I have visited the leprosy asylum, and the sick people were very glad. I paid two visits already, and they try not to let them off. So I am going to ask the keeper if I can set up a Bible class for them. For the month of January we held five public^. meetings with the transcription lectures, and every place we go the people cry to come back. I placed 21 combinations of bound books for January.”
OVER OBSTACLES TO GET SUBSCRIPTIONS
“A meeting with a recorded series was arranged, and those who had shown considerable interest were personally invited to attend. Only two of these interested families attended. Following morning we made it a point to call on those whom we had specially invited, endeavoring to show them their responsibility before Jehovah. (They had read quite a bit previously.) Result: Three Watchtower subscriptions, five Consolation subscriptions. We attempted to reach a man whose name we had received among an interested list from the Society. His wife turned us away very coldly. On checking over our back-call lists later we decided to call again and ask for Mr.------, since it was his name
«e had received. We did this, found the man at home and were readily invited in to play a recorded series. His wife, uneasy at first, soon listened attentively. He gladly subscribed for The Watchtower, expressing joy at the prospect of having such a magazine. We organized a Model Study with his neighbors, and later left this same man conducting a local Watchtower study. He was 100-percent.”
COMMENT ON APPLICATION FOR PIONEER WORK
“It might interest you to know that the applicant for pioneer service was a brother in the Catholic church just a few years ago, intending to be a priest. He was a teacher. He overheard a witness playing the phonograph and giving a testimony in a French sisters’ home. After the witness left, he showed immediate interest and was remarkably interested. He went to the local meetings and in less than two weeks was out in the field service, and has been faithful ever since. Although not well physically, he is real active.”
USING MODEL STUDY BOOKLET NO. 2 AS AN ARGUMENT
“I have found the Model Study No. 2 a great asset in placing and completing sets of books, by showing the Reference Index to the various publications. This has also enabled me to place Bibles with the books, by stating that our purpose is to encourage consistent Bible study in the homes of the people:
A FOLDER DID IT
“Before I got around the block a man accosted me on the street: ‘You are the man with the Bible books, aren’t you?’ ‘Yes, sir.’ ‘You were on my street a few days ago. I read the little slip you gave me [-Enemies slip] and liked it very much. Let me see some of those books.’ He took Enemies, Face the Facts, and Fascism or Freedom, and went on his way rejoicing. I went and did likewise.”
80 YEARS OLD, BUT RISING UP AGAINST RELIGION
“This octogenarian, who exceeds 60 hours a month in field service regularly, received a haughty reception at the hands of an irate housewife who had a distasteful impression of Jehovah’s witnesses. ‘I am a Catholic, and you people criticize our religion. You were around here last wees, and I told you I did not want any of that stuff I’ “Madam, if you will read this booklet Government and Peace I’ll give it to you. It will explain everything. Read it right away. I'll be working in this block if you want to find me.’ About an hour later he was called while preparing to enter another house. It was the same woman, who this time had quite a different story to tell: ‘I have been turning you people down every time, even though I did not have any idea what your work was about. I want those three books you have there Stop back to see me in about two weeks; by that time I’ll have them read and will probably want some others ’ ”
STARTED AND CONDUCTED HIS OWN FAMILY STUDY
“We called Sunday morning to invite him to the Watchtower study. He asked us in, saying, ‘We are just having a meeting of Jehovah’s witnesses.’ On entering we found the family of five seated around the room, one with the book Salvation and the others with their Bibles This man had been reading the Watchtower books for years, but said that just recently he had come to the conclusion that he must take a definite stand for the Lord. He was a Sundax school superintendent and had always used the books in his classes. We pointed out to him how he could have a small share in this work. He replied: ‘I don’t want a small share I’m going to have a big share in this work.’ A study was arranged for Wednesday night and there were twenty in attendance. A young Spanish woman came to our service meeting A publisher had given her Uncovered. She said ‘I never read anything so wonderful in my life I’m gomir to have a part in this work.’ A Model Study has been arranged for next week for her father, mother and sister She is going with us in the field this coming Sunday and says she can go out every day in the week". Her mother wants a phonograph to play for their Spanish friends ”
DEBUNKING THE XMAS IDOL IN VANCOUVER, B.C.
“We debated whether to try witnessing on ‘Krismiss' day or to hide out until the orgy was past. We decided to go, and started for a logging camp. Found it entirely deserted except for a few stragglers who could not or would not join in the general spree. Among them we found those who were hungry for truth. We left eight bound books, 51 booklets, took five Consolation subscriptions and placed a full set of records ‘Government and Peace’ with three additional retards (single discs) with a man who was literally overjoyed with our visit. Who says ‘Xmas’ is a poor time to witness? Get out and try it yourself'”
12S
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
officers
J. F. P.htttkrford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ liaiah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon bls throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal la published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Obxat Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Os. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remitlances should be made direct to the respective branch offices Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British...........-......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian..........-......40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5. Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7	Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W,, Australia
South African ________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several ianffuapesj
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within ono month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T , under the Act of March 3, 1375
“LOCUST ARMY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Summer’s opening is marked by the “Locust Army” Testimony Period, during the whole month of June. It is a movement of Jehovah’s “locusts” against religion by a campaign to increase yet more the subscription list of The Watchtower. The unusual offer in effect during the campaign will operate greatly to that result, to wit, one year’s subscription for The Watchtower together with the premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covered booklet on a contribution of but one dollar; foreign countries, $1 50. This Testimony Period is the final of a threemonth campaign with The Watchtower. Now is not too late to arrange for some part therein, as to territory, equipment, time, supplies, distributor’s copies, etc. If unacquainted with an organized company of publishers in your locality, notify this office of your wish to get in touch with such for this Testimony. Those in foreign countries should write the branch office having supervision. The Informant (which is free) goes into greater detail on this.
THEOCRATIC CONVENTION OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
The manifest leadings of the Lord indicate that all lovers of the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God should assemble in
general convention in 1940. Columbus, Ohio, has been selected as the key city for a five-day convention of Jehovah’s witnesses The dates will be July 24-28 inclusive. Announcement is made this early m advance in order that Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will may have ample opportunity to arrange their affairs so as to be at Columbus, Ohio, or other cities tied in by direct wire communication and loud-speaker equipment. By the Lord’s grace, the president of the Watchtower Society will be in attendance in person at the key assembly in Columbus Further details will be published later.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of June 2: “Instruction” (Part 3),
fl 1-33 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1940.
Week of June 9; “Instruction” (Part 3),
fl 34-61 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1940.
CORRECTION
In the April 1, 1940, issue of The Watchtower, page 103, in the concluding sentence of paragraph 15, it should read “Preservation" instead of "Preparation".
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol LXI	May 1, 1940	No 9
INSTRUCTION
PART 3
instruction: but he that regardeth reproof is prudent."—Prov. 15:5.
"A fool despiseth his father’s
JEHOVAH lias provided for man the information pointing out the only safe course to take. Jehovah makes known to the man who desires instruction what is the right way to go. He discloses to such as seek after knowledge who are His enemies, and the enemies of man. He also informs man as to the identity of his friends. The meek seek after the right information. Believing that the Almighty God is Jehovah, the meek gladly receive information that comes from God’s Word. The person who takes a selfish course and ignores the instruction set forth in the Word of God is a fool. By his course of action he proves his motive and shows that he is a fool. "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.” (Pss. 53:1; 14:1) The fool refuses to give heed to the Scriptures. Those who today advocate religion as the means of saving the world from disaster thereby prove that they do not believe in the existence of the Almighty God. Such persons sense an approaching disaster, and do not know what it is, and they refuse to be instructed as to the truth thereof.
2	By his prophecy uttered through Zephaniah God informs mankind of the rapidly approaching calamity upon the world. By the same and other prophecies he tells the reason therefor and what will be the result. The prophecy of Zephaniah 1: 14-18 briefly summed up shows the following things and facts, to wit: That the day of Armageddon is fast closing m; that Armageddon will make the stoutest men. and particularly all of the worldly “peacemakers”, shriek in bitterness; that Armageddon will be a dreadful time, dark with terror and vengeance, a time of Jehovah’s war against the proud and lofty strongholds of Satan’s organization, and particularly the key men thereof; that all proud and haughty are spiritually blinded and are sinners against God and that all of these come to their wits’ end ; and that at the great battle the blood of all such willful sinners will be poured out and their carcasses will spread over the ground as contemptible; that this is retributive justice for all the savage and heartless spilling of human blood done by the wicked in violation of Jehovah’s everlasting covenant and because
of their defiance to God’s supremacy; that they will attempt to find the way of escape, but will utterly fail; that none will be able to buy deliverance from destruction with any material gain they have acquired, legally or ilk gaily, but that God will make a thorough clean-up of the entire enemy organization; and that he will bring to a terrible end all who disregard his warning message and who therefore willingly continue to hold to and support Satan’s organization. It will be quick action on the part of the Lord.
s It must have appeared to the leaders of Israel as a very “strange” work in which Zephaniah was engaged, going about among them and uttering pioph-ecy of approaching disaster. That prophet was blind to everything aside from his commission iroin Jehovah, and he straightway delivered the message that God had committed to him: "The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord; the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.”—Zeph, 1: 14.
4 The prophecy warns of the nearness of the great climax of the day of Jehovah, that is, Jehovah’s "act. his strange act”. The fulfillment of this part of the prophecy delivered by the faithful witnesses of Jehovah in the present time, and whom Zephaniah i'oie-shadowed, warns the people that the great and tern-ble day of Armageddon is near. These witnesses inform the people that the battle of that great day of God Almighty is the act, the “strange act” of Jehovah. (Isa. 28:21) This is not a mere human guess, nor a political prognostication, nor a creepy feeling of premonition, such as religionists have. This message from the prophet is based entirely on the facts, which God gave him to utter, and which facts He brings to pass in fulfillment of the prophecy, and which lead to the Scriptural conclusion as to what is coming to pass, and such utterance is therefore authoritative. The message is the voice of Almighty God from Zion.
’The prophecy says: ‘The day hasteth greatly.’ The call is for prompt and speedy action on the part of those who hear. There can be no delay. Speaking of the time of that great and dreadful day, Jesus 131
132
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
emphasized the necessity for haste when he uttered these words: “Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of his house: neither let him which is in the field return back to take his clothes. And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days! But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the sabbath day.” (Matt. 24:17-20) That could not mean that the battle breaks out because beyond control of the Lord, but does mean that God’s appointed time has come, and God does not delay for any reason whatsoever. Having purposed it, he brings it to pass exactly on time.
6	While “the day” has come upon the world like a thief in the night, when the battle does begin it will necessarily be accompanied by a great noise: “Even the voice of the day of the Lord.” It will be marked by peculiar sounds, or awesome noises, accompanied by the operation of the supreme power of the Almighty moving to the destruction of his enemies. Thus is indicated that the battle will be accompanied by the victorious shouts of the heavenly or invisible host, and by songs of praise to Jehovah, sung by his faithful servants on the earth. In contrast to such joyful sounds there will be the cries of confusion, terror, grief, disappointment and utter dismay on the part of those who have followed religious leaders and who have refused to give heed to the instruction set forth in the Word of God. These shouts made by the two classes, that is to say, the “sheep” and the “goats”, are stated by the prophet in these words: “A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompence to his enemies.”—Isa. 66: 6.
7	Noise is discordant and terrifying, while “a voice from the temple [of God]” is harmonious and a song of victory and praise. The enemy indulges in a great discordant and terrifying noise, while those on earth devoted to Jehovah proclaim his praise from the temple.
8	Today there are on the earth men who are regarded as “mighty men”, also “honorable men”, men of great influence and power, and this because they are in the saddle and in control of the people. Soon such men will come to bitter disappointment. Says the prophecy: “The mighty man shall cry there bitterly.” The “mighty man” mentioned includes the political dictators who now think they have builded impregnable strongholds against future violence; it also includes the commercial giants and international bankers, and it particularly includes the religious great, wise and mighty ones, such as the pope and members of the Hierarchy of Authority. These men even by their dress and actions strut about, inviting the people to regard them as unusually mighty men. Just preceding the beginning of the battle those
mighty men will have seized control of the nations of the earth, and by such control will completely regiment the people and put all people in fear of them and their dictatorial power, except those persons who take their stand fully on the side of Almighty God and who put their entire trust in him and his Theocratic Government.
• But the power of these so-called “mighty” men, their material wealth and influence, will count for nothing at Armageddon. Seeing their structures crumbling to pieces, they shall cry bitterly and will find no help and no means of escape. Everything on which they have set their heart and soul will be ruined, because God has declared it so. They will be at least convinced that it is the end and that the hand of Almighty God is operating against them.
10	Take note of God’s words concerning them. “Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in hi might, let not the rich man glory in his riches.” “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will punish all them which are circumcised [religionists who hypocritically claim to be devoted to God but who are devoted to the Devil religion] with the uncircumcised [all who openly defy God’s law] ; Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness; for all these nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.” (Jer. 9:23,25,26) Otherwise stated, the Israelites had then become unfaithful and their heart devotion was not to Jehovah God, but to the things of the Devil’s world.
11	“Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without; the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.” (Isa. 33:7) The valiant ones amongst these mighty men are those who make war and then cry for peace and assume the responsibility and the honor of bringing about peace; and concerning them the Lord says: ‘The mighty men cry there bitterly’ when they see their efforts have failed.
12	The men who now think that the world has builded a civilization that shall stand forever by reason of their own efforts to bring about peace and prosperity will be wholly disappointed.
13	The mighty commercial men, who transact the commerce of the world, and all their pilots amongst the people, shall get theirs, and they shall weep. “And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land; and shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes.” (Ezek. 27 : 29, 30) Today all these great and “mighty” men sing hilariously and felicitate one another, while they feast
May 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
133
upon the fat of the land and the poor lean on their shovels and wait to be fed on the crumbs; and to these mighty ones the Lord says: “And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentations ; and I will bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head; and I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day.”—Amos 8:10.
14	All such, seeing their efforts are in vain, will cry as Esau cried, but, like Esau, will receive no help. (Gen. 27: 34; Heb. 12:17) The mighty men will take no heed to the warning that is today given, but in their anger continue to persecute the humble messengers of Jehovah that bring to them God’s warning.
“DISASTER”
15	Today all persons who think readily discern that these are days of distress. The religious and political leaders say in substance: “We are going to make better times; the church must and will convert the world and bring all people under religious control; and in the very near future this world will be a fit place in which to live.” In response to the boasting and hilarious songs of the so-called “mighty” men Jehovah God through his prophet says: “That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness.”— Zeph. 1:15.
16	God is about to violently express his indignation against “Christendom” and all her supporters, and to ail such he says: ‘That will be a day of trouble and distress.’ The prophet Habakkuk -was also given a vision of that day of battle, and it was so terrible that he prayed to God in these words: “When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he [Satan, with Gog] cometh up unto the people [of Jehovah; and is bent upon the destruction of all who serve the Most High], he [Jehovah] will invade them with his troops”; that is, God will invade Satan and Gog.—Hab. 3:16.
17	The peak of the “distress of nations” comes at Armageddon and will cause the nations and the people of the world to cry out in desperation. (Luke 21: 25) Where, then, will the people find the place of safety in that day? Certainly not with religious organizations or political institutions. Safety will be found only in one place, and that is under the organization of the Almighty God: “The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him. But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.” (Nahum 1: 7, 8) “The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the
wicked cometh in his stead [that is, into his trouble].” (Prov. 11:8) “The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips; but the just shall come out of trouble.”—Prov. 12:13.
“DESOLATION”
18	The “battle of that great day of God Almighty” will not be one of ease and comfort and plenty, but, as stated by the Lord’s prophet, “a day of wasteness and desolation.” Jehovah’s witnesses now by faith see that this great prophecy concerning the trouble is near fulfillment, and until its fulfillment they must keep on sounding the warning and pointing the people to God’s organization as the only place of safety. That responsibility is laid upon the faithful, which they cannot escape and at the same time receive God’s approval. Not even the faithful are told the exact day and hour that the great trouble will break, but they do see that it is soon. Seeing that the distress upon the world increases, the way of the witnesses becomes more difficult and they must continue to give the witness, and they cry unto the Lord: “How long [must they continue the witness work]?” and they get the answer: “Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate.”—Isa. 6:11.
18	Jeremiah the prophet of God foretold what was about to fall upon Jerusalem, which disaster was typical of what is now about to fall upon “Christendom”. “This whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment.” (Jer. 25:11) The honorable or religious leaders say: “We will soon clothe the earth with the glory of our moral achievements, making it a fit place for Christ to visit.” Such conclusion is based upon the fertile minds of modern evolutionists, but such products will not be considered precious in the sight of Almighty God. On the contrary, all the wicked shall, together with their works, be completely dashed to pieces.
J	0 Furthermore the prophet says: “A day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness.” The day is dark now, but the greatest darkness will come when the battle of Armageddon is on. That darkness, no doubt, will be literal, as well as mental, and the darkness will compass all the violators of God’s law that are upon the earth: “The way of the wicked is as darkness; they know not at what they stumble.”—Prov. 4:19.
21	In the vision which Jehovah gave his prophet Habakkuk of that terrible day the prophet was so moved by the invisible power of the Lord that he exclaimed : “The sun and moon stood still in their habitation; at the light of thine arrows [of liquid fire] they [Jehovah’s host] went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear.” (Hab. 3:11) The literal darkness
134
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
surrounding “Christendom” and other nations of the earth will be made worse by reason of the mental darkness of those who have claimed to serve God but who have not. Those who now refuse to hear the warning and instruction of Jehovah will then have only blackness, foreboding destruction, about them. “To whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.”—Jude 13.
22	Contrasting friend with foe, Jehovah says: “I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil. I the Lord do all these things.”— Isa. 45: 7.
23	As a warning of that approaching time of great darkness the alarm is sounded and God says: “Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains. and while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.” (Jer. 13:16) “Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so. Amen.”—Rev. 1:7.
24	This warning of Armageddon was written long ago for the aid and comfort and hope of those who have devoted themselves to God, and these witnesses of Jehovah are commanded to sound such warning that all other persons within the hearing and who may hear and who are of good will may flee to the place of safety.
TRUMPET
25	The trumpet is a sound of alarm. Jehovah’s faithful witnesses now are sounding the trumpet of Almighty God by proclaiming the approaching day of Armageddon. When the battle actually begins, the sound of the trumpet will announce the Lord charging upon the enemy, leading his invincible host, which host will be uttering the cry of victory. “A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high towers.” (Zeph. 1:16) That will be the time of both the trumpet sounding and the shouting against the entrenched forces of wickedness, against those who have convinced themselves into believing that they are secure.
26	The battle of Jericho was a type of the fight of Jehovah’s heavenly host against the enemy. Before entering into actual combat against Jericho Joshua, under the direction of the Lord, gave this instruction to his army: “And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with the ram’s horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up, every man straight before him.” (Josh. 6:5) This foreshadows the instruction which God gives to the spiritual Israelites by his great Officer, the Great
er Joshua, that is, Christ Jesus. According to the instruction given to the Israelites by Joshua thev were to march around the city seven days, and on the seventh day of the march the prophecy was fulfilled in miniature. Now the witnesses of Jehovah are marching, proclaiming the message of the King, and soon the marching will be done, and then the battle of the great day of God Almighty will be on. Then will the shout and the sound of the trumpet be given as Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, leads his heavenly host to complete victory. It will be a shout of victory and the sound of the trumpet of triumph. That will mark the complete downfall of “Christendom” and of every part of Satan’s organization. The anointed and their companions by faith see it now
27	In the year 606 B.C. unfaithful Jerusalem fell at the hand of King Nebuchadnezzar, whom God used as his servant to punish the unfaithful. That was another picture of the fall of antitypical Jerusalem, that is to say, modern-day “Christendom”, and this will take place at the hand of the King of the Theocratic Government, Christ Jesus, whom Nebuchadnezzar foreshadowed: “At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to appoint captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to appoint battering rams against the gates, to cast a mount, and to build a fort.” (Ezek. 21: 22) As the Lord Jehovah made the picture at Jerusalem, so now he will fulfill that prophetic picture at the hand of Christ Jesus.
28	The battle of the great day of God Almighty will be a time of alarm and of shouting "against the high corners” (Young) ; “high corner towers." (Zeph. 1: 16, R.V., margin) The “high corners" or "towers" of the earthly division of Satan’s organization are these, to wit: religion; the high tower and chief one of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the pope: together with him are the “high corners”, the other dignitaries of the Roman Catholic organization. To religious “Catholic Action”, bent on- ruling or ruining the world, these are key men: politically, dictators or totalitarian chief rulers, the “high corner towers" who regiment the people and control them; commercially, the mighty men or chief corner stones of the financial institutions that traffic in the products of the earth and in human creatures. These high dignitaries constitute the chief ones of the “fenced cities”, that is, the ones who have shielded themselves by their own efforts and are taking refuge now in then-entrenched organizations and are further attempting to strengthen their entrenchments, and in so doing are using all means of getting control of the people and of all the material wealth of the earth. Such organizations have fenced themselves in with laws to suit their own convenience, and by religious practices, and by such they think they are safe from at
May 1,1940
STe WATCHTOWER
135
tack.' With the political dictators and commercial strong men the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have fenced themselves in by treaties and concordats made with dictators and with commercial traffickers, and by confederacies or alliances, by which they hope to control the earth. All of these are ably backed up and supported by the military and the “strong-arm squad”. They all have their propaganda agents, and public press and magazines, and other means of publication, to sound out the greatness of the three ruling elements of the earth, and by which they hope to convince the people that these three elements constitute their only means of salvation. These combined “high towers” or higher-ups think they can furnish all the necessary things for mankind and can shield them from disaster. They are certain to be disappointed, because Almighty God has so stated.
29	Christ Jesus is the chief corner stone of Jehovah’s capital organization. He is the “head stone” and the “corner”. (Isa. 8:14; 28:16; Ps. 118:22) Christ Jesus is the Vindicator of the name of Jehovah God. At Armageddon he will lead the heavenly host against the earthly “high corners” or high towers of Satan’s organization, and also against the invisible host of Satan. All of the “high corners” the Lord Jesus will overturn, lay low, and crush to pieces: ‘‘For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low; and upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall.”—Isa. 2:12,15.
JEHOVAH’S “ACT”
30	Worldly rulers and their supporters are stubborn, heady, high-minded and refuse to give heed to the warning by Jehovah, and therefore the purpose of the Most High is expressed concerning them: “And I [Jehovah] will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord; and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.”— Zeph. 1:17.
31	It is the Almighty God who brings this distress upon those who have refused to give heed to his warning. This he does because it is his day for squaring the accounts. He has put these rebellious ones into such a place that they cannot find the way out because they refuse to give heed to His Word. Every one of man's announced remedies for relief has failed, and these mighty prognosticators and associates will be brought to their wits’ end and be compelled to acknowledge their utter helplessness. They will become desperate and go wild and hysterical and will cause everyone to turn against his fellow creature. In their efforts to destroy one another they “walk like blind men” and fight as blind men. “They reel to
and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits’ end.”—Ps. 107 : 27.
” Blind and hysterical, the worldly leaders, who have been obstinate, brutish and foolish, will fight against one another, and all shall perish. (Ps. 49: 10) They will destroy one another as did the Midianites when Gideon and his little band of 300 faithful supporters put the enemy to flight. (Judg. 7 : 20-22) The religious, political and commercial men, who have hypocritically assumed to serve God but have done to the contrary, have broken their implied covenant with Jehovah God; so “Christendom” is in an implied covenant with the Almighty God because they have professed and announced that they served him.
” No doubt there were men in the early part of “Christendom” and some all along until the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple who did serve God, but since the enthronement of Christ Jesus and his coming to the temple the religionists have gone entirely blind and devoted themselves entirely to demonworship. Concerning such workers of iniquity God’s Word says: “The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart: and thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways; and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee.”—Deut. 28: 28, 29.
REASON OF CALAMITY
34	Jehovah makes known the reason for his visiting a great calamity upon the worldly-wise, obstinate and foolish ones: “Because they have sinned against the Lord.” They have had opportunity to hear the truth from Jehovah and have willfully rejected it and are therefore “willingly ignorant” that, by the Word of God, the heavens and the earth shall be wiped out.—2 Pet. 3: 5-7.
35	The blind leaders of “Christendom” and their blinded followers and supporters are headed now right into the ditch of destruction, and into that ditch they shall soon fall. (Matt. 15:14) The wisdom of the “wise” prognosticators of this world shall come to an ignominious end, and they in their last desperate state will know that the hand of Jehovah God is against them to destroy them: “Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.” —Isa. 29: 14.
36	The self-constituted wise men ignore everything that God has given to his people and everything that godly men have proclaimed in their presence. These wicked ones have committed the “sin unto death”, and that beyond the hope of resurrection. The “man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” has certainly done this
136
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y
very thing. Such wicked “man of sin” class comprise the “evil servant” and the clergymen, who have professed to serve the Lord God but who have denied him, and these together with the principal of the religious flock and their blind supporters and hangers-on continue to sin against Jehovah and his kingdom. Such persons have had opportunity to know the truth of and concerning Jehovah God and his government and have received a warning of the approaching battle of that great day of God Almighty, which shall bring disaster upon all governments of this present world. As the Lord told the unfaithful people of Jerusalem through Jeremiah, so now he tells the unfaithful ones, those of “Christendom” who have pretended to serve him but who have not: “I called you, but ye answered not.”—Jer. 7:13.
87	All such have sinned against the Lord, particularly since 1918. And how have they sinned! By their open hostility to the message of Jehovah, which he has sent amongst them by his obedient and faithful messengers; and by their contemptuous indifference and unconcern toward that message relative to God and his kingdom, and which they have regarded as of no worth to them. They have preferred to hold to demonism or religion, saying, “That is good enough for us.” By their course of action they have declared that there is no Almighty God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and the sole Giver of life. “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt; they have done abominable works; there is none that doeth good. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God. They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge! who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.” —Psalm 14:1-4.
38	Those willful opponents of Jehovah and his kingdom and the message concerning the same have shed the blood of many innocents; and says the Lord God to those religionists and their supporters: ' Their blood shall be poured out as dust [that is, as a worthless thing].” (Zeph. 1:17) The religious leaders of Israel (the prototype) and their antitype, the religionists of “Christendom”, have been guilty of such lawlessness as no other creatures on earth, and to both the Lord God says: “For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, that have ■'hed the blood of the just in the midst of her [‘Christendom’], they have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.”—Lam. 4:13,14.
38	God’s Avenger of blood, as executioner of those who have willfully violated his everlasting covenant
concerning bloodshed, will carry out Jehovah’s purpose and will bring all offenders to account. In this day of peril all who have heard of the “cities of refuge” and who have not taken themselves to that place of refuge, that is, to God’s organization under Christ, shall be slain by the avenger of blood.—Gen. 9:6; Num. 35: 9-34.
DEMON INFLUENCE
40	After the battle of Armageddon begins there will be multitudinous numbers outside of the “city of refuge” because they have held to demonism or religion. They have preferred to hold to the doctrines of demons, such'as “purgatory”, and to worship images and pray with beads and go through other formalism rather than to hear the Word of God. Because of their support given to the Devil’s bloody organization they will not be permitted then to plead ignorance of their responsibility. They will have the mark of the beast in their foreheads (mentally), if not actually in their hands.—Rev. 13: 16,17.
41	The responsibility is now upon Jehovah’s witnesses and servants to take the kingdom message to all such and sound it within their hearing, even though they cannot induce the obstinate to hear and obey. The responsibility of Jehovah’s witnesses is to proclaim the truth, and this they cannot avoid. God will make a clean-up of all the enemy and supporters of the Devil; and those who refuse to give heed to the warning now being proclaimed and who persist in their service of demonism and yielding to the influence of demonism, shall die and will bear the responsibility upon their own heads.—Ezek. 33: 8, 9.
48	Since the year 1918 religionists in particular and their allied supporters have heaped great reproach upon the name of Jehovah and upon those who faithfully serve God and his King. Those enemies have cruelly persecuted Jehovah’s faithful servants and have shed much blood of the innocent and faithful followers of Christ Jesus. Jehovah gives his unbreakable word that at Armageddon he will square the account with all such and that this he will do by pouring out the blood of the enemies as dust and strewing about their flesh upon the earth even “as the dung”.
43	Jehovah has put in the mouth of his faithful people to pray this prayer concerning the enemy, and particularly the leaders of “Christendom” who have so wickedly persecuted the faithful servants of the Lord, to wit: “Do unto them [those of ‘Christendom’ who have persecuted God’s servants] as unto the Midianites; as to [Captain] Sisera, as to [King] Jabin, at the brook of Kison: which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth.” (Ps. 83:9,10) That prayer God will fully answer at Armageddon when he wipes out the enemy. This is cer
May 1,1940
WATCHTOWER,
137
tain because Jehovah put the prayer in the mouth of his servants as a prophecy, and wliich prophecy he will fulfill.
“ Modern-day leaders of “Christendom” and their willing supporters treat the Word of God with utter contempt and heap great contempt upon Jehovah’s witnesses. As “Christendom” shows her rebellion against God and against his kingdom, so Jehovah shall treat them as rebels at Armageddon. He will show his contempt for “Christendom” and her leaders and supporters. Their flesh shall be strewn upon the earth as a contemptible thing. The survivors of Armageddon shall see them; as it is written: “And they [the survivors of Armageddon] shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.” (Isa. 66:24) No resurrection for such.
NO DELIVERANCE
45	The austere, selfish and arrogant professed servants of God who are leaders of “Christendom” today depend upon their own influence and their material wealth to deliver them in the day of God’s wrath; but to them the Lord says otherwise: “Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord’s wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy; for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.”—Zeph. 1:18.
46	Those worldly-wise men who have relied upon their own building of so-called “civilization” have laid up on earth treasures by which they hope to protect and save themselves. Thus they have heaped up their treasure for the days of evil as a kind of insurance against disaster. All the dictators have large • iinounts of money stored up outside of their respective countries from which they are liable to be chased by the enraged people. For instance, Hitler has large hank accounts or deposits in the name of agents in nine foreign countries, but none in Germany nor in the land of his fellow dictator in Italy, whom he does not fully trust. When he is compelled to flee and to seek a place of hiding and refuge he will find that his earthly treasure thus laid up will do no good for him. This is also true with reference to the other dictators and political “big shots”.
47	It has been said that the Vatican, the headquarters of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, has stored up a fabulous amount of earthly treasure. That great treasure of silver, gold and precious jewels has been gathered from the various countries of the earth. Even from the poor peons of Mexico as much as thirty million dollars a year was taken to the Vatican, until that institution was somewhat curbed in that
land. Added to such treasure the Hierarchy have their intake from the “purgatory” racket, fraudulently operated among the credulous hangers-on. Added to the “purgatory” fees is that collected from the masses for the dead; and the hold-up collection plate, “Pay as you enter” charge for a pew in the church building; also the religious Bingo games; gambling games, and the great piles raked in therefrom; also their ill-got gains from raffles; and money contributed by the state, which has been wrongfully taken from the people in the form of taxes; also the sums that have been wheedled out of many upon their deathbed, and large sums of money collected out of the insurance policies paid by insurance companies to the widow upon the death of her husband, or some other dead relative; also the profits from numerous commercial deals and investments, such as Monte Carlo, Wall Street, liquor manufactories and breweries, and in stocks and bonds, and in grain, and in other products dealt in upon the stock exchanges; and, added to the foregoing, numerous “charity” drives operated among the general public, Catholic and Protestant, Jew and Gentile, and responded to by numerous persons, all such because of their fear to go contrary to the influence of the mighty men of the Hierarchy; also great revenue derived from their enslaving “houses of good shepherd”, orphanages and hospitals operated for selfish gain; Peter's pence to the “poor” pope; also from the sale of candles. beads, “holy water,” and many other things too numerous here to mention. But wait until Armageddon begins and “the dictator pigs begin to root”.
48	No amount of money or other treasure can serve to bribe Jehovah and his great Executive Officer, Christ Jesus. No amount of accumulated earthL treasure “shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord’s wrath”. (Vs. 18) The Almighty God will receive nothing as pay to keep that hypocritical crowd out of the shambles and to save them from destruction. “For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.” (Deut. 10:17) “They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed: then-silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord; they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels; because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.” (Ezek 7:19) Furthermore says the Lord: “Treasures of wickedness profit nothing; but righteousness dehv-ereth from death.”—Prov. 10: 2.
48 “The city of refuge,” that is, God’s organization, is the only place of security and safety. Concerning that place of protection it is written: “Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death; but he shall be surely put to
138
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
death. And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is tied to the city of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land until the death of the priest. So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are; for blood it defileth the land; and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein [by gold and silver], but by the blood of him that shed it.” —Num. 35: 31-33.
50 Further considering the destruction that shall come upon the nations of the world at Armageddon, Jehovah says by his prophet: “But the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy.” That does not mean the literal earth or mundane sphere, because it is written in the Word of God: “The earth abideth for ever.” (Eccl. 1:4) It does mean, however, the visible (that is, earthly) organizations of “Christendom” particularly and the nations round about “Christendom”. That devouring or destruction shall be an expression of Jehovah’s consuming zeal in righteousness and holiness, and he will perform this in vindication of his holy name. Jehovah’s zeal burns against and consumes the wicked organizations of men that have defied him or that have ignored him and that have followed the religious leaders of demonism. God’s zeal for righteousness will completely burn up everything of wickedness, both invisible and visible.
61 The following Scriptural texts further support the foregoing conclusion that the zeal of Jehovah’s (ire, the fire of righteousness, shall utterly consume all workers of iniquity and all their wicked organizations: “For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.” (Deut. 4: 24) “For our God is a consuming fire.” (Heb. 12:29) “How long, Lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire? Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.’' (Ps. 79:5,6) “And it shall come to pass at the same time, when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face. For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel.”—Ezek. 38: 18,19.
QUICK RIDDANCE
52 The Lord Jesus Christ, the great Judge who now sits in judgment as the High Officer of Jehovah God, is judging the nations. He is separating “the goats” from “his sheep”. (Matt. 25: 31-46) “The goats” symbolically describes all those persons on the earth who are against The Theocratic Government. That means everyone that is not for The Theocracy, because all such are against it: “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.” (Matt. 12: 30) The Lord’s “other
sheep” are those who flee to the “city of refuge”, that is, the Lord’s organization, who remain there and who joyfully serve God and The Theocratic Government. When that judgment work of the Lord is done, then the “goats” will have fully identified themselves as God’s enemies and then the Lord’s “other sheep” will have identified themselves as on the Lord's side, willingly and joyfully serving God and his government of righteousness. Then the final execution of the judgment will be next in order. Concerning the goats, that is, the enemies of God, he says through his prophet (Zeph. 1:18): “He shall make even a speedy riddance of all them [that is, all the goats] that dwell in the land”; (R.V.) “make an end, yea, a terrible end, of all them.” That terrible and speedy end of the goats is stated by Jesus in these words: “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire [destruction], prepared for the devil and his angels [that is, all demons and all those who abide under the influence and power of the demons and who act in opposition to The Theocracy].’’ “And these shall go away into everlasting [cutting-off (Lhaglott) ].” —Matt. 25: 41, 46.
” W’hile the separating judgment is being conducted by Christ Jesus he sends forth his anointed servants and their companions, his “other sheep”, to sound the warning of the approaching battle of Armageddon and the disastrous results that shall come upon those 'who refuse to give heed to that warning. He commands his servants to declare his Word and to tell the people to flee to the mountains, that is to say, to the kingdom of God ruled by Christ Jesus, the Righteous One. Today the witnesses for the Lord are sounding that warning. The stubborn and obstinate ones remain in the religious institutions and many of them say: “I will never change my religion for anything.” “I am satisfied with my religion, and I don’t care to hear about anything else.” Such are merely nominal or so-called "Judean';”, claiming to praise God; but they know not the truth and do not know Almighty God, because they refuse to hear and abide by his Word. They refuse to give heed to the warning. They hang on to the demon religion, and their end will be that of the leaders of religion, and of the chief of demons, and of all other demons.
“ Jehovah by his prophet makes clear that the end of all who stand against The Theocratic Government shall be “a terrible end”. They shall have a troubled end, with such trouble as cannot be described in human phrase. They shall certainly not finish their days on earth in peace and ease and comfort. The religious leaders are the most reprehensible. Political prognosticators as to what they are going to do for the world are in a like class. But all who after having been warned continue to follow
May 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
139
their'leaders and religious teachers shall meet with the same fate meted out to the hypocrites. Christ Jesus, the Greater than Solomon, will in obedience to his Father’s command do as did his prototype to Joab and Shimei: “Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace.” “Now therefore hold him not guiltless ; for thou art a wise man, and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blood.”—1 Ki. 2: 6, 9.
55	A speedy and terrible end shall come to “all them that dwell in the land”, as God states through his prophet Zephaniah. That specifically means the nominal Judeans, the religious leaders in “Christendom”, who hypocritically claim to serve God, deceive the people, and deny the Lord. Says the Lord concerning such: “I will consume man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumblingblocks with the wicked; and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the Lord. I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests.”—Zeph. 1:3,4.
56	In plain phrase, that prophecy means the “evil servant” class, the leaders who teach religion in this day of Jehovah, and all who induce the people to practice religion or demonism. All the inhabitants of “Christendom” who remain under the leadership of the religious combine and everyone who gives aid and comfort to the Devil’s organization are also included in that destructive judgment. Says the Lord: “I will cut off [all] the remnant of Baal from this place”; the clear meaning of which is, ‘cut off all that in any manner advocate or support Devil religion,’ even as God caused Jehu to cut off all of them that identified themselves as demon worshipers, that is, religionists.—2 Ki. 10: 22-25.
NO DELAY
87 The judgment of execution will not be delayed. When Jehovah’s time, comes execution will take place speedily. Religionists, that is, the demon-worshipers, will have fully identified themselves by that time, and the Lord finally pronounces against them his judgment, and execution will immediately follow: “Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.” (Ps. 2:5) What shall take place is indicated by the prayer which God caused to be written long ago, and such prayer is now uttered by the faithful servants of God who are now on the earth and is addressed to Jehovah and against his enemies: “So persecute them with thy tempest,
and make them afraid with thy storm. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish; that men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth.” (Ps. 83:15,17,18) That prayer God will hear, and his judgment shall be executed accordingly, because the prayer is in full harmony with his expressed will.
58 The “battle of that great day of God Almighty” is not'a thing to be lightly considered, as even some who claim to be servants of God have done. The fact that Jehovah has repeatedly made mention thereof by his prophets adds to the great importance of that battle. It will be the final conclusion of the controversy between Satan, the chief of demons, and the Almighty God. It means the final end of everything that is in opposition to The Theocracy. It is made prominently to appear in the Scriptures and many times is brought to the attention of the people, because it is the last opportunity for those who now hear the message to ever get life. It is the great event that shall for ever establish the supremacy of Jehovah and completely vindicate his name. Holy angels and faithful men have for long looked forward to tins great and terrible day. Now it is very near. The faithful on earth see it and rejoice.
58 Armageddon will mark the end of all the nations of the earth, because all nations have forgotten God. It will mark the manifestation of The Theocrac\ This is the appropriate time when Jehovah God. representatively in the temple at Zion, commands that all shall keep silent and hear what he has to say to them. It is the time when his faithful servants must sound his alarm throughout the earth.
Go Who shall hear and give heed to the commandment of Jehovah from Zion? and who shall abide that terrible day of Armageddon? Neither “Christendom” nor any of the nations of the world shall abide “But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King; at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide Ins indignation.”—Jer. 10:10.
81 Satan and all the demons are called “gods”, and many people worship such. None of them shall abide, but they shall perish: “Thus shall ye say unto them, The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens.” (Jer. 10:11) Who, then, shall find the place of safety and abide the day of God’s wrath? Jehovah has set forth in his Word the answer to these questions, pointing out the only means of finding protection, safety and deliverance in that day.
(To be continued)
Thine, O Jehovah, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty.—1 Chron. 29:11, A R.V.
KINGDOM WORK
TTT 7 ATCHTOWER readers now appreciate the fact \A/ that the Theocratic Government is functioning r in the earth in so far as those who are consecrated to Jehovah are concerned. Both the anointed remnant and the Jonadabs have the privilege, by the Lord’s grace, of participating in bearing the legitimate expenses for carrying forward the kingdom work. Their contributions made direct to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, at 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y., is assurance to them that the money will be used to the best advantage in advancing the kingdom interests.
This notice is not a solicitation of money, but a reminder to all who have a desire to support Jehovah’s kingdom that it is well to make advance provision to participate in the work and do so by laying aside a specific sum each week according to the manner in which the Lord prospers them financially. The work of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society is to use the money contributed in the most economical way to make known Jehovah’s name and his kingdom. If informed in advance as to the probable amount that will be contributed during the year by those who are interested, that makes it possible to outline the work and the expense connected therewith accordingly. It is therefore suggested that upon receipt of this issue of
The Watchtower you address a post card to the Soeietv and keep a copy thereof as a reminder to yourself as to the amount you have promised and post that to the Society immediately. Write nothing upon the card except the following :
By the Lord’s grace I hope to be able to contribute to the work of announcing the kingdom of Jehovah during the ensuing year the amount of $......., which I will remit m such amounts
and at such time as I can find it convenient as the Lord prospers me.
Signed ...........................................
Address your card to
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society Treasurer’s Office 124 Columbia Heights Brooklyn, New York.
Those residing outside of the United States and who desire to participate in contributing to the necessary expense will please address your letters or cards to the Society’s office in the respective country in which you live.
Have in mind our need for guidance by the Lord and present the matter before the throne of heavenly grace that the money contributed may be used to the best advantage to announce the kingdom.
FIRST DEFEAT OF TOTALITARIANISM
TOTALITARIAN rule is overrunning all the nations. “Totalitarian” means, according to Webster’s Dictionary, “of or pertaining to a highly centralized government under the control of a political group which allows no recognition of or representation to other political parties, as in Fascist Italy or in Germany under the Nazi regime.” A state or government in which all the activities of the people are within the control of a dictator, that ruling power constitutes a “totalitarian state or government”. Under such the people are regimented or formed into classes, and all their individual privileges are fixed by the state, if they have any at all.
Totalitarian rule is a monstrous thing, is a fanatical rule, and. as its treatment of the witnesses of Jehovah God proves, it denies the inalienable right of men to worship God, and openly defies God and Christ. Fanatics who are dictators insist on an arbitrary rule of the people. That great monster has put fear in all “Christendom” and has destroyed the liberties of the people of continental Europe and is rapidly advancing its power and control over all the nations of the earth. The British Commonwealth of Nations is gradually yielding to that monstrosity because of fear. In the United States of America that monstrosity, the dictator spirit which puts the state above God, is rapidly advancing and the liberties of the people are disappearing. Compulsory flag-saluting, and suchlike ceremonies, are but a means or step to force all persons to yield to the totalitarian government. Nazi clubs are now organized and operate throughout the United States and openly declare themselves for that monstrous government. Communism, Fascism, and Nazism, although different in name, are all one and the same thing, and are all against God and his Theocratic
kingdom, and all put the state forward as the supreme power, and all defy Almighty God and punish those who insist on serving God according to his Word, the Bib’e, rather than man. Religionists now openly support such totalitarian or dictatorial governments, and thereby religionists belie their claims and place the organization of men above Jehovah God. The political rulers know that the position now taken by religionists is insincere and hypocritical. Religionists are afraid to say a word against that dictator rule which defies Almighty God, Jehovah, and thus religionists show their unfaithfulness to God and his King
If totalitarian rule overruns all nations shortly, is there any rule by which we can determine whether it xv ill end me and for long or go down in defeat? and by whom') Theii is such a rule, over four thousand years old, and dating from shortly after the Flood
It is written: “Now is the judgment of this world no.. shall the prince of this world be cast out ” (John 12.31, “The prince of this world” is the author of totalitarian rule. Following the Flood the first organized government was a totalitarian rule with Nimrod as dictator. That government was organized in defiance of Jehovah God. Nimrod’s government was the product of Satan, the adversary of the Almighty God. Immediately after Noah left the aik Jehovah made known his “everlasting covenant” concerning the sanctity of life. (Gen. 9: 9-11) God would have all creation to know that life is a gift from him and that no one can properly take or destroy life without the permission of God. The beasts of the field and the fowls of the air God has provided for man that he may use them for food as he may require. (Gen. 9: 2-4) If any man, contrary to the law of God, kills another man, the killer is guilty of
140
May 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER-
141
murder and must suffer death. (Gen. 9: 6) Also the wanton and needless slaying of animals is a violation of God’s everlasting covenant. If a man kills beasts for his necessary food, such is lawful; but if he kills them merely to satisfy a selfish desire to slay or to gratify his desire for sport, that is a violation of the everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of life. Totalitarian rule is a gross violator of God’s everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of life.
The covenant having been announced, the Devil saw an opportunity to further reproach the name of God by causing man to violate that everlasting covenant. This violation began to be manifested particularly in the first totalitarian ruler, Nimrod. The man Nimrod was a descendant of Noah’s son Ham. Genesis 10:8-10 records: “And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth: he was a mighty hunter before the Lord: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.” Nimrod was ambitious, warlike and bloodthirsty, and reveled in wicked deeds, and was undoubtedly induced to do so by reason of the influence of “the god of this world”, the Devil, and his associate demons. Nimrod hunted and killed wild beasts merely to satisfy his wicked desires, and he armed and trained young men to follow him in the killing business. In the eyes of the people Nimrod became one greatly admired and worshiped because of his prowess. No doubt the Devil put that into the minds of the people, that they would show their devotion to a creature rather than to a Creator. According as it is written, Nimrod was to them a mighty hunter “before”, that is, superior to or greater than, the Almighty God. The honor, plaudits and adoration bestowed upon Nimrod was worship, and there began the practice of religion following the Flood.
Religion is a form of worship bestowed by creatures upon another, the one worshiped being regarded by such creatures as superior to themselves and worthy of adoration and worship. The Devil had gained control of the mind of Cush, the father of Nimrod, and had used Cush, the son of Ham, as a ringleader in turning the increasing population of earth away from Jehovah God Nimrod, son of Cush, together with others, was trained to violate God’s everlasting covenant and to establish creature worship, and this was for the purpose of diverting the minds of creatures away from the Almighty God. By this means Satan and his associate devils defied the Almighty God and reproached his name, and thereby set up the practice of religion in the earth. Let this be remembered and kept in mind henceforth: Religion has ever been the chief instrument employed by the Devil to reproach the name of Almighty God and turn the people away from the Most High.
Politics is the means and art of organizing and governing the people and of conducting and controlling organizations of men Religion having been organized and put into operation to turn the people away from God and to the worship of creatures, it was quickly followed by politics, that is, an organization amongst men to control and rule the people. Nimrod, the religionist, took the lead in politics, he being made the ruler or king. Genesis 10: 10 notes that “the beginning of his kingdom was Babel ... in the land of Shinar”, Nimrod and his religious and political associates
built cities, into which the people were gathered, and that was the beginning of trade or commerce, trafficking amongst one another. From that day to this, religion, politics and commerce have been operated jointly by the Devil and his assistants for the purpose of controlling and ruling the nations of the earth and keeping them away from a knowledge and service of Almighty God, Jehovah.
With Satan, “the prince of this world,” it was anything to turn the minds of the people away from the Lord Jehovah. Being a powerful spirit creature, Satan exercised his power by influencing the thoughts of men, by injecting into their minds wicked thoughts. And this he did that he might again get complete control of the human race and turn them away from the great Theocratic Ruler.
Satan’s next attempt, therefore, was to organize the people into one compact body or government, that he might with greater ease control and direct all the people according to his own selfish ways. The Scriptural record upon this point reads: “And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech. And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.” Then in furtherance of his wicked scheme to turn the people away from God and to cause them to worship creatures, the Devil and his wicked angels injected into the minds of men that their salvation depended upon the acts and power of themselves and other creatures. “And they said, Go to, let us build us a city, and a tower whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.” (Gen. 11:1-4) This was the first attempt after the Flood on the part of the Devil to organize the people into a government or world power.
A “city” is a symbolic expression referring to a government; and on the occasion above mentioned Satan induced the people to conclude that now they must build a city and a tower. They proceeded to do so. Why? To “make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad [disorganized] upon the face of the whole earth”. (Gen. 11: 4) That city was called Babel, or, at first to the natives, “Bab-il,” which means “Gate of God”, a religious name to them. The beginning of Nimrod’s kingdom was Babel. (Gen. 10:10) The Tower of Babel, builded by the people at the instance of the Devil, was Satan’s defiance of Almighty God. Clearly this was his method of planting in the minds of the people the thought that they did not need God but that by their own efforts they could provide for their own kind of worship and their own uplift, and could save themselves when it was necessary; which was another wily scheme to turn them away from the true God. The Devil has not changed his methods even to the present time. Hence Psalm 9 . 17 speaks of the nations as “the nations that forget God”. If not in words, then by their course of conduct they say. “We do not need God, nor do we need a Savior. We do not need the Bible. Our wisdom exceeds the wisdom of all men of the past. We worship power and our own ability to accomplish our uplift.” Not back to the Bible and its God Jehovah, but the politicians of “Christendom" say: “What the world needs is more religion.” Thus the Devil, using the savants and self-constituted wise men, turns multitudes of people away from the true and living God.
God permitted the people of the plains of Shinar to go
142
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
to the full limit of their folly. They were building this tower that they might make for themselves a name, which the Devil had induced them to believe would safeguard them from being scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. Of course, he would expect to hold them in the vicinity of the tower and the city, and to cause it to be a mecca or place of worship to which all the peoples of earth would look for instruction; and thus he would control them through a dictator or totalitarian ruler. He had almost succeeded now in turning the minds of the people away from God that they would no longer trust Him. Satan no doubt thought that again he had won the victory over God, and that now he would hold the people in subjection to himself and have their worship.
Then the Lord Jehovah took action for the vindication of his name and for the benefit of creatures that believe. Seeing Satan again turning the minds of the people away from him and into subjection to a totalitarian rule and against the Theocratic rule, now the Lord God would give them a demonstration that Satan is not the true God, but a mimic god, and that the Lord God Jehovah alone could help them. The record is that God “came down”, that is, turned his attention down to earth, to see their organization and their tower. Then he changed their language. Before this, as will be noticed in the Hebrew text of Genesis 11: 1, the people were all “of one lip”. (See the marginal reading.) Their lip must have been shaped in the same general manner, and they all spoke one kind of words.
The Lord, by the action which he now took, demonstrated his own supremacy. “And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded. And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and
they have all one language; and this they begin to do and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech. So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth ; and they left off to build the city. Therefore is the name of it called Babel, because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.”—Gen. 11: 5-9
That was the first defeat of totalitarianism. It foretells totalitarianism’s final and lasting defeat. Again totalitarianism has come to the fore, to dominate the earth, in opposition to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and the people who support that Government. Shortly comes "the battle of that great day of God Almighty”, the battle of Armageddon. Although of one mind to destroy the Lord’s people, and although allied together in their wicked conspiracy and acting in full harmony, the enemy forces will, in the beginning of that battle, be confused by the power of Jehovah God and every one of these anti-theocratic enemies will be caused to fight each the other by his side. (Judg. 7 22, 2 Chron. 20:22-24; Ezek. 38:21,22) In a similar way Jehovah God caused confusion at the tower of Babel Says the Lord God Jehovah: “I will shake the heavens ami the earth; and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the heat lien [(A.B.V.) kingdoms of the nations] ; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother.” (Hag. 2:21,22) Totalitarianism will bow to The Theocracy.
EARTH MADE FIT TO LIVE ON
generation passeth away, and another general J tion cometh: but the earth abideth for ever.” Not the words of a fallible geologist, but of Ecclesiastes, chapter one, verse four, written under inspiration of the Creator; “God himself that formed the earth and made it, he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited.” (Isa. 45: 18) Further by the mouth of his prophet Isaiah (chapter sixty-six, verse one) the Creator says: “The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool.” “And I will make the place of my feet glorious.” —Chapter sixty, verse thirteen.
Perfect and glorious was the garden of Eden at the beginning of man’s existence. In that garden grew everything that was pleasant to the sight and good for food. (Gen. 2 9) Had the first man proved his complete devotion and obedience to his Creator, without doubt God would have shown man how to make the entire earth beautiful and glorious, because it is written in Genesis 1: 28 that God gave to man the divine mandate: “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth, and subdue it.” (Roth.) This authority implies that God would have supplied man with a proper knowledge and means to accomplish that very thing. Had perfect man followed that course, and his offspring remained in harmony with God, in the course of time all the earth would have been finished and robed m the glory and beauty
of God, and perfect man would have had something to do with it
By reason of his own wrongdoing man lost all these privileges and blessings. Approximately 1900 jears ago God’s beloved Son, Christ Jesus, as a man on earth, shed his own blood and provided redemption for believing men Jehovah God made him “heir of all things", which includes the earth. God has made him the Executive Officer to carry into operation his will, and that includes making the earth a glorious place as God’s footstool. Now he comes the second time, as a glorified Spirit divine with all power in heaven and in earth, to deliver men of good will toward God and to make such men a glorious home on earth Before the Lord will robe the earth in beauty and in the glory of God he will first destroy and completely remove the worldly structure which man’s enemy Satan and his agents have erected and which is unsightly and hideous to all who love righteousness. The great battle of Armageddon between The Theocracy and Satan’s entire organization, and which is just ahead, will clear the ground to make way for the erection of the beautiful and glorious structure to the good of God-fearing men and to the honor of God.
Clothed with power and authority to even open the graves and lift the people out of death, Jesus now comes
May 1, 1940
WATCHTOWER,
143
to regenerate obedient men of good will and make them joyful of heart At Revelation, chapter twenty-one, verses four and five, he says • “And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away. And he that sat upon the throne [The Theocracy] said, Behold, I make all things new.”
Now thorns and thistles encumber the earth, and the Devil sends an army of bugs and other pests to destroy men’s crops, but such conditions will not exist during the reign of Christ Concerning the power of the Lord then, read Isaiah 55: 13. Then the earth shall be free from the pests and will yield her increase, and the people will be glad
Today there are millions of square miles covered with burning sands where no living thing exists. If these desert lands were watered they would produce. God will see to
it that they will be watered, according to the declaration of his power at Isaiah 35: 1-7. Today the people travel oxer the desert lands and remark: “How.barren' and what a waste of land!” They will not always say that, for the Lord says: “Behold, I make all things new.” Under the Theocratic Government they will say too as now they say concerning the condition of spiritual Israel: “This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden ” (Ezek 36: 34, 35) The people of earth that live will then see God’s great handiwork and will rejoice.
God having promised to make the earth a place of glory and beauty, wherein regenerated man can live for ever, God is sure to make good that promise. By his beloved Son Christ Jesus the King he will cleanse the earth of all unrighteousness and make it a place of perfection and beauty for the good of man. Let the people learn these truths now and begin to take heed and to give honor and glory to the Almighty God, Jehovah, the Great Theocrat.
LET'
EVIDENCE OF GOD’S GUIDANCE AND BLESSING
My dear Brother Rutherford:
All the days since the Yearbook came and was read and perused I haxe thought to write to you a letter more personal than those which carry reports or ask for instructions, for I wanted to tell you of the encouragement which the report brought, and of the comfort and assurance xvhich I felt in common with the brethren. That so much service for the Theocracy has been done despite the difficulties of the time, the opposition of the Devil’s agents on earth, and of the Devil himself aided by the wicked spirits with him, is evidence of the blessing of our God and his King upon the arrangements of his organization. I thought of the joy of heart you would have in preparing and sending out the report, and I thanked him in heart and by voice for all this meant. That which is freshest to the mind often calls forth the remark, “The best yet”, but I think that is really the case with the introduction to the report, setting out clearly the Theocratic Government, its purpose and the place of the xvork in the purpose of God.
Also I had purposed to venture on your time while I told you of the encouragement got from the clear evidence of the Lord’s guidance for his people through the recent Watchtower articles, tor the remnant, and for their companions the Jonadab sheep. ■And outstanding among these the article on Lazarus, the beggar. Now, reviewing its publication, I feel that it takes a place comparable with the revelation of the true place of the “great multitude” as an earthly company, with the “Fill the earth” opening to clearer understanding, and, to go farther back, to the true interpretation of the parable of the “sheep and goats”, each of xvhich has been as events in the Lord’s instruction to his people At the moment I do not recall any one article which gives so much light on other scriptures and sets them in what is evidently their true interpretation as this on Lazarus. As the light has increased it became evident that the interpretation of the parable given so long ago was not according to the intent of Jesus’ words; so, as in other things, one waited for the clearer light sure to come. It is now clear that the story of the rich man and Lazarus was not an illustration of the widening out of the message of truth to the Gentiles, and certainly not of the restoration of the Jews to God’s favor Now its particular intent for these last days is manifest, when the rich are brought down from their high places, and ‘the needy are lifted from the dunghill’, as Hannah’s song has it. Seeing the story as a prophecy was grand, and surely that is the key to the words of Jesus It is plain now why the interpretation was
EKS
delayed: other truths needed to be known first Till we knew the true position of those who form the “rich man” class, and knew about the Jonadab brethren and the “great multitude”, the story could not give its meaning. The Roman Catholics shout out that xxe go to and get the “rabble”; which is not true, and they know they he in saying what they do; but the “beggar” class are certa.nlx’ getting their comfort, and their safety, and the prophecy is being fulfilled. I thought the connection made with Isaiah 26. 10-14 very illuminating: life is given to it.
The dogs snarl at you, and the critics and cynics sneer, and you have to bear these things, but I rejoice in the comfort of heart you get in the ministry of the Scriptures, and in realizing the blessing of the Lord on your service for him May those blessings continue for the help of those who fear him, and for his name’s sake.
With love,
Your servant in the Lord,
J. IIemery, England
RESOLUTION
We, the Lincoln Park [Mich ] company of Jehovah’s witnesses, resolve and wholeheartedly declare that we are for Jehovah’s Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus the righteous King ai d that we will absolutely refuse to even consider to read any part of any letter that some who at one time have been entrusted by the Lord with great responsibilities are circulating among the brethren for self-justification and pity. At no time will we co-operate xvith anyone that is in opposition to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government.
W’lth Christian love to you, dear Brother Rutherford, and wishing you Jehovah’s continued blessings as you boldly press the battle to its final end!
This resolution was unanimously approved by the entire company.
RESOLUTION
Dear Brethren :
We, the Aurora (Ill.) Company, Zone 1, believing the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society is the visible representative of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, declare that we are in harmony with it and against any one or group who is not We also refuse to consider letters circulated in this zone by one trying to justify his malicious actions against the Society and to gain sympathy.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
CANADIAN ACTIVITIES IN SUB-ZERO WEATHER
“Having just returned from a five weeks' trip through the western provinces of Canada, I know you will be interested in learning something of the work there and the way the witnesses carry on the service although handicapped by the extreme cold. The weather generally over the winter season in these provinces drops frequently from 10 to 40 below zero. Years ago very little work was done in the cities and rural districts during the wintertime, owing to the intense cold and the roads’ being blocked with snow, the publishers being unable to use their automobiles. The publishers, being determined to witness during this season, found a way out, and about two and a half years ago began to make use of the horse with caboose or toboggan, or sleigh. Although it was not possible to cover the ground very quickly, yet the territory was done.
“Traveling by horse and caboose is not so expensive. Practically any farmer will willingly give the horse or horses feed. It is easier witnessing this way once the publishers get to the farms, because very few persons will visit the homes under such conditions and the witnesses are made welcome and often invited to stay overnight and are supplied with food. To carry out this service effectively some publishers prepare for three or more days’ journey.
“Owing to the use of the horse, very few publishers consider stopping the service now in the wintertime because of the cold weather, and due to this method of working it is amazing to see that in spite of the winter season the publishers throughout these provinces, as well as in other parts of Canada, have increased. In January, 1940, a peak figure of publishers for the country was reached. Many pioneers yeais ago were in the habit of ceasing their work during the wintry weather, but now they continue on. In fact, in many parts of these provinces the company publishers as well as the pioneers prefer the winter season for the service to the summer.
“The back-call work under such conditions is no easy job, especially when the horse pulling a toboggan or caboose has to travel seven or more miles in heavy snow to get to the interested persons. Back-calls, however, are being made, and this work is making progress, even though it cannot be done to the extent that it is possible in the cities
“During the past nine years there has been drought in these three provinces, particularly in Saskatchewan Practically no crops have been obtained, bringing terrible poverty and extremely hard conditions to the witnesses in many districts. During the past year it is true that conditions have been a little better and there have been some crops, but so far as I could gather, what little money has been made is being used to put their cars in order and provide for gas to be used during the summertime to get around the districts. It is also worthy of note that it is this province particularly that has yielded the most interest in proportion to the population.
“There is a great increase of publishers throughout the Western provinces. There seems to be interest everywhere, and it has been reported by one zone servant that on several occasions, on being advised of interest in a district,
he found on arrival at the home of the interested that the’, were already gathered together studying The Watchtower
“There is also much interest in the district to the extreme north of the provinces. There is a new district now opened out north of the province of Alberta which is called ‘the Peace River District’, and the witness is being delivered now as far north as there are towns and camps In this Peace River district the temperature often drops to 60 or 70 degrees below zero. This district is alive with interest Many of the witnesses in these parts have come to a knowledge of the truth during the last eighteen months. At the zone assembly at Edmonton, Alberta, two pioneers traveled from this Peace River district a journey of well over *2(}<) miles. They came in an old Ford car, no heater, and were compelled to leave the window open all the way because of the frost on the windshield. The temperature on their journey must have been at least 30 degrees below zero When they arrived at the assembly they were overjoyed with the privilege of meeting with their brethren The biethren at all these assemblies were very enthusiastic and rejoiced greatly in their assembling with others of the same faith. In some districts the only way the witnesses could get to the assemblies was by digging themselves through the snowdrifts, but even this did not deter them.
“At one assembly a witness traveled in an open ng a great number of miles, and when he arrived at the assemnly his leg and foot were frozen. He showed no signs of pain but delight was written on his face, and he said he would not have missed the assembly even if it meant having both legs and feet frozen. Another witness, a pioneer, covet his rural territory on foot, and this he does even in the coldest weather. He arrived at the zone assembly pulling a small sleigh which carried his literature and all his belongings. This faithful witness has been in Kingdom service many years.
“Another pioneer reported that all his work in the rural territory is done on foot, having no means of conveyance and yet as regards funds he was not worrying, because, he stated, he had more money in his pocket now than when he started the pioneer service.
“It is true to say that practically all the service that is done by the witnesses in the Middle West provinces is accomplished only through putting forth much effort Th< witnesses have zeal, warm hearts and a loving devotion to Jehovah and determination to push forward in the servic< and sound the warning, no matter what the cost
“In the western part of British Columbia the position is somewhat different. The weather in the wintertime is generally good and the publishers can work most of tl.c time. The witness work is entered into wholeheartedly, but it is very noticeable that the severe conditions in the Middle West which have to be fought by the witnesses have dex 11 oped in them fighting qualities, and as a result the work of Jehovah is performed, no matter what obstacles lie before them. Throughout the whole of the western provinces the witnesses are joyful and very zealous for The Theocracy and it was a great joy as well as a privilege to have some part in working with these witnesses in the interests of tin Theocratic Government.”
144
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of l.fe to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and Ins active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ In glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the  world ; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peop’es of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign-, SI 50; Great Biiitvin, Australasia, and South afpica, 6s American rem't-tanccs should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Hank Draft, Canadian, British, South African and Australasian reinirt.tries should be made direct to the respective branch oilices Itemittnm cs from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn ollice, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
Butish ..................... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W2, England
Canadian ................ 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian ......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N S W, Australia
South African ................. Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in seteral languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or ndtcrsity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one rnontli A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expnes.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y , under the Act of March 3, 1819.
“LOCUST ARMY" TESTIMONY PERIOD
Summer’s opening is marked by the “Locust Army” Testimony Period, during the whole month of June. It is a movement of Jehovah's “locusts” against religion by a campaign to increase yet more the subscription list of The Watchtower. The unusual offer in effect during the campaign will operate greatly to that result, to wit, one year’s subscription for The Watchtower together with the premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covered booklet on a contribution of but one dollar, foreign countries, $1.50. This Testimony Period is the final of a three-month campaign with The Watchtower. Now is not too late to arrange for some part therein, as to territory, equipment, time, supplies, distributor’s copies, etc. If unacquainted with an organized com--pany of publishers in your locality, notify this office of your wish to get in touch with such for this Testimony. Those in foreign countries should write the branch office having supervision. The Informant (which is free) goes into greater detail on this.
THEOCRATIC CONVENTION OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
The manifest leadings of the Lord indicate that all lovers of the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God should assemble in
general convention in 1940 Columbus, Ohio, has been selected as the key city for a five-day convention of Jehovah’s witnesses The dates will be July 24-28 inc’usive. Announcement is made this early in advance in order that Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will may have ample opportunity to arrange their affairs so as to be at Columbus, Ohio, or other cities tied in Indirect wire communication and loud-speaker equipment By the Lord's grace, the president of the Watchtower Society will be in attendance in person at the key assembly in Columbus. Further details will be published later.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 16: “Instruction” (Part 4),
1-18 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1940.
Week of June 23: “Instruction” (Part 4),
19-39 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1940.
Week of June 30; “Instruction” (Part 4),
1J 40-62 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1940.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	May 15, 1940	No 10
INSTRUCTION
PART 4
"The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way."—Ps. 25: 9.
JEHOVAH is good, upright, just and true. He has provided instruction in abundance for those who desire to go in the right way. All men are born sinners, and all need instruction. Those who are of good will toward God desire instruction and are willing and anxious to be taught. Such are meek, and they seek to learn and to go in the right way. On the contrary, the proud, haughty, self-centered, who "know it all’’, refuse instruction. Modern-day religious leaders in “Christendom” are proud, haughty and scornful. They do not fear God. They spurn the instruction that is offered to them from God’s Word. Such haughtj, scornful persons are the ones who now exercise rule over the weaker ones. To them God now says: “Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem.”—Isa. 28:14.
2	The present is a day of judgment of the nations by that Mighty One, Christ Jesus, whom God has appointed to sit in judgment. It is also the time of judgment of individuals. Those persons who are of good will toward God receive instruction and by the Lord are guided in the right way in this time of judgment. The prophecy of Jehovah by Zephaniah is given that all may hear and heed the warning if they will do so. The scorners refuse to hear, while the meek gladly hear and obey.
3	In the preceding part of the prophecy of Zephaniah heretofore considered in The Watchtower Jehovah gives warning of a great and terrible day that is approaching. That prophecy was fulfilled in miniature upon Israel. But not many of the Israelites gave heed to the words from the Lord in their day. The prophecy has its final fulfillment upon “Christendom” ; and so likewise the warning is today sounded in “Christendom”, but few hear and give heed thereto.
* A brief statement of the matter considered in this issue of The Watchtower follows. Chapter two of the prophecy of Zephaniah begins with a call to the people of “Christendom”, that is, both the haughty and the meek, to gather themselves together. The haughty and disobedient class will be gathered for destruction. Those of good will toward God, who give heed
to the call, will find the place of safety. All are commanded to make a self-examination in the light of Jehovah's judgments, which were written aforetime. This examination must be done before Armageddon arrives, at which time religion and all religious organizations and all who stick to religion shall be destroyed. “Christendom” does not heed the call for self-examination and obedience to God. Therefore “Christendom” will be destroyed beyond hope of recovery.
5	Jehovah then addresses all the meek of the earth who have not resisted him or scorned his instruction, but who have lined up with God’s judgments as they have been heard and understood. All these God bids to seek him. This part of the prophecy first applies to the “remnant” of the spirit-begotten class, who because of fear of man and their holding to some things religious became negligent and failed to perform their covenant. These must be warned, and God warns them. Then the commandment of the Lord applies to those who will form the “great multitude”, and which people have been kept back from Jehovah by the influence exercised upon them by religionists. All such are commanded now to seek further instruction in meekness and to learn Jehovah's way, that is to say, the right and righteous way. Therefore God says to all such: “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.” All, then, who are thus instructed must be for The Theocratic Government and support it with zeal and joy. The self-important, haughty, self-righteous, know-it-all, will not be able to find a hiding place during the battle of the great day of God Almighty. Only those who continue to ascertain God's will to earnestly give heed thereto will thus fulfill the Lord's requirements and have hope of being hid from the great destruction that shall be wrought at Armageddon.
8	The prophecy further discloses that not alone will the religious elements be completely cleared out during Armageddon, but also the combination of creatures over whom the demons exercise control and all who worship demons, including the political and commercial elements. These religious leaders 147
148
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
are the modern-day Pharisees, and they shall be uprooted and destroyed. The religious combine, led by “Catholic Action", shall cease to function. The faithful remnant and their companions shall come forth from their place of seclusion where they rest during Armageddon and shall, after Armageddon, dispense food from God’s Word to those who worship and serve Jehovah God in spirit and in truth.
THE GATHERING
7	Jehovah has no desire for the nation that has rebelled against him or those who have forgotten him and who have done violence to his faithful servants, who support The Theocratic Government. Therefore Jehovah, by his prophet Zephaniah, says: "Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired.” (Zeph. 2:1) The three English words “gather yourselves together” translate just one Hebrew word, which word appears to be derived from the root word meaning chaff, that is, that which has become dry, such as dry straw or the chaff of straw driven by the wind. It refers or applies to that substance, such as stubble, used for burning. The prophecy uses the further words: “Gather together.” Another translation thereof throws light on the subject: “Collect your thoughts, aye, collect them.” (Rotherham) And still another: “Search yourselves through, yea, search.” (Leeser, margin) The prophet Zephaniah was directing his w.ords first to the kingdom of Judah. (Zeph. 1:1) The warning was that they might seek a place of safety from fiery destruction. Only those who would give heed to and obey could hope to be saved. The modern-day application is to “Christendom” and all in “Christendom” who would find the way of escape.
8	Further identifying the ones to whom the prophecy applies, the words are: “0 nation not desired {(margin) not desirous].” Other versions of this text are: “0 nation without desire (for repentance).” (Leeser) “0 nation depressed [(margin) without a longing] !” (Rotherham) This is exactly contrary to the expression at Psalm 84: 2: “My soul longeth . . . for the courts of the Lord.” Another rendering of Zephaniah 2:1: “0 nation that hath no shame [ (margin) that hath no longing].” (A.R.V.) “0 nation not worthy to be loved .” (Douay) “0 shameless nation.” —Margolis.
’ The ancient kingdom of Judah finds an exact counterpart in the present-day “Christendom”. Both Israel and “Christendom” agreed and professed to do the will of God, and both have proved unfaithful to God. The fulfillment of the prophecy in completion, therefore, specifically applies to the presentday religious organizations known as “Christendom”. Having spurned The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus, “Christendom” is now shameless, with
out any longing whatsoever for God, without repentance, not worthy of God’s love and not worthy of his consideration; she is fit only for destruction.
10	But within the borders of “Christendom” there are those devoted ones whom the Scriptures describe as God’s “holy nation”. Such nation is not desired by “Christendom” or any part thereof. These must hear and do hear and give heed to the warning of Jehovah. Also there are those held within the confines of “Christendom” and who are sad of heart and who sigh and cry because of the abominations committed by “Christendom”. (Ezek. 9: 4) The religious leaders of “Christendom”, and political and commercial allies, have no desire for the individuals within their borders who disapprove of “Christendom’s” actions and the many abominations committed in “Christendom”. Those persons in “Christendom” who are of good will toward God hear the warning from Jehovah, but receive it sincerely. They need to search themselves and to reason out the matter in the light of God’s Word and come to a proper conclusion. Hence they are called upon to search their thoughts and gather themselves together. Jehovah, through Christ Jesus, who now sits in judgment of all, provides the help for all that hear the Word of God and give heed thereto. The opponents of The Theocratic Government, designated “the goats”, scorn the Word of Jehovah and do violence to those who serve Jehovah and his King. The Lord’s “other sheep” hear and gladly render support to The Theocracy and do good unto those who love, praise and serve the Almighty. The prophecy, therefore, takes in all, and all are commanded to hear what Jehovah has to say from Zion. All have need to give serious consideration to the commandments of the Lord and to examine themselves in the light of revealed truth and meekly seek the righteous way.
"Why is the prophecy now having fulfillment in completeness? Why should the nations and individuals hear and give consideration to Jehovah’s words, as set forth in the prophecy? When must the selfexamination and the gathering together take place? Jehovah, by his prophet, answers: “Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord’s anger come upon you.” —Zeph. 2: 2.
12	In chapter one of Zephaniah’s prophecy God's decree is summed up. There Jehovah makes known his definite purpose of wiping out unfaithful Judah and Jerusalem. His purpose was carried out or fulfilled in miniature upon Judah and Jerusalem. The prophecy was recorded, and the meaning thereof is now made known for the benefit of those on the earth at the time when God, speaking from the temple, commands all to keep silent and hear. (Hab. 2: 20) It is
May 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
14!)
“Christendom” and all those within the borders of “Christendom” that are commanded to hear, because the decree of Jehovah is about to be executed. The division is taking place, to be followed quickly by the destruction of the one and the preservation of the other class.
” The words of the prophecy command that this consideration must be given “before the day pass as the chaff”. That clearly shows that the opportunity to gather together and consider the matter is brief and passes swiftly by, like the chaff driven by the strong winds. Privileges wasted and let to slip by unused are gone, and now what is to be done to buy back time or recover from such lost opportunities must be done quickly. There is no time to waste. Those who have walked in obedience to God, having been diligent to hear and to obey his commandments, are strongly contrasted with those who have been negligent, indifferent, and who have failed to take advantage of opportunities to show their love for God and his kingdom. The faithful delight in the law of God and hasten to do his will. (Ps. 1:1-4) Now the final warning is given, and that which is found worthless, like chaff, is passing rapidly away to complete destruction at Armageddon.
14	The warning must be heard and obeyed now, “before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you.” According to Young’s version of this part of the text: “While yet not come in upon you doth the heat of the anger of Jehovah.” That means, before the violent expression of Jehovah’s hot anger, that is, “his strange act,” at the battle of the great day of God Almighty. All the nations are in danger of the coming day of God’s hot anger. “Christendom” is particularly pointed out and the warning specifically given to her. All who have agreed to do the will of God are included within the commandment of the Lord to hear and to obey.
15	Further emphasizing the need of quick consideration and action, Jehovah by his prophet says: “Before the day of the Lord’s anger come upon you.” God permitted Nineveh to have forty days in which to repent. (Jonah 3:4) God gave warning for 120 years preceding the great deluge. (Gen. 6: 3) Counting from the thirteenth year of Josiah’s reign, in which Jehovah raised up Jeremiah to prophesy, God allowed forty years before he destroyed Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, whom He used as his servant. (Jer. 25 : 3; Hzek. 4: 6-8) It was forty years from the beginning of the preaching by Jesus until the second destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans took place. (Luke 21: 20-24) The day of preparation for Armageddon has been in progress for some time. There is now a short period of grace until the battle of God Almighty, and which time brings all creation to the greatest climax ever known. God has shortened the
day of tribulation and afforded time and opportunity for his warning to be sounded (Matt. 24: 21, 22), and all the Scriptures and all the physical facts relating thereto clearly indicate that the final conflict at Armageddon is very near. “Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation." (2 Cor. 6:2) When the day of Jehovah’s anger m all its fierceness breaks, then it will be too late to flee to the place of safety, and therefore too late to give consideration to the warning God sends to the people by and through his prophet Zephaniah. Armageddon is a time of destruction, and not a time to begin to hear and obey the commandments of the Lord. There will then be no escape for those who have disregarded the warning of Jehovah.
” A striking example is this: King Zedekiah was warned, and he held out against Jehovah’s warning which was time and again announced to him by the prophet Jeremiah; and he continued to hold out until the Chaldeans broke into Jerusalem. Then Zedekiah tried to escape by night through the king's garden, but he failed. He was overtaken by the executioner, bound securely, his eyes were put out, and he was carried out, exiled, and died in Babylon, lie had waited too long. (2 Ki. 25: 3-7) When Armageddon breaks there will be no further hope of finding the way of escape. All who then begin to flee will find that they have waited too long.
THE MEEK
1	T Among the religious organizations there are two classes, one made up of the clergy and the principal of their flocks, and who are entirely devoted to carrying out the schemes of the rulers of the nations of the earth. They have no regard for God's kingdom, but are pushing human schemes; and that is pai ticu-larly true with reference to the Hierarchy toda\. All of these are under the influence and power of the demons. The other class among religionists are those men and women who have been led to believe that it is necessary for them to hold on to religion and follow religious leaders in order to be saved. At the same time these sincere ones are thoroughly disgusted and are greatly grieved by reason of the abominable acts committed by the religionists, the leaders and the principal of their flock. They sigh and cry because of such condition. The class first above described are arrogant, haughty and cruel. That class is commanded by the Lord to gather themselves together for the slaughter at Armageddon.
18	The other class above mentioned hear the warning and flee from the wrath of God, which is about to befall “Christendom”. They desire to know the truth, and yet they have been kept in prison by the religious leaders. Now the time is here when all such sincere persons who desire to know the truth must consider
130
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the matter, must inform themselves, and must gather themselves together unto the Lord, and for this purpose Jehovah sends his witnesses to them with the message of The Theocratic Government.
19	In the prophecy Jehovah now addresses that class of persons who have desired to know the Lord, and who have a desire for righteousness and truth, that is, the meek and lowly ones. “Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness; it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.” (Zeph. 2: 3) The meek here addressed must flee from religion and hence come out from the Devil’s organization and do so before Armageddon begins. They seek the Lord in troublesome times and are the ones that ‘come out of great tribulation’, which tribulation is now upon all the nations of the earth. (Rev. 7:14) This is the time for those to flee to the place of safety. Such persons of good will toward God, and who have a desire for the truth, come out from amongst the religionists and out from all the nations and away from them that have turned back from following the Lord and from those who “have not sought the Lord nor inquired after him”. (Zeph. 1: 6, R.V.) The Lord is not in the religious systems, and this is clearly proved by the language of the prophecy. The clergy have entirely failed to serve God, and they have led their parishioners away from God and his kingdom. They have not learned of the kingdom and have failed to tell the people about God’s kingdom. They have turned the people entirely away from God and put them under the control of the demons.
20	Through his prophet God announced his rule which applies to all who sincerely desire to know and to receive the truth and to serve Jehovah. This rule is set forth as follows: “And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. And I will be found of you, saith the Lord; and I will turn away your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith the Lord; and I will bring you again into the place whence I caused you to be carried away captive.”—Jer. 29:13,14.
21	In this present day prophecy applies in completeness. Who, then, in this time of great distress will have an understanding of God’s purpose? Certainly not the haughty, or cruel and wicked ones. This is the time of judgment of the nations by Christ Jesus, and those who hold to religion or demonism are in darkness and cannot understand. “Evil men understand not judgment; but they that seek the Lord understand all things.” (Prov. 28:5) But the meek, that is, those who are anxious to be taught, will now be diligent to seek the Lord and by him will be properly instructed. “When thou saidst, Seek ye
my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.”—Ps. 27 : 8.
22	Who are the meek? The meek are those who sincerely desire to be taught righteousness and who are anxious to walk in the right way. They must be meek, as Moses was meek, and cry unto the Lord for help. (Num. 12:1-3) The meek will be diligent to seek knowledge and understanding and to bo guided by the Lord’s word, and will not be resisting the Lord’s instruction. (Ps. 25: 9) They will be not only willing, but glad to know of the good news concerning The Theocratic Government. (Isa. 61:1) That means to have a keen desire to be beautified by the Lord’s salvation, as it is written: “For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people; he will beautify the meek with salvation.”—Ps. 149: 4.
23	Why do the meek seek Jehovah now’ They are depressed and made sorrowful because of the many abominations committed in the earth by tho'-e who blaspheme God’s name and who at the same time claim to serve God. These meek ones desire to si e righteousness which comes only from the Loi d : “The Lord lifteth up the meek; he ca-teth the wicked down to the ground.” (Ps. 147: 6) None but the meek-wili now receive satisfaction and joy - "The meek shall eat and be satisfied; they shall piai«e the Loid that seek him; your heart shall live for ex er.”— Ps. 22:26.
24	This is the day in which Christ Jesus, the great Judge, has before him the nations, and he is judging both the wicked and the righteous. The righteous are those who are poor in spirit and are anxious to learn Concerning them it is written: “But xxith righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth ; and he shall smite the eart h with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of Ins lips shall he slay the wicked.” (Isa 11:4) As tlm meek seek the Lord their joy increases - "The ine-k also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the pom among men shall rejoice in the Holy One ol Israel ’ —Isa. 29:19.	’
25	Those who begin to learn of Jehovah and his purposes and who obey him as the truth is revealed unto them are the meek ones. Those who are of good will toward God, and who receive instruction.
discern that this is the day of judgment by the Lord. “The humble shall see this, and be glad; i”’d your heart shall live that seek God. For the Lord hoareth the poor, and despiseth not his prisoners.”—Ps. 69: 32, 33.
26	The “remnant”, that is, the anointed of God, must now be meek and continue in meekness ami in righteousness; and concerning such it is written: “But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.”—1N. 37: 11.
May 15,1940
WATCHTOWER.
151
2’ Jehovah God has given Christ Jesus the earth and the fullness thereof. Those who are with him as members of “his body” shall inherit the earth. The people of good will who form the “great multitude” shall abide in the earth forever under the complete supervision of Christ Jesus the Lord. At the Red sea God performed a great miracle when he executed his judgment upon the Egyptians, and which pictured the judgment of the Lord from heaven, now being announced and which shall be executed at Armageddon upon all the world. Concerning this it is written: “Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still, when God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.” (Ps. 76:8,9) At that time those who seek meekness shall be delivered.
CONDITIONED
28 A condition precedent to receiving the Lord’s guidance and blessing is that one must be willing to serve the Lord and he must not resist Jehovah. He must gladly submit to the Lord’s judgments written long ago, and which judgments are now being pronounced. Those who seek meekness and find it must be the ones who are anxious to do the will of God. “All ye meek of the earth, which have wrought [worked, practiced or pursued a course of action in harmony with] his judgment.” They hear the truth and then bring themselves into line with God’s judgment against demonism, that is, against all manner of religion and religious practices. They declare themselves on the side of The Theocratic Government. This must be done by those of good will before receiving God's favor. The same rule applies to those of the anointed and also to those who will form the "great multitude”. They must desire to be on the Lord’s side. God’s Word cannot be forced upon anyone, and none will receive it until he desires a better condition than that which he has previously enjoyed.
20	The judgment of the Lord began in 1918, when Jesus Christ came to the temple of Jehovah, and it was only after seeking to conform themselves to the judgment of the Lord that the remnant began to see that the name of Jehovah is of greatest importance. Previous to 1925 the consecrated in general had been looking forward to their individual exaltation. But desiring to learn, they found that the most important thing is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. By the year 1929 the faithful anointed ones had been permitted to have some part in pouring out upon “Christendom” the seven “vials” or judgments of God which are described at Revelation, chapters fifteen and sixteen. They had been used of the Lord in doing something that they did not then understand, and he used them because they were anxious and willing to do his will. From that time on to the present day Jehovah
has continued to increase his blessings upon the remnant, that is, the anointed ones who have continued to faithfully serve Jehovah and his King. The-e faithful anointed ones are identified in the Scriptures as singing praises to the Lord Jehovah, giving glory to his name, after they have been diligent in seeking meekness and righteousness and have been enlightened of the Lord; and to them the following scripture applies: “Who shall not fear thee, 0 Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy; for all nations [that is, the great multitude, that survives Armageddon] shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.”—Rev. 15: 4.
RIGHTEOUSNESS
80	All who would have God’s approval are commanded to “seek righteousness”. They must not be like the Pharisees, the “elective elders”, and others of like spirit, who stand upon their own righteousness and who try to justify themselves. (Luke 16: 15 ; Ps. 143: 2) Those who seek righteousness must gladly come into line with the justification of God’s organization. They must be diligent to know and to do the will of God. (Isa. 60:17) They must obey Jehovah’s commandments and put forth their best endeavors to ‘turn others to righteousness’. (Dan. 12:3) They must be lovers of righteousness and haters of lawlessness. (Ps. 45:7) They must not fail to speak the truth and be fearless and diligent in telling the message of God. “He that speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousness; but a false witness deceit.” (Prov. 12:17) “The righteous considereth the cau>e of the poor [the people of good will toward God] ; but the wicked regardeth not to know it.” (Prov. 29:7) “Light is sown for the righteous.” (Ps. 97:11) Those who are diligent to do the will of God walk in the light and find life.—Prov. 21: 21; Hos. 14-9.
81	“Seek meekness”; that is to say, be anxious and diligent to learn what God is now doing. Christ Jesus defends and protects those who seek meekness and who are therefore anxious to be guided in the right way. (Ps. 45: 4) The following texts apply to all who are diligently obeying the Lord and following his instructions which come from him through his organization: “My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation; I will pay my vows before them that fear him. The meek shall eat [what Jehovah provides] and be satisfied [not complaining] ; they shall praise the Lord that seek him; your heart shall live for ever.”—Ps. 22: 25, 26.
82	These must be willing to follow organization instructions and not try to run ahead of the Lord and do the work of the Lord in their own way. The following texts also apply: “Wherefore putting away all filthiness and overflowing of wickedness [malice (margin)], receive with meekness the implanted
152
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
[inborn (margin)] word, which is able to save your souls.” (Jas. 1:21, R.V.) “But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptible apparel of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. But sanctify in your hearts Christ as Lord; being ready always to give answer to every man that asketh you a reason concerning the hope that is in you, yet with meekness and fear.”—1 Pet. 3:4,15, A.R.V.
33 Meekness is the very opposite of pride or selfimportance or the manifestation of that “know-it-all” spirit. One who finds fault with others, and particularly who objects to having organization instructions given to him or called to his attention, is proud, selfimportant, and not meek: “Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly [meek], than to divide the spoil with the proud.”—Prov. 16:19.
31 “Christendom” is not meek, but scorns the instructions that come from God. When the Lord’s Word rebukes “Christendom”, the clergy, instead of being properly exercised thereby, have their “religious susceptibilities shocked” and resent the Lord’s message and persecute those who bring to their attention the judgments of the Lord.
33 Jehovah now commands that those of good will hasten to seek meekness and to seek righteousness. Why? “It may be [ (Hebrew) Who knows whether or not] ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger”; that is to say, there is no other way of escape to a safe hiding place, and if one will comply with the divine rule he may be led into that place of safety.
36 God’s enemies try to hide themselves, and so they say: “When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.” (Isa. 28:15) The religious leaders of the Hierarchy and others will be sorely disappointed when Armageddon begins. God foretold what shall be their condition then: “In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles, and to the bats; to go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.”—Isa. 2: 20, 21.
31	The Vatican, the headquarters of the Hierarchy, the big politicians and the commercial giants, and all the principal ones in the flock of the religionists, have sought to fortify themselves against the evil day. They have heaped up earthly treasure for the day of God’s wrath. (Jas. 5:1-3) At the time of Armageddon their earthly riches will do them no good. The Lord tells them what shall come to pass upon all who have taken the selfish and disobedient course: “For, behold, the days are coming, in the which they
shall say, Blessed are the barren ; and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us. For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?” (Luke 23: 29-31) “The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed; the thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars; and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us.” (Hos. 10: 8) “And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains [earthly organizations] ; and said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand ?" —Rev. 6:15-17.
33	Their human fortifications will quickly crumble and all human hide-outs will be entirely in vain: “Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? saith the Lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord.” (Jer. 23:24) A vision of God’s wrath upon the enemy who try to hide in their holes was given to his prophet who wrote these  words: “I saw the Lord standing upon the altar; and he said, Smite the lintel of the door, that the posts may shake; and cut them in the head, all of them; and I will slay the last of them with the sword; he that fleeth of them shall not flee away [successfully], and he that escapeth of them shall not be delivered [by flight]. Though they dig into hell [dark holes in the ground], thence shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down.”—Amos 9: 1-4.
38	God provides the only place of safety, and the prudent ones recognize this and pray: "Keep me as the apple of the eye; hide me under the shadow of thy wings, from the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies who compass me about.” (Ps. 17: 8, 9) “For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a rock.” (Ps. 27:5) “Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man ; thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.” (Ps. 31: 20) “I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever; I will trust in the covert of thy wings. Selah.” (Ps. 61:4) “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.” (Ps. 91:1) These precious promises from the Lord serve as a guide now, and those who obey God’s commandments may be assured that they will be led into the only place of safety.
May 15,1940
2FKe WATCHTOWER,
153
“HID”
40	‘Being hid,’ within the meaning of the prophecy, is to be hid from destruction by Jehovah’s commissioned Executioner, who will execute the wicked at Armageddon. A type of such hiding was that of Noah and his family, who were hidden in the ark. “The Lord shut [them] in.” (Gen. 7:16) Jeremiah was hid; so were Baruch, Ebed-melech, and the Rechabites, the sons of Jonadab, at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, and this foreshadowed or foretold how the faithful, obedient ones will be hid at Armageddon.—Jer. 39: 8-14; 45:1-5; 39:15-18; 35:16-19.
41	The name Zephaniah means “hidden of Jehovah”, both as a treasure and as against his enemies. These prophetic pictures foretell how the faithful ones, who shall compose the “great multitude”, will be hidden and shielded at Armageddon.
42	Another striking example is that of Rahab, who hid the spies from their Canaanite enemies. The modern-day Rahab class are those called “Jonadabs”, who hide now the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses from their enemies, and at Armageddon the Rahab class, or faithful Jonadabs, shall be hid as she was hid from the enemy at the fall of Jericho. Rahab and the members of her house safely remained in the hiding place and were untouched when Jericho fell. —Josh. 2: 4,17-21; Josh. 6: 22-25.
4S	Though some individuals, like Jonathan at the battle of Gilboa, may die at the hands of the enemy at the battle of Armageddon and die because they persist in maintaining their integrity toward God, yet they will not perish, but will receive life in the resurrection. The “great multitude” as a class will survive at Armageddon, although some individuals may die at the hands of the enemy. The Lord’s anger or wrath, there executed by Christ Jesus, will not come upon those who are thus hidden. Jehovah’s anger has now been turned away from the remnant. (Isa. 12:1) And his anger will be turned away from those of the “great multitude” who comply with his commandments. (Rev. 7:14-17) It is therefore imperative for all to seek meekness and seek righteousness before Armageddon begins and to continue faithful and true to The Theocracy if they would find a place of safety.
ENEMIES
44	The cities of the Philistines pictured chiefly the religious organization of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. They inhabited the land of Philistia along the seacoast of the Mediterranean. They seized that territory and held it in violation of God’s commandment, even as the religionists wrongfully claim to be the ones who serve God at the present time.
45	There will be no place of safety for the enemies of God when Armageddon begins: “For Gaza shall
be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation; they shall drive out Ashdod at the noonday, and Ekron shall be rooted up.” (Zeph. 2:4) The Philistines were the mortal enemies of God’s typical people, and the city of Gaza was a Philistine stronghold from which Samson escaped, carrying away the gate thereof. (Judg. 16:1-3) The stronghold of “Christendom”, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, which now claims to be a hiding place for the religionists and allies, cannot hide anyone from God’s wrath. Ashkelon, another city of the Philistines, also picturing the organization of “Christendom”, will be completely ruined by the Lord at Armageddon, and none of the enemy shall be hid therefrom. The cities of the Philistines along the seacoast pictured the organization of “Christendom” and allies, and concerning these the words of the prophet apply, to wit: “At the noonday [destruction comes upon the enemy].” That means, at the time when the execution of God’s wrath will be most plainly observed and the enemy will see that it is the hand of God upon them.
46	In support of the foregoing the following prophetic texts refer to the war against “Christendom”: “Prepare ye war against her [organization of Satan and ‘Christendom’]; arise, and let us go up at noon.” (Jer. 6: 4) “Their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas; I have brought upon them, against the mother of the young men, a spoiler at noonday; I have caused him to fall upon it suddenly, and terrors upon the city.”—Jer. 15: 8.
47	The word “mother” in this last-quoted text means the old “harlot”, the religious element of Satan’s organization, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and her “young men” are strong, vigorous supporters of religion, including the political and commercial elements. At the height of Armageddon the earthly organization of the enemy shall be completely ruined, and they shall know that the hand of God has done it: “The destruction that wasteth at noonday.” (Ps. 91: 6) As to those who continue faithful to Jehovah, and as contrasted with the fate of the enemy, the Lord says: “The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.”—Deut. 33: 27.
4* The adherents of the religionists, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the modern-day Ash-dodites, shall be destroyed. The Lord’s judgment executed upon Babylon, the old “harlot”, and her children will be far worse than the affliction of emerods with which he smote the Philistines. (1 Sam. 5: 6, 9,12) None of the enemy will find a hiding place in that day of the Lord’s wrath. What befell the combined Philistine organizations pictures what shall fall upon the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and her allies, and particularly upon the totalitarian mon
154
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
strosity, which the modern-day Philistines have brought forth to rule the world. Then the earthly organization shall be slain, even as David slew Goliath, the giant monster of the Philistines.
49	The Philistine cities controlled all the people along the coast of the Mediterranean sea, in that part of the land, which properly belonged to the Israelites. Those on the seacoast carried on a commercial business upon the sea, picturing those who use religion today to further their commerce or traffic. The following texts apply to all such at Armageddon: “Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the Cherethites! the word of the Lord is against you; 0 Canaan, the land of the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.’'— Zeph. 2: 5.
50	This means that the commercial religionists will find no protection in the day of Armageddon. They shall not be hid from God’s anger. Their wealth and influence and power amongst men will avail them nothing. “The nation of the Cherethites” means the men or organizations of violence, that is to say, those of the world who use religion and the “absolution” which they receive from the religionists, to further carry on their schemes of robbery and violence. These look to the religious leaders to save them, but the religious leaders will not be able to help them at all. The Cherethites, therefore, picture those supporters of the Roman Catholic organization in politics, in commerce, and the “strong-arm squad”, the military class, and others who use religion for their selfish purpose and who act at the bidding of the Hierarchy, and who willingly mistreat and heap violence upon the witnesses of Jehovah and their companions, and who do so at the instance of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
51	The “Catholic population” is divided into two classes. One class practices the Catholic religion solely for what material benefit they hope to receive therefrom; and this includes the political and commercial men who rely upon religion to protect them in their unrighteous schemes. The second class are those sincere persons who are led to believe that the Catholic religion is the only means for their salvation. This latter class of sincere persons, upon hearing the truth and giving heed thereto, will flee from religion before Armageddon begins, and then if they faithfully obey God’s commandments they have the promise of finding a place of safety in the day of God’s wrath at the battle of Armageddon. This division between Catholics is now progressing, and many sincere ones are fleeing from that religious organization and are hurrying to God’s organization under Christ Jesus. They see that religion is a snare and a racket and that the place of safety is with the Lord.
COMPLETE DESTRUCTION
!2 Concerning all who hold to or support religion for selfish reasons the Lord says: “The word of the Lord is against you.” (Zeph. 2:5) It is a word of woe from Jehovah against such and is certain to be carried out. Another rendering of this text: “The word of Jehovah is against you, 0 Canaan, the land of the Philistines.” (A.R.P.) The word “Canaan” came to be understood as “merchant”, or commercial men, who worship their demon-god Dagon. They were venomous persecutors of the Israelites. Therefore they pictured those who follow demon religion for gain and who persecute the faithful followers of Christ Jesus. None of such will find a hiding place at the time of Armageddon.
5S The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the chief amongst religious organizations, claims that the “Catholic population” numbers approximately 300 million. The chief ones of the organization consist of the Hierarchy of Authority, and of the principal ones of the Catholic flock who use the Catholic religion for personal gain and who hold in subjection and control many of the lower people. The Hierarchy has now brought forth the giant monstrosity, the totalitarian rule or form of government, which regiments and controls the people. This modern-day monstrosity includes religious, political, commercial and military elements. It includes individuals which go to make up the present-day “inhabitants” of that godless, demon-controlled system, and concerning all of which Jehovah, by his prophet, says: “I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.” (Vs. 5) It has long been the boast of the Roman Catholic organization that “the gates of hell shall not prevail against us”. At Armageddon that boast shall end for ever and every vestige of that religious organization shall perish, so that “there shall be no inhabitant” thereof throughout the whole earth. “Catholic Action” will perish for ever. Not one part of that organization shall find a hiding place in the day of God’s wrath.
BLESSINGS FOR THE OBEDIENT
54	The enemies of The Theocracy being cleared out at Armageddon, as stated in verse five of the prophecy, there will be a complete change of conditions, and then the faithful servants of God shall come into possession of things which the enemy have previously occupied wrongfully: “And the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds, and folds for flocks.” (Zeph. 2:6) Another rendering of this text is: “And the sea-coast shall be pastures, with cottages.” (A.R.7.) This part of the prophecy shows that the survivors of Armageddon will be those, and those only, who have taken their stand on the side of The Theocratic Government before Armaged
THE WATCHTOWER
loo
May 15,1940
don begins. These will include the ‘"remnant” and those who will compose the “great multitude”. The religious element and supporters at the present time fleece the flock of God and rule the people with an iron hand. At Armageddon that unrighteous action shall cease for ever. (Ezek. 34:2-10) Dictators and religionists will be for ever disposed of and then the survivors of Armageddon will feed God’s flock: “And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the Lord have spoken it.”—Ezek. 34: 23, 24.
55	The “flocks” of the Lord are the "other sheep”, to whom Jesus says: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.”—Matt. 25:34-40; John 10: 16.
50	True Judeans are those who praise and serve Jehovah and his King. When the tribe of Judah was assigned its territory by Jehovah its boundaries took in the seacoast then occupied by the Philistines and within which territory were the cities of Ekron, Ashdod, and Gaza. (Josh. 15:1-47) In the antitype the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their religious organizations claim the right to rule the world, and thus occupy the territory that does not belong to them. In the language of God’s Word, ‘they stand in the place where they ought not to stand,’ and are an “abomination of desolation”. (Mark 13:14) Jehovah through Christ Jesus will completely oust all of them. Then the meek 'Judeans’, that is, those who truly serve and praise Jehovah, will inherit the earth. “But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.” (Ps. 37:11) “Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth.”—Matt. 5: 5.
57	The earth was created by Almighty God as a permanent place to be occupied by righteous men. (Isa. 45:12,18) The enemy having been completely destroyed at Armageddon and thereby completely deprived of its possession, then the righteous ones, the meek, shall come into their own: “And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah; they shall feed thereupon ; in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening; for the Lord their God shall visit them, and turn away their captivity.”-Zeph. 2:7.
58	Armageddon having ended, everlasting peace shall reign. The faithful “princes” will then be on the earth. (Ps. 45:16; Isa. 32:1) Those who have fled to the “city of refuge” will be there.
59	At the present time the “remnant of her seed”, that is, the faithful servants of God now on earth, are dispensing the spiritual food from the Lord’s
table to his “other sheep”. Says the prophet: “They shall feed.” This feeding applies specifically after Armageddon has ended. There appears some evidence that should give much joy both to the remnant and to the great multitude. It is the faithful Judeans, “the remnant of the house of Judah,” that do the feeding. This is proof at least that part of the faithful, spirit-begotten “remnant” ones will survive Armageddon and for a time thereafter will continue to dispense food from the Lord’s table to those of the “great multitude”, and in this they will, no doubt, act in connection with the faithful “princes” on the earth. That will be a joyful and happy organization on earth. Some of the royal family, together with the princes of the earth, will be participating in the work of rendering aid to the “great multitude”, all to the praise of the Great theochat and his government of righteousness, resting upon the shoulders of Christ the King.
80	The prophecy says: 'They shall feed thereupon, lying down in the evening.’ Ashkelon was the city where Samson spoiled the Philistines. (Judg. 14: 19) The modern-day Philistines having been destroyed, their house shall be completely desolated. (Zeph. 2 4 ) No more will there be any thieves and racketeers. The cities once occupied and controlled by the religious, political and commercial oppressors will be for ever gone, and then, as stated by the prophet, the faithful of God shall “lie down in the evening”. That would clearly indicate peace and rest and safety. No more shall they fear the beastly giants, like Goliath, the antitype of whom is the monstrosity, the totalitarian rulers. The people of good will who then are obedient to God’s command shall receive his blessings These are the ones that have sought righteousness and meekness and who may “be hid”, and then they shall dwell in peace and security forever on the earth.
01 The further words of the prophet are: "For the Lord their God shall visit them, and turn away their captivity.” The faithful, spirit-begotten ones were in captivity to Babylon, that is, the Devil’s religious organization, and were continuously subjected to the vicious assaults of the Devil and his agents. In 1918 Jehovah visited his people by sending Christ Jesus to the temple, who then turned away their captivity. Later, at Armageddon, all those who faithfully have served Jehovah shall be completely delivered. Into the mouth of his people Jehovah has put this truth : “Remember me, 0 Lord, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people; 0 visit me with thy salvation ; that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.” (Ps. 106:4,5) This prayer will have been fully answered at the end of Armageddon. The faithful servants of Jehovah now
136
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
by faith have sought deliverance or salvation, and they sing: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” —Ps. 13: 5.
62 Jehovah relieved Joh from captivity by causing the Devil’s assault upon him to cease. (Job 42:10) At Armageddon Jehovah will fully deliver all who have faithfully served him from those who have persecuted them. While the servants of Satan are now being gathered together for destruction the gathering of Jehovah’s faithful servants is also taking place for their salvation. All who take their stand on the side of The Theocratic Government and continue to serve the great Theocracy, under Christ Jesus, shall be fully and completely delivered at Armageddon.
ss It appears from the prophecy of Zephaniah that “Christendom”, that is, those people who practice what they have called “the Christian religion”, will first be disposed of at Armageddon and then God’s
faithful servants will be fully delivered from them. The clearing out of all who have opposed and who continue to oppose must proceed until every enemy is destroyed. Jehovah’s purpose is to make the earth a fit place in which faithful human creatures shall remain. Those who continue in righteousness shall abide in the earth forever. Jehovah’s purpose shall be fully performed, and therefore the destruction of the wicked will result in cleansing the earth and thereafter it shall be filled, according to God’s purpose, with a righteous race of people. In this part of the prophecy God therefore shows the course and the end of those who oppose his government, and the right way for those who are of good will toward him, and what shall be their happy condition following Armageddon. The prophecy further discloses that which shall come upon every part of earth’s organization.
{To be continued)
FIRST REFUGEE FOR THEOCRACY
THE land from which he fled was a place of totalitarian rule, religion, commercialism, militarism, and aggression, according to the earliest records describing the land of the Chaldees, or Chaldea. For the sins thereof the inspired prophet says: “And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.” (Isaiah 13:19) Babylon, or Babel, in the plains of Shinar, was the beginning of the kingdom of Nimrod, the wanton slayer of men and beasts. (Genesis 10-8-10) The country was called “the land of Nimrod”. Concerning the rapacity of the inhabitants thereof the servant of Job of the land of Uz says: “The Chaldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.” (Job 1:17) From Babylon, the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency, c-ame the one who wrecked the temple at Jerusalem and took “the vessels of the house of God, which he carried into the land of Shinar, to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure house of his god”.-Daniel 1:2,1.
Disregarding the several traditions as to the cause of the flight of the refugee, such as the tradition that “for [his] doctrines, when the Chaldeans and other people of Mesopotamia raised a tumult against him, he thought fit to leave that country”, the inspired historian writes: “Thou art the Lord the God, who didst choose Abram, and brought-est him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of Abraham.” “By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles [tents] with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise: for he looked for a city [The Theocracy] which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.”—Nehemiah 9:7; Hebrews 11:8-10.
It was 350 years after the flood dried up that Noah died, and during that time the descendants of Noah increased rapidly. (Gen. 9:28, 29) Almost all the people had by that time fallen under the influence and control of “the prince of this world”, Satan the Devil, and the other devils or demons. Two years after the death of Noah Abraham was born. Abraham was then residing in the land of Ur of the Chaldees, under the domination of Babylon He loved and served the Almighty God, Jehovah. Abraham, whom God later called His “friend”, fled from the political, religious government of Babylon, hoping for the Theocratic Government, which God promised to come in the then far distant future. When Abraham was seventy-five years old, at the command of Almighty God he moved into a foreign land, Canaan. As recorded at Genesis 12:1-5: “Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house, unto a land that I will shew thee; and I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing: and I will bless them that bless thee, and eurse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. So Abram departed, as the Lord had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran [where they had temporarily stopped after leaving Ur of the Chaldees]. And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother’s son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.”
Abraham went to Canaan to be a witness for Jehovah. Since Adam’s rebellion at Eden God has had some faithful witnesses on the earth, although very few in number, compared with earth’s population. God began to make known that no man would have his blessing unless that man had faith in God and obeyed his commandments, and so He began to preach or proclaim the good news or gospel unto
May 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
157
Abraham. The Scriptures, at Galatians 3:8,9, declare: “'And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before [hand] the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.”
When Abram was ninety-nine years old God appeared unto him and said: “I am the Almighty God: walk before me, and be thou perfect. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham [meaning ‘father of a multitude’] ; for a father of many nations have I made thee. And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.”—Gen. 17:1, 5-8.
“And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac; and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.” (Gen. 17:19) When Sarah had passed the time according to women, and Abraham was one hundred years old, God counteracted these seemingly unfavorable conditions and caused Sarah to bear a son; and he was named Isaac. Thereafter the Lord made the promise to Abraham: “In Isaac shall thy seed be called.” (Gen 21 • 1,12) That Isaac foreshadowed the King of Jehovah’s Theocracy, the real Seed of the promise, through whom the blessings must come to men of good will, is clearly stated by the divine record at Galatians 3:16: “Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. lie saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.”
At this point God made a living picture which foreshadowed the unfolding of a part of his purpose. In this living motion picture Abraham as father was used to represent God the Father, while Isaac, Abraham’s only son by Sarah, was used to represent the only begotten and beloved Son of God, who was afterwards called by the name of Jesus. In making this picture the Lord God directed Abraham to take Isaac, his only son, whom he loved dearly and in whom he had all his hopes centered, and to go to Mount Moriah and there offer up his son as a burnt offering. Because God had told Abraham that “in Isaac shall thy seed be called” and that the blessings shall come through him, this was a crucial test, to offer up as a sacrifice this only son. In obedience to the Lord’s command, Abraham provided wood for the altar, fire, and a knife; and with this provision he and his son Isaac journeyed to Mount Moriah. Abraham built the altar, laid the wood in order, bound his son Isaac and laid him on the altar upon the wood, and then stretched forth his hand and took the knife to slay his son. In another instant the knife would fall and his son would be dead! God’s purpose here was to test and prove Abraham’s faith. Abraham having now met the test, the Lord God arrested the hand that would have slain the son. The record reads:
“And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heav
en, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said. Here am I. And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fcarcst God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, from me. And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns, and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son. And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh [that is, Jehovah will see, or, provide] : as it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen [ (Am. Rev. Ver.) In the mount of Jehovah it shall be provided]. And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time, and said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord; for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son; that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore, and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed because thou hast obeyed my voice.”—Genesis 22: 11-18.
The prophetic shadow made by this living motion picture was afterwards carried out in every particular As stated at John 3: 16, 17,18, by the Greater Isaac himself “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved. He that believeth on him is not condemned,” Thus Abraham’s offering of Isaac upon the altar foreshadowed that the Son of God would be offered as a great sacrifice to provide a sin-offering for the benefit of such of the world as believe on him as Jehovah’s provision, to the end that in God’s due time the believers out of “all the nations of the earth” might be delivered from the enemy, from his wicked influence and from his wrongful acts which had brought death upon the human race. Abraham did not understand what the picture in which he was an actor meant. With him it was purely a matter of faith. God commanded him what to do, and that he did. It was a test of Abraham’s faith, but he trustingly met the test and (God rewarded his faith.
Afterwards Rebecca became the wife of Isaac, and Rebecca was barren. Then Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife, and Rebecca conceived. Twin sons were born and were named Esau and Jacob. God made it clear that Jacob should succeed to the promise, and that through him should the Seed for the blessing of mankind come. Like a refugee, Abraham “became a sojourner in the land of promise, as in a land not his own, dwelling in tents, with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise”. They might have returned to Ur of the Chaldees; but not so. Of the faithful witnesses of Jehovah it is written: “These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them and greeted them from afar, and having confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth For they that say such things make it manifest that they are seeking after a country of their own. And if indeed they had been mindful of that country from which they went out, they would have had opportunity to return. But now they desire a better country, that is, a heavenly [The Theoc
138
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, A. Y.
racy] : wherefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God ; for he hath prepared for them a city [The Theocratic Government], By faith Abraham, being tried, offered up Isaac: yea, he that had gladly received the promises was offering up his only begotten son; even he to whom it was said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called: accounting that God is able to raise up, even from the dead; from whence he [Abraham] did also in a figure receive him [Isaac] back.” —Hebrews 11: 9, 13-19, Am. Rev. Ver.
Jehovah’s unconditional promise to Abraham is called the Abrahamic Covenant, for the reason that Abraham served to picture Jehovah himself, while Sarah his wife served to picture Jehovah’s organization, which brings forth the Seed for Jehovah’s purpose. That is a unilateral or onesided covenant. It is a declaration of the unchangeable purpose of Jehovah to do a certain thing, and the result thereof does not at all depend upon what the man Abraham or any other creature might do or fail to do. That is the covenant that announces God’s provision for man to obtain life, for the reason that therein it is plainly stated, “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” (Gen. 22: 18) The blessing of the families or peoples of the earth means that God will give them opportunity to live, and such opportunity must come in his appointed way, to wit, by and through the promised Seed, which is Christ Jesus.
There is no Scriptural reason to conclude that the man Abraham and his fleshly descendants will inherit the earth. God's promise to Abraham was long ago fulfilled in miniature and in a typical manner, but the greater fulfillment in completion is to those of Jehovah’s capital organization, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. “For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to Ins seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.” (Romans 4:13) Jehovah is the Greater Abraham. “The earth is Jehovah’s, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.” (Ps. 24:1, A.R.7.) Satan, who as Lucifer was the orginal invisible overlord of the earth, has now been cast out of heaven ; the overlordship of the earth now belongs to Christ Jesus, the Seed of Abraham, whose right it is to rule, because Jehovah has gixcn it to him. Christ Jesus is Jehovah’s heir of all things, and those of Jchoxah's royal house of sons are joint-heirs with
Christ Jesus. (See Romans 8:16,17.) When God said to Abraham, T will give unto thee and unto thy seed after thee the land,’ clearly the meaning thereof is that Abraham in type was given the land and that the Seed of Abraham, “which is Christ,” will possess it for ever.
The position of Abraham and the other faithful witnesses of old, when resurrected from the dead in a “bettei resurrection” than that of the rest of the dead, will be that of “princes in all the earth”, that is to say, the visible gox-ernors of earth under the invisible Theocratic Government, the direct representatives of Christ Jesus, to whom God has given the earth as his inheritance; and as such princes these resurrected witnesses of old will rule under Christ and will rule in righteousness. (Note Psalm 2: 6-8; Hebrews 11:35; Psalm 45:16; Isaiah 32.1.)
The patriarch’s original name Abram means “exalted father”, which name the Lord changed, calling him Abraham. The name Abraham means “father of many nations” This is proof that Abraham was here used as a symbol to represent Jehovah God himself, who alone is the Gixer of life, hence the great Father of all those of the families ami nations of the earth that live under The Theocracy, and that The Seed is Christ Jesus, by and through whom Jehovah gives life to man. (Rom. 6:23) When Jehovah said to Abraham, “I will . . . make thy name great,” manifestly God meant that he would make his own holy name great (Gen. 12:2) The dealing of Jehovah with the natural descendants of Abraham, the fleshly Jews, was for Uis. Jehovah’s, own name’s sake. (Ezek. 20' 9) The purpose of the Abrahamic covenant, therefore, was not primarih for man’s benefit, but was and is for the vindication of Jehovah’s name; and this conclusion is abundantly supported by the Scriptures. A long period of time has been permitted to elapse during which period of time Jehovah God permits Satan to remain and carry forward his nefarious won; in order that He, Jehovah, in his own due time may have a testimony given in the earth concerning his name and Theocracy and then may exhibit his power at the battle of Armageddon to convince all creation that he is the Supieme One, the great Theocrat. Let it be kept m mmd that the salvation of creatures is entirely secondary to the gi eat purpose of Jehovah by this Theocratic Government.
MOTHER RELIGION IN MAY
CCY MOTHER’S DAY” began to be observed in Eng-|\/| land, in 1913. That same year the United States Congress, by resolution, made the second Sunday in May of each year a national holiday, “dedicated to the memory of the best mother in the world, your mother.” That sounds nice, and on the face of it looks nice; but is it sincere? and what is the real purpose thereof? Do the men of England'and America love their mothers better since that than they did before? Certainly not. Is it true that every man’s mother is the “best mother in the world” ? Everyone knows that is not true.
“Mother’s Day” was first observed in America in 1914, the very year that the “times of the Gentiles” expired and Satan’s uninterrupted worldly rule ended, at which event he knew his time was short to get ready for the great battle of Armageddon between his organization and The Theo
cratic Government. To induce the people to bestow special honor and worship upon mothers would be one step toward turning the people away from the worship of the great Theocrat, Jehovah God; just another one of Satan’s means of preparing for Armageddon. In all the religious organizations today much is made over “Mother’s Day”, but in not a single one of them are the people told that in respect of the commandment to honor father and mother God is the Father of those that live and His “woman”, to wit, his organization, is the mother of those that receive life from God, and that all honor and worship are due to Jehovah God. On the contrary, the men of “Christendom” are taught to pay their honor to creatures, and not to the Creator, and this is taught by clergymen, whose duty and obligation is to teach the people the truth of God’s Word. For example, note the following:
May 15,1940
WATCHTOWER
The New York Times published the following under the date line ‘Rome, April 17, 1940’: “Today, as he did a year ago, the Pope issued a world-wide appeal for a month of prayer to the Virgin Mary ‘for the restoration of peace among the nations.’ . . . ‘Through you [pastors], we bade the whole Catholic world to offer in the month of May, then close at hand, prayers and fervent aspirations to the Great Mother of God that she might conciliate her Son, offended by our many sins, and that the just settlement of opposing interests and the restoration of confidence to men’s minds might effect the return of peace among nations. Now that the situation is worse, and that this terrible war has broken out, bringing with it already untold harm and suffering, we cannot but call again on our children scattered through the world to gather around the altar of the Virgin Mother of God daily during the next month [May], consecrated to her, to offer her suppliant prayer ’ ”
The month of May and of Mother’s Day is understood to be named after Maia, a demon worshiped by the pagans. “Her name marks her as the ‘fruitful mother’. . . . Maia became by Zeus the mother of the god Hermes.”—The Encyclopaedia Britannica.
On the face of it the arrangement of Mother’s Day seems harmless and calculated to do good. But the people are in ignorance of Satan’s subtle hand in the matter, and that lie is back of the movement, to turn the people away from Jehovah God The slogan is: “The best mother who ever lived", the purpose being to establish creature worship, or at least to divert the attention of man from the proper worship of God. There have been many good mothers of men, and many bad ones. Not every man has the best mother that ever lived; and therefore the slogan is false. The woman
159
that dishonors Jehovah God and blasphemes his name is not a good woman, regardless of how many children she may bear; whereas some of her children may be faithful servants of God. The good mother is the one who serves and honors Jehovah and teaches her children to do likewise, and who renders her proper motherly duties in the home. Real men have great respect and great love for such mothers, but their worship is given to Jehovah God.
Neither the man nor the woman should be worshiped for doing right, because such doing of right is their duty. Creature worship of any kind is wrong and is an abomination in God’s sight.—Luke 16:15.
In “Christendom” men have formed the habit of quoting their mothers as authority for their course of action and of utterly ignoring God’s Word. In “Christendom” women teach, preach and prophesy in religious houses, and predict and prophesy in affairs of state concerning peace and war Women are seducing and misleading men, causing them to mix politics and religion and to compromise tLeir duty toward God in order to comply with the rules of Satan's unrighteous world. Such conduct is “fornication” in the Scriptural meaning of that term, as set forth at Rev elation 2:20: “Thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which eaEctb herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my sen ants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols " Such is contrary to God’s rule, as stated at 1 Timothy 2 1'2 “But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authouty over the man, but to be in silence.”
When men and women follow the Devil’s subtle scheme, they turn away from Jehovah God; and the farther they go, the more trouble they get into.
LET
RESOLUTION
Dear Brother Rutherford :
The publishers of the Chicago [Ill.] company, South unit, assembled at a regular service meeting Thursday, October 19, extend to you love and greetings, and pass the following resolution .
"Understanding that everything that can be shaken shall be shaken from the Lord’s Kingdom Organization, and having revelled warning from the Lord that in ‘this last day’ unfaithful ones within the organization would be led to believe a he and to cause division and strife among the brethren (2 Thess. 2:11 and Rom 16:17,18),
"We firmly resolve to give no heed to such evil and unfaithful cnes, nor to any manner of information which does not come through the channel provided by the Lord’s Theocratic Goverfa-ment, but to be always alert to receive information and instruction from the temple and in the spirit of Christ to act promptly and in full obedience thereto, thus manifesting love and devotion to our King. (1 Cor. 1:10; Acts 3:23) Salvation belongeth to the Lord!
"We resolve to do with our might what our hands find to do and use the equipment provided by the Lord with which to bring the message of hope and salvation to those of good will, or ‘other sheep’, and joyfully anticipate a most marvelous increase in Kingdom publishers this new year (the Lord will provide the increase).
“We extend to you, dear Brother Rutherford, and to the Bethel family, our utmost confidence and appreciation for the unstinted and faithful devotion you manifest unto the Lord and
ERS
for your zeal and courage in leading us, at the direction of the Lord, in fighting this battle against the enemy (Ephes'ans 6 12) ‘They will fight against you, but they shall not prevail against you. for the battle is not yours, but mine, saith the Lord!’
“Deaf and blind to all but the Kingdom interests, «e pray the Lord’s rich blessing upon you and ‘all who are willing in c/u-. the day of the Lord’s power’.”
EVIDENCE OF INCREASED JOYS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We, the Bloomfield, New Jersey, company of Jehovah’s witnesses, appreciate your thrilling letter of January 20, concerning the new quota for publishers. It seemed to have an electrifying effect upon us, in more fully realizing our grand pnvilegc in putting forth a greater effort in searching out those who are truly lovers of righteousness.
Your letter, which showed us, as never before, our opportunities of serving in The Theocracy, spurred us on to a wonderful climax of the three-bound-book witnessing period of January Our report for the month of January is given in further evidence of our increased joys in The Theocracy: thirty-four pubhsheis placed a total of 1,144 bound books; of these there were 358 combinations of three bound books. Note the most interesting of all: we made a total of 410 back-calls, or an average of 12 back-calls per publisher. Thus we mark the results, and now we are conducting 55 model studies each week
We together send greetings in the Great Theocrat’s name, desiring to do this one thing, that is, serve faithfully m the Theocratic Government, as your brethren and fellow pub.ishers
FIELD EXPERIENCES
IN A BRITISH PASSENGER-TRAIN COMPARTMENT
“Traveling north from London. As the journey wore on and I looked around my six fellow passengers in my compartment were all reading novels, magazines, and newspapers. The train rattled on and I was getting desperate about how I could start a witness, when we slowly stopped at a station, two passengers getting out and two soldiers getting in. The Tommies are always ready for chatter, so I asked them about conditions in the army, how they liked it, etc., etc., and they began explaining in gruesome detail how they had to do a bayonet charge; so I remarked, 'What a wonderful world this is, to be born, grow up to the prime of life, and then learn how best to kill one’s fellow creatures !’ At this the lady next to me piped up from behind her magazine, and said: ‘I wonder none of you men object to this war business on religious grounds.’ There was my opening, and I got in quick with the Truth till all the carriage was bursting with remarks and comments. The lady, a young girl really about 22, was a Roman Catholic, and before the journey had gone much farther I was explaining to her the soul, 'trinity,’ remission of sins, ‘purgatory,’ and most other false doctrines. The other five in the compartment were sitting bolt upright listening with amazement. One of the Tommies said: ‘Are you a Sunday-school teacher?’ Showing the difference between religion and Christianity, I told him if I were a teacher I wouldn’t be explaining these things as I was. He was a Spiritualist. His beliefs he tried to justify by saying that Christ appeared to Mary after His resurrection as a spirit and therefore other humans could appear after death; but he couldn’t prove anything at all and the Roman Catholic girl backed me up: evidently she had no likes for Spiritualists.
“Two hours passed by in witnessing. We drew into a big station (Darlington) where all got out except one lady opposite me, but before the train stopped this Catholic girl stood up and pointed to me and said: ‘What this lady has told us is absolutely true, and if I had half her courage I would leave my religion tomorrow.’ Then she came to me and said: ‘May I leave you my address so you may send me one of those little books where you learnt all you know?’ We parted. The sole remaining occupant of the carriage traveled on to my journey’s end with me and we finished the conversation and she ended in taking two Consolation and Kingdom News from me, which I had in my bag ‘in case’! Next day I wrote to the Catholic girl and sent her Salvation and Where Are the Deadf and Uncovered, and a catalog, telling her to read with an unbiased mind and not to listen to contrary advice from others which she would probably get. I also gave her a short resume of world conditions and the cause thereof. Yesterday I had this reply from her:
“Thank you very much for your kindness in sending the books. I will ceitainly read them. I have already read the one entitled Where Are the DeadT with great interest, and I must admit that I find Judge Rutherford’s views far more logical than the teachings of the Church. I still feel rather reluctant to reject the beliefs that I was taught from childhood, and I am sure you will understand what a,big step it is to take. You see I have very httle leisure time in which to study the Bible and, to be honest, I have not thought about God and religion much until just recently. You say in your letter that the world goes on forever, but you also say that we are living near the end of the world. What does this
mean? How will the world end? Will God destroy it in order to clear out evil and then create it again? Or are we in actual fact living during the process of the cleaning up? I showed your letter to my friend, who was very interested. She had heaid of the Bible Tract Society before, but I never have, and religion has been causing me a lot of fear and unhappiness. I thought I was being wicked for thinking God unfair because he made us imperfect and then burned us forevermore for our human faults, and I think in a way it made me defy religion. I tried to l<we God, but I could not; how can one love something one is terrified of? When I finish the books I have, I would be glad if you would select others which you think will be most helpful to me, and if you will let me know the price of them I will send the money as you kindly offered to send them to me. I hope you can understand my letter, as I have not your gift of expression, and I do hope you will write me if you have time. Yours sincerely, M. McC.”
FIRST PUBLIC LECTURE IN EIRE
“I report on the public lecture given in Dublin yesterday. As this is the first time that a lecture of Judge Rutherford’s has been given in a public meeting in this country— Eire—you will appreciate just how the publishers here have been kept in a state of keen anticipation as to the results Advertising by means of the ‘Government and Peace’ handbill was done in a quiet and orderly way. The publishers called on the Protestant people in their homes and gave them a personal welcome to the lecture, leaving the handbill with eaeh one. Many were sent by post to the people of good will living farther afield. A notice was also inserted in the public press, which informed the people that ’a free Bible lecture on “World Events and Bible Prophecy” ’ was to be given in the Northumberland Hall on Sunday February 11 at 3:30 p.m. This advertising work took us two weeks to complete, for the majority of the work was done by four pioneers along with the zone servant.
“As we have no electrical transcription machine m Eire we had to use other means of reproducing the speech A good wireless set was given to us on loan and we used a separate pickup along with it so .that the operators could be out of sight in another room. This gave very good results
“By the time the lecture commenced there were 70 people present, which included 50 strangers Tnese all paid rapt attention to all that Judge Rutherford had said in his lecture at Madison Square Garden. Everyone stayed to the finish, except one old lady who was deaf, and it was clearlv evident that they had been much impressed. After the concluding announcement the meeting was left open to questions. Further interest was quickly shown by the man; questions then asked. Besides leading questions from Jehovah’s witnesses there were further questions from eight of the public. All were given a warm invitation to attend the weekly meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses, and as the people left the hall each one received a copy of Kingdom Ncn ■> No. 5 and a copy of the schedule of meetings.
“When we realize that Eire is 93 4 percent Roman Catholic (according to the latest figures obtainable) we can appreciate how the boldness of the publishers in advertising and arranging this lecture has been well rewarded, and we give all praise to Jehovah for the privilege of serving Him in this dark land.”
too

THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Butherfqrd, President___W, E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures ; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are Ins witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and I Icssings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expres-^l in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bijble as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents In the light of the Scriptures It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to pcrsonalit.es.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150: Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittance* should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances tram countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, Englind
Canadian.................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 6. Ontario, < amd.i
Australasian .......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathdeld. N S W , Australia
South African .................. Boston	House, Cape Town, South Afuea
Pleaso address the Society In etery case.
(Translations of this journal appear in seveial languages.J
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription puce n>aj hate The Watchtower free upon written application to the pubhsbeis. made once < icli year, stating the reason for so requesting it We ate glad to thus aid ib<’ needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations
Xotice to Subscribers • Acknowledgment of n now or a renewal sub scription will be sent only when requested thji'ce of address, wl.of requested, may be expected to appear on address label vi’lnn one tnoi.-'i A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Enteied as second-class matter at the post office at Drool.li/n, X Y , under the Act of Hatch 3, 1370
“LOCUST ARMY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Summer's opening is marked by the “Locust Army” Testimony Period, during the whole month of June. It is a movement of Jehovah’s “locusts” against religion by a campaign to increase yet more the subscription list of The Watchtower. The unusual offer in effect during the campaign will operate greatly to that result, to wit, one year’s subscription for The Watchtower together with the premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covered booklet on a contribution of but one dollar; foreign countries, $1.50. This Testimony Period is the final of a three-month campaign with The Watchtower. Now is not too late to arrange for some part therein, as to territory, equipment, time, supplies, distributor’s copies, etc If unacquainted with an organized company of publishers m your locality, notify this office of your wish to get in touch with such for this Testimony. Those in foreign countries should write the branch office having supervision. The Informant (which is free) goes into greater detail on thia.
VACATION
The annual vacation period of the members of the Bethel family at Brooklyn this year is from Saturday, July 20, to Sunday, August 4, inclusive. This will allow them a diversion from their regular activities at headquarters, and especially to avail
themselves of the privileges of the 1940 Theociatic Coin, n' ,,i Jehovah’s witnesses and of the increasing opportunities fur fie’d witnessmg. The normal operations of the factory and office will be suspended for that period; no books will be shipped or regular mail answered. Hence all field publishers should order sufficient!) in advance that their supplies of literature to carry them through the vacation period and to the end of August may be shipped out not later than the evening of Friday, July 19 Also re=-eivi your correspondence with the factory and office until attei Moi day, August 5.
FALSE REPORTS
Some unreliable person is responsible for the circulation of a report that Beth-Sanm is being enlarged as a place of security and that this is being built by the Society. There is absolutely nut one word of truth in the report. Those who are interested in tin Theocracy would better be circulating the kingdom message rathci than false imaginations of others.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 7: “Instruction” (Part 5),
1-26 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 19-10 Week of July 14: “Instruction” (Part 5),
jl 27-53 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1940
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol LXI	June 1, 1940	No. 11
INSTRUCTION
PART 5
"When he maketh inquisition for blood,
—Ps.
TEHOVAH instructs the obedient ones that they | might receive comfort and be strong in hope.
J He assures those who serve him that when his time arrives to vindicate his name he will remember for good all who have maintained their integrity toward him and that he will not pass over unnoticed any of the wicked. Those now on earth who are fully devoted to Jehovah are hated of all nations for his name’s sake, reproached and oppressed. God’s time to administer due recompense to the wicked is very near, and Jehovah will see to it that none of them escape. The Margolis Bible renders the text in the foregoing Psalm in this manner: “For He that aveng-eth blood hath remembered them [those who wrongfully shed blood] ; He hath not forgotten the cry of the humble [the ones who are obedient and who declare his name].”
2	Jehovah makes inquisition, that is, he inquires into the facts or calls to mind the facts, that he may properly recompense those who have done wickedly and that he may put his blessing upon those who have obeyed him. The day of his vengeance is near, and God will not overlook any of his enemies: “The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their goings; they have made them crooked paths; whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace.”—Isa. 59:8.
3	In the preceding issue of The Watchtower consideration is given to the prophecy of Zephaniah 2:1-7 and discloses God’s purpose to completely clear out the religious racketeers. In this present issue of The Watchtower consideration is given particularly to the commercial and political element of Satan’s visible organization. The Philistines were on the west of the tribe of Judah. On the east were the Moabites and the Ammonites. Moab pictured the commercial wing of Satan’s visible organization. Ammon pictured the political wing of that wicked organization. Both the commercial and political parts of the organization of Satan are supported by the military and strong-arm squad. All of these have joined with the religionists for the purpose of doing violence to
he remembereth them; he forgetteth not the cry of the humble.'’
9:12.
Jehovah’s servants. Their action shall not be passed over unnoticed by Jehovah, but he will recompense them shortly. Upon those adversaries disgrace and destruction shall come as upon the ancient Sodomites and the people of Gomorrah. That punishment will be a just recompense for their sell-glory and pride and arrogance in wrongfully claiming what belongs to Jehovah alone. God’s faithful servants shall finally triumph. They that worship God shall fill the whole earth. Worshipers of demons and men will cease for ever. That instruction now comforts the people of God and makes their hope strong that they may move forward in the work that God has assigned to them.
* At Armageddon there shall be no hiding places for those in far-off lands nor for the empire builders who have opposed God and persecuted his faithful witnesses. Such enemies were foreshadowed by Ethiopia and Assyria, and particularly the city of Nineveh. Individuals held amongst those who oppose The Theocratic Government, and who were pictured by Ebed-melech and by the repentant Nine-vites, may escape. The organization of Satan, made up of political dictators and commercial traffickers who have allied themselves with religionists, shall be basely degraded and forever despised by those who survive Armageddon and who continue to praise Jehovah. The Lord remembers his faithful servants and avenges them.
’ Proceeding now with the examination of the prophecy by Zephaniah: It is noted that Jehovah mentions the reproaches that his enemies have put upon him and his faithful servants. “I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border.”—Zeph. 2: 8.
‘ Moab of ancient times reproached Jehovah and his typical people, the Israelites. The modern-day Moabites, the commercial traffickers in the wealth of the earth, and in human blood, have heaped great reproach upon the name of Jehovah, and those reproaches have fallen upon the ones who love and
163
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
164
faithfully serve the Most High and his King. (Ps. 69:9; Rom. 15:3) To his faithful servants the assurance is given: “Thy Father, which seeth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly” (Matt. 6:4); and to his adversaries he says: “Understand, ye brutish among the people; and, ye fools, when will ye be wise! He that planted the ear, shall he not hear! he that formed the eye, shall he not see?” (Ps. 94: 8, 9) At Armageddon Jehovah will make good these promises, fully carrying them out.
’ The antitypical or modern-day Moabites, that is to say, the commercial element of Satan’s visible organization, as the facts fully disclose, have yielded to the laws of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. That wicked religious organization has repeatedly declared that Jehovah’s servants are carrying on a money-making scheme and indulging in a campaign of hate and intolerance. They further lied saying that Jehovah’s witnesses are Communists. The commercial element, in their propaganda sheets, the daily press and magazines, continue to publish such lies against Jehovah’s witnesses, while at the same time those publications refuse to publish any true statement of the facts even for pay. Thus it is seen that the commercial element, through their propaganda sheets and at the instance of religionists, willfully and deliberately and with malice aforethought, resist God and persecute his servants. They continue such bitter opposition to all publications concerning The Theocratic Government. They have put forth their endeavors to prevent the radio from being used to broadcast the message of The Theocratic Government. They prevent Jehovah’s witnesses from obtaining the use of public halls for their assemblies. The commercial press stoops to the basest lies against Jehovah’s servants and does so always at the instance of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their other religious allies.
8	The ready and willing servant of the commercial giants, who traffic in human blood and property, is the strong-arm squad and the military group. They continually heap reproach upon the name of Jehovah God and his servants. These servants of God they denounce as pacifists and charge that they are unpatriotic and dangerous to the security of the state. They willingly and wickedly circulate reports that the publications of Jehovah’s witnesses are subversive and should be suppressed for that reason. This commercial and military group, acting at the instance and on advice of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, attempt to force upon the servants of God compulsory saluting of flags contrary to the commandment of Almighty God. They attempt to force Jehovah’s faithful servants into the military service and to engage in killing contrary to God’s Word. All of these things God will not forget at Armageddon.
He will permit none of that commercial element of Satan’s organization to find the way of escape. They will not be hid. This, of course, does not apply to legitimate and honest dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of necessity, but the application is to that class of commercial men who prey upon the people and use their power wickedly against mankind, and particularly against the servants of Almighty God.
ammonites
8	Jehovah takes full notice of the reviling of his people by the Ammonites of modern days, that is to say, the political element, which element works with the religionists for political gain. The totalitarians are now determined to rule the world or to bring about the destruction of the nations. They get their inspiration, of course, from the Devil by and through the religious element, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. None of these like the message of God, because it discloses that The Theocracy shall rule the whole world in righteousness and that the totalitarian rule shall soon for ever cease. Those modern-day Ammonites, or politicians, join forces with the Hierarchy to destroy Jehovah’s servants and to prevent the spreading of the gospel of God’s kingdom. To accomplish their wicked purpose they enact laws giving men dictatorial or arbitrary powers to enable the chief political ruler to declare an emergency when he desires and to thus justify his actions in taking away all privileges of those who love and serve the Almighty God. Thus have many of Jehovah’s witnesses been imprisoned and killed in the dictatorial countries, not for wrongdoing, but because they persist in declaring the good news of The Theocratic Government. Those enemies of God and his servants will find no hiding place at Armageddon. They will not be hid.
10	Jehovah says of the modern-day Moabites and Ammonites: “They have reproached my people, and magnified themselves.” The commercial and political element therefore serve the Devil's purpose by acting in conjunction with the ultrareligionists, and all of them are against God. That wicked element purpose to make it very difficult for the people of good will toward God to hear God’s message, which message from Jehovah shows man the only way to safety. Envious of those who speak the truth and who therefore tell of The Theocracy and the relief it will bring to humankind, those agents of Satan persecute all who openly serve God and Christ his King.
11	The political and commercial elements, supported by the military and strong-arm squad, insist that those who have devoted themselves to Jehovah must now put the state above Almighty God and therefore render unto Caesar all allegiance and support. In
June 1,1940
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
165
this they bring great reproach upon the name of Jehovah and upon those who serve him. Hoping to fully control the rising generation the political, commercial and military elements, acting at the behest of the big religious group, attempt to compel the small children to salute flags, “heil” men, and engage in other ceremonies in violation of God’s law. Bent upon arbitrary rule or ruin, they go beyond all proper limits and insist that the law of the state is supreme and that the state must be obeyed under any and all circumstances. They magnify men and rulers, and thus magnify and exalt themselves against God, blaspheming and reproaching his name. They shall find no way to escape the wrath of Almighty God.
12	Jehovah God is the fountain of life. (Ps. 36:9) No creature can live without God’s permission. The entire universe hangs on the life of Jehovah, the Almighty. Strange as it may seem, now the existence of God is at issue. “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.” (Ps. 14:1) These modern-day Moabites and Ammonites by their course of action deny the existence of Almighty God. Therefore in their heart (seat of motive) they say there is no God. Many of them openly deny the existence of Almighty God and speak of him as “the tribal God of Israel”, “only a God of antiquity.” There are none of the political rulers of the nations of this day that tell the people of the Almighty God as the Ruler of the universe and that all blessings must come from him. ‘All nations have forgotten God.’ (Ps. 9:17) All take a course of action exactly contrary to what God has pointed out in his Word that man should take. The nations have yielded to the influence and power of the demons, whether they know it or not. Almost all of them advocate some kind of demonism or religion. Note, then, what Jehovah’s prophet says of and concerning them: “Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation ; the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.”—Zeph. 2: 9.
13	In this declaration Jehovah by his own life swears that he will bring all such opponents to an everlasting end. His eternal existence obligates the Almighty God to openly demonstrate to all creation that he is supreme. At Armageddon he will so demonstrate to all, that he is the living God, the selfexisting One, without beginning and without end; that he is the King of Eternity, who inhabits eternity, and that there is none before him. (Jer. 10:10; Dan. 6: 26; Deut. 5: 26; Isa. 57:15) He first made a covenant with the nation of Israel after the flesh; therefore he was the “God of Israel [after the flesh]”. That nation broke the covenant with Jehovah and
turned away from him and denied and continue to deny him, and particularly to reject Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God. That nation still holds to religion, or demonism, although professing to serve God. Jehovah is the God of spiritual Israel, that is, those who are of the spirit, fully devoted to him; meaning, those who have taken his name and joyfully obey his commandment and worship him in spirit and in truth through Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy.—Rev. 12:17.
“Jehovah therefore says to those who deny his existence: “Surely Moab [the antitypical Moabites, the commercial traffickers] shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon [the political ruling element] as Gomorrah.” Thus is the judgment written against them, and that judgment will be executed at Armageddon. Destruction shall come upon them by the superhuman power. The visible result upon them will be like that which came upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and this is also mentioned at Jude seven. As Lot fled from the ancient cities of Sodom and Gomorrah and was saved from the destruction that came upon those cities, so the persons of good will who shall now flee to the place of safety may be saved. Many of these persons of good will are now under the dominating control of the political and commercial elements; but by taking their stand firmly on the side of the Lord they may escape to the place of safety. (2 Pet. 2:6-8; Gen. 19:14-29) Sodom and Gomorrah were reduced to complete desolation, from which there is no possibility of recovery; and so likewise the modern Moabites and Ammonites shall be destroyed, and the place where they have inhabited shall be “even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation”. The totalitarian rule and rulers, the commercial robbers and those who have defied God, shall perish for ever at Armageddon, as the prophecy declares.
15	Now mark how God turns the tables upon the wicked and permits those who serve him to have His blessing: “The residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.’’ (Vs. 9) Those who serve God and his King are not looking for material gain or spoil now held by the godless, political and commercial elements of the earth. The spoiling here mentioned is spiritual; showing that only those who love and serve Jehovah God shall have the blessings of Jehovah in abundance. The faithful who shall be changed from human to spirit creatures shall receive forever the blessings of Jehovah by and through Christ Jesus, and the faithful on earth shall enjoy forever the material things which God has made for man, and all of which blessings proceed from the throne of the Almighty One. This spiritual spoiling snatches the people of good will out from the power and control of the
166
5He WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
modern-day Moabites and Ammonites. The result is that the people of good will toward God shall find a way to escape to safety and, being faithful, shall receive life everlasting and enjoy the blessings of The Theocratic Government.
16	Jehovah has made known that the faithful followers of Christ Jesus shall be ‘forever with the Lord' and that these constitute his “holy nation”. (1 Thess. 4:17; 1 Pet. 2:9) Such are the “remnant of her seed”, that is, the seed of God's organization (Rev. 12:17); meaning the last of the faithful spirit class on the earth. These constitute a part of his “holy nation”, and concerning them it is written: “And the remnant of My nation shall inherit them.” (Margolis) The modern-day Moabites and Ammonites being wiped out at Armageddon, those surviving ones of His “holy nation”, of which Christ Jesus is the King of kings, will come into possession of that unobstructed freedom, liberty of action, and use of the earth which God provides and into its fullness, and which the enemies of God have selfishly used and abused and denied to the servants of the Most High. With Christ Jesus these shall have to do with aiding those of the “great multitude” to carry out their assigned duties. Thus it is seen that those of good will shall be brought into the fold of the Lord and ultimately they shall be all of one fold and all shall be under one shepherd or king. (John 10:16) This is further and supporting evidence that some of “the remnant” will remain on earth for a time after Armageddon and co-operate with those who will form the “great multitude”.—Rev. 7: 9-17.
17	Moab and Ammon of the modern day, that is, the commercial traffickers and political rulers, supported by the military and strong-arm squad, will receive full retributive justice administered by the Lord. (Zeph. 2:10) The totalitarian rulers and the commercial tyrants, that rule and oppress the people now, are very proud and haughty. Many of them claim to be servants of the people, but they are in fact cruel oppressors of the people. They rely upon the religious racketeers to keep them in a way that they believe is safe for themselves. Mark what the Almighty God says concerning such modern-day Moabites and their allies: “We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud,) his loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart. I know his wrath, saith the Lord; but it shall not be so; his lies shall not so effect it.” (Jer. 48:29,30) Jehovah’s rules are fixed and do not change: “Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fail.”—Prov. 16:18.
18	The poor in spirit who obey God are constantly ill-treated and oppressed by those proud and haughty political and commercial great men, and concerning them God says: “Thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand; the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the fatherless.” (Ps. 10:14) None of these proud and haughty ones of the present day have Almighty God in their thoughts. All of them are against The Theocratic Government. These proud and haughty ones will be brought to a despicable end. That end of such proud, haughty and oppressive ones will be further proof of the supremacy of Jehovah God: “For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the dunghill. And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim; and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands. And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust.”—Isa. 25:10-12.
19	Why will the Almighty God inflict upon the modern-day Moabites and Ammonites such dire punishment? “Because they have taunted and spoken boastfully against the people of the Lord of hosts.” (Margolis Bible) “Because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of hosts.” (Zeph. 2:10) No one will be permitted to taunt and treat with contempt the servants of Jehovah and be permitted by him to go unpunished. The accounts will be fully squared in his due time. Affronts to God’s name will not be overlooked. The persecution of his people and faithful servants will not be overlooked. “For he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.” (Zech. 2:8) “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? 1 tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?”—Luke 18:7,8.
20	The proud, haughty, self-centered ones persuade themselves that their contemptuous treatment of Jehovah’s witnesses is being noted only by men, but they have overlooked the fact that they are ill-treating the servants of the Lord and that the Lord counts it as unto himself. ’Forasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of my brethren, ye have done it unto me.’ (Matt. 25:40) “Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased.” (Matt. 23:12) The wicked deeds of the haughty, austere ones who now control the nations will not be overlooked by Jehovah’s Executioner at Armageddon.
21	The proud, austere and haughty religionists of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have encouraged the modern Moabites and Ammonites to ill-treat Jehovah’s servants. This they have done because the religionists craved the aid of the political and commercial elements and have desired to share in their ill-got gains. They have not heeded the admonition
June 1, 1940
WATCHTOWER.
167
given to those who make a covenant with or who profess to serve Almighty God: “Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy; that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.”— 1 Tim. 6: 17-19.
22	To the Israelites God caused Moses to declare that they should worship him only. These words Jesus repeated to Satan: “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” (Matt. 4:10) This commandment applies to all who would receive God’s favor. Contrary to God’s commandment, men have given themselves over to the worship of demon-gods. Thus they have rejected Jehovah and his King and kingdom. The political and commercial elements deny Almighty God and now oppose The Theocracy, and to such Jehovah says: “The Lord will be terrible unto them [Fearful is Jehovah against them (Young)]; for he will famish all the gods of the earth; and men shall worship him, every one from his place, even all the isles of the heathen.” —Zeph. 2: 11.
23	At the “battle of that great day of God Almighty” he will be terrible unto those who have given their worship to men and to demons. Those who survive Armageddon will not forget what God has done unto the modern Moabites and Ammonites: “And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts; and I will declare thy greatness.” (Ps. 145: 6) With great awe and wonder the prophet of Jehovah, having a vision of what was coming upon the world at Armageddon, exclaimed: “O Lord, I have heard thy speech ltire report of thee], and was afraid.” (Hab. 3:2) Jehovah’s battle against the enemy will be so terrible that it will cause all the survivors beholding it to be afraid and tremble.
24	Those who receive God’s favor cannot divide their service or devotion by giving to others some part thereof. He is the Almighty, the Most High, the Giver of life, and those creatures who oppose him and exalt themselves as gods shall perish. Therefore Jehovah says: “For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.” (Deut. 10: 17) “For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great King over all the earth. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.” (Ps. 47: 2, 3) “He shall cut off the spirit of princes; he is terrible to the kings of the earth.”—Ps. 76 : 12.
25	The word “gods” in the original language of the text literally means “mighty ones”. Therefore, “all
the gods of the earth” refers to the demons, and also to mighty ones amongst men, that is, the political, commercial, and religious lofty and mighty ones amongst men. Such are the political, commercial, and religious lofty and mighty ones whom the people highly honor and worship. And what shall be the end of such high, exalted and mighty ones, both of the demons and amongst men? “He [God] will famish all the gods of the earth.” Among the demon mighty ones or gods are these: Chemosh, the abomination of Moab; Molech or Milcom, god of the Ammonites, and the abomination of Ammon; Ashtoreth, goddess of the Zidonians; Baal, the god of the Tyrians. (1 Ki. 11: 5, 7; 16:31) These are all demons, of which Satan is the prince or the chief. There are mighty men who are also called “gods” because of the power that they have to exercise against others. These rule in politics and in commerce and in religion, all of which are a part of Satan’s organization, and some of whom are deified by the admirers of the deluded people. Amongst such human mighty ones called “gods", and representatives of the demons, are these, to wit: Hitler, Mussolini, Stalin, and Pacelli, and others. —John 10:34, 35; Ps. 82:1,6.
20	To “famish all the gods” would mean their destruction. This would mean that commercial traffic would become very lean for the clergy of “Christendom”, and it is now becoming lean because the people of good will are turning away from those religion mongers. The waters of truth are overflowing and sweeping away the refuge of their lies. (Isa. 28: 17) Religion is now at a great discount, due to Jehovah’s “strange work” and the exposing of religion as being of the Devil and all religionists as being the servants of that wicked one. Religious frauds are shriveling up. The mighty men amongst the clergymen, becoming weak and lean, will famish when God causes the commercial and political mighty ones to close down on the religious racket, even as the people of Moab and Ammon closed down on the people of Mount Sen-and destroyed them. (2 Chron. 20: 23) Then will follow the destruction at Armageddon of the mighty ones of the commercial, political and military forces.
27	Jehovah then by his prophet shows what accompanies the famishing process, and the results: “And men [those of good will] shall worship him [Jehovah], every one from his place.” Such are they of good will who forsake religion and engage in the true worship of Almighty God. (Luke 2:14) This the people of good will do regardless of where such persons may be. They will come from all nations: all nations, kindreds, peoples and tongues.’ (Rev. 7:9) All such Jehovah will bring into the temple courts and put them in touch with the “remnant” of the temple company yet on the earth, and therefore such
168
SEe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
persons will form the “great multitude” and serve Jehovah at his temple.—Rev. 7:14,15.
18	Such true worshipers and true worship will not be confined to only one nation or a few nations, but “even all the isles of the heathen [nations]”. There shall be some from all these nations. The testimony to the name of the great Theocrat and his government under Christ Jesus his King is now being carried to the various nations, and the “great multitude” is being manifested: “For I know their works and their thoughts; it shall come, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory. And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those [the remnant] that escape of them [from Babylon, Satan’s organization] unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.” —Isa. 66:18,19.
29	These faithful ones who survive will sing the praises of Jehovah: “Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.” (Isa. 42:10) “Let the multitude of isles be glad thereof.” (Ps. 97:1) “The isles shall wait for his law.” (Isa. 42: 4) “Surely the isles shall wait for me.” (Isa. 60: 9) There being such a great number of isles would indicate that the “great multitude” will come and worship before Jehovah and that they will come from every part of the earth. Such are the people who are now of good will toward God and who are scattered amongst the nations but who are diligently seeking the way to the “city of refuge”, God’s organization.
ETHIOPIANS
30	It further appears in the prophecy that Jehovah will not overlook any of the enemies. He identifies the Ethiopians as a part of the enemy horde and declares his judgment against them: “Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.” (Zeph. 2:12) The ancient Ethiopians were black men, cruel and bloodthirsty, who willingly hired themselves out to fight against God’s covenant people. (See 2 Chronicles 12:2-4; 14:9-15; 16:8.) The record of the Ethiopians is against them. “Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel? saith the Lord. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?” (Amos 9:7) The antitypical Ethiopians are the men of merchandise for selfish gain who in these last days hire themselves out to “Egypt" (world rulers) and fight against Jehovah’s witnesses and the kingdom of God, and do so for what selfish, temporary gain they reap
therefrom. They plainly appear as sin-darkened, and this is indicated by the dark-skinned Ethiopians, that is to say, the present-day ones degraded through sin. None of these shall be overlooked or “hid” at Armageddon, but, as the Lord says, ‘Ye shall be slain by my sword.” Being far removed, that is to say, remote or isolated, will not aid them or save them. There will be no way for them to escape. It appears that there may be among them some individuals that will escape, such as were foreshadowed by Ebed-melech of Ethiopia, and who showed favor to the servants of God and whom God did not forget. These must turn to God and serve him before Armageddon breaks: “Princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.” (Ps. 68: 31) Such are the ones who now do good unto the brethren of Christ Jesus, for which good deeds the Lord remembers them.—Matt. 25: 34-40.
ASSYRIA
81	On the north from Ethiopia was ancient Assyria, with its main city Nineveh. Assyria was then a world power. God remembers these at Armageddon, and therefore says: “And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness.” (Zeph. 2:13) In this part of the prophetic picture Assyria foreshadowed the political wing of Satan’s visible organization, and particularly a totalitarian monstrosity, which is now reaching out over all the nations of the earth. Assyria was an absolute, totalitarian government, and specifically pictures the entire political system, and especially at that time when the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have extended their influence and power over all the governments, and particularly over “Christendom”, and when all governments shall become totalitarian or Fascist and all recognize the Hierarchy as the spiritual higher power. The prophecy, therefore, is beginning to apply right now. In proof of this the countries of the northwest that claim to be neutral, such as Sweden, ban or prevent the publication and distribution of books, magazines or literature that speaks the truth concerning Hitler and other arbitrary, totalitarian rulers. Information published shows that recently a newspaper publisher in Oslo, Norway, is charged with a crime because he published an editorial uncomplimentary to Hitler and this the so-calied neutral countries declare is an insult to the throne Thus it is shown that the state is put above God and above everything that is true, because truth proceeds from God, and the Scriptures and facts further show that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, with its mountain of lies, is pushing its influence into every part of the earth. This is further evidence that Armageddon is rapidly approaching.
June 1,1940
STie WATCHTOWER.
169
82	In the picture ancient Assyria first assisted or helped the cause of unfaithful Israel, which unfaithful Israel pictured religious “Christendom”. Thereafter Assyria suddenly faced about and destroyed Samaria and later Jerusalem. (See 2 Kings 16:7-10; 17:1-6,23,24; 18:13-37; 19:1-13.) Still later Assyria joined Babylon in destroying Jerusalem. (2 Ki. 25:1-21) Such facing about, or what is modernly called “double crossing”, was foretold by the prophet Ezekiel in chapter 16:28-43 and chapter 23:1-49. This shows, in harmony with other scriptures, that the totalitarian rule and rulers will turn against the religious element and destroy them and that God will destroy the totalitarians after the modern-day Assyrians have fulfilled the prophecy at Revelation 17:16,17. That is to say, after the destruction of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and all religious organizations, then will follow the destruction of the modern-day Assyrians. This is fully corroborated by what is recorded in 2 Chronicles twentieth chapter.
“ In the picture Assyria served God’s purpose against the unfaithful Israelites. The action of the Assyrians, however, against unfaithful Israel was taken because of malice and in defiance of Jehovah God and at the instance of the Devil, the Devil’s purpose being to carry out his challenge and boast that Jehovah is impotent and inferior to the demon gods, and to thereby bring reproach upon Jehovah’s name. (Isa. 10:7) In like manner the modern-day Assyrians, the political totalitarian crowd, attack God’s true people, joining with the religious element, and then turn against the religious practitioners. The modern Assyrians must be wiped out at Armageddon just as the Ammonites and Moabites will be destroyed, as shown in the type where they destroyed Edom and then destroyed each other. (2 Chron. 20:1-23) In brief, then, this is shown by all these prophecies: that the political, commercial and military element join with the religious element to destroy Jehovah’s faithful servants; that then the political, commercial and military element destroy the unfaithful religious element, and then God cleans them all out by causing them to fight against one another.
’‘Note the corroborative Scriptural proof: “0 Assyrian, the rod of mine anger [upon unfaithful 'Jerusalem’, modern, religious ‘Christendom’], and the staff in their [the Assyrians’] hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them [the religious element of Satan’s organization, particularly the Hierarchy] down like the mire of the streets.” “Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols? Wherefore it shall come to pass, that, when
the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem [that is, upon hypocritical, religious ‘Christendom’], I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the [boastful] king [that is, boastful totalitarian, political rulers who boast that their building and power shall stand forever] of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.”—Isa. 10: 5, 6,11,12.
” “And they shall waste the land of Assyria [totalitarian, political rule] with the sword, and the land of Nimrod [of devil-worshipers] in the entrances thereof; thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders.”—Micah 5: 6.
** From these prophecies it clearly appears that God will destroy the elements of Satan’s organization, specifically naming all of his organization and all of the gods, demons and mighty men that oppose Jehovah. Out from such organization, however, shall come some who are of good will toward God, even as some came out of Egypt and Assyria to serve God; and this is corroborated by the prophecy of Isaiah, to wit: “In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria; and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria; and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land; whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.” (Isa. 19: 23-23) This prophecy corroborates many others that those who will compose the “great multitude” will escape from the Devil’s crowd.
MODERN NINEVEH
” God “will make Nineveh a desolation”; and that will cause astonishment. Ancient Nineveh was given over entirely to devil-worship. It was built by Nimrod shortly after the deluge, and in that city religion, the worship of the Devil, the demons and Nimrod, the “mighty” man, took the lead. (Gen. 10:11,12) That totalitarian rule of Nimrod foreshadowed or pictured the political, dictatorial monstrosity that is now overrunning the earth. Both the typical and the modern-day Nineveh, the totalitarian rulers, deal with the people of earth as so much barter material. The totalitarian governments make the state supreme and the people as things to be dealt with to advance the interest of the wicked state rule. As proof of this, Germany now provides for the breeding of men and women, and the rearing of illegitimate children, that they might grow up under the supervision of the state to make cannon fodder. This is further corroborated by the four-man conspiracy that sold Czechoslovakia at the Munich Conference; the theft of Austria; the rape of Abyssinia and
170
STe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Albania; and also of Poland, and the unwarranted assault upon Finland. Concerning the bloodthirsty, political, totalitarian rulers Jehovah’s prophet, by God’s command, wrote: “Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and robbery; the prey departeth not; . . . because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavored harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.”-Nahum 3:1-4.
38	In all these wicked deals the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has conspired with and aided and supported the totalitarian rulers in carrying out their wickedness, the religious element hoping to ride on top and hold the position of spiritual advisers and rulers of the earth. This wicked combine will be made a desolation, even as ancient Nineveh was made a desolation. Out of modern Nineveh shall come some seeking Jehovah, and these will be spared at the battle of the great day of God Almighty; but none of that totalitarian crowd will be spared at Armageddon. All such the Lord will make, as the prophet declares, ‘a dry and desolate wilderness.’
39	The totalitarian monstrosity rule will end for ever at Armageddon. The complete desolation is pictured by the fact that the wild beasts inhabit the place of such rule: “And flocks [{Young) droves] shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of the nations [all beasts of every kind (R.F.)]; both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge in the upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in the windows; desolation shall be in the thresholds; for he shall uncover the cedar work.” (Zeph. 2:14) That modern Nineveh now preys upon the peoples of the earth like wild and vicious beasts. She shall have just retiibution at Armageddon.—Nahum 2:11-13.
40	Ancient Nineveh indulged in the chase and slaying of wild beasts and in military campaigns and exploits, the proof of which is now found in tablets unearthed in modern times. Likewise political, totalitarian rulers today delight in the slaying of others, and particularly those who serve Almighty God. This wicked rule shall come to an end, and the desolate places of modern Nineveh shall, figuratively, be occupied by wild beasts and hateful birds; as the prophecy puts it, “the cormorant [(Tottn//) the pelican] and the bittern [porcupine (R.F.)],” which creatures are unclean according to God’s law. (Lev. 11:13,17) Continuing, the prophecy says: “Their voice shall sing in the windows [of the ruins].” Through such windows there now comes the sound of the hilarious and drunken, demonized totalitarian politicians, who, while reveling in their political debauchery, have caused the faithful servants of Jehovah God to be beheaded or shot down. God makes it clear, then, that such totalitarian rule shall be made a place of desolation. No more shall statues or images of church
saints, of great warriors and of dictators ever be found before which the people shall duck and kneel. The buildings erected now to the glory of such as Hitler, who claims that his buildings will stand for a thousand years, shall crumble to the dust. They will come to a bitter and terrible end.
41	And why? “For he [Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s Executive Officer] shall uncover [lay bare] the cedar work”; that is to say, the work that claims to be everlasting. All such work of the totalitarians is now about to collapse. The time draws near when they shall fully collapse, and then never again shall the cruel politicians enjoy their stately buildings erected to the memory of those who are demoncontrolled and who are debauching the nations of the earth. Their work will be exposed, and such work, when compared with The Theocratic Government, will appear like a dump.
42	Concerning the pomp and glory of these dictators and slayers of the innocents, the monstrous organization of the Devil that is wrecking the world at the present time, Jehovah says: “Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feedingplace of the young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the lion’s whelp, and none made them afraid* The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin. Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions; and I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.” (Nahum 2: 11-13) Such will be the condition of the modern Nineveh after Armageddon.
43	Then the Lord, with scornful sarcasm, addresses the desolated organization of the totalitarians, which has flourished for a season: “This is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly; that said in her heart, 1 am, and there is none beside me; how is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every one that passeth by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.’' —Zeph. 2:15.
44	The totalitarians now boast of their power and strength and declare that they are invulnerable. They dwell carelessly, and the big dictator says in his heart: ‘I am, and there is none else beside me.’ Then the totalitarian rule comes to an end and the place occupied by such becomes desolate. This sarcasm here spoken by the Lord is compared and contrasted with what God says to his organization, that is, those who obey his holy Word and magnify his name. (Zeph. 3:14) The present-day, boastful, wicked, harsh, cruel dictator rulers now laugh and deride the faithful servants of Jehovah God, ill-treat them in an unspeakable manner of wickedness, and to them will soon apply the words of Jesus, to wit: “Woe un
June 1,1940
^He WATCHTOWER.
171
to you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.” —Luke 6: 25.
45	The modern-day Ninevites now sing hilariously, but soon they shall mourn and weep. There were some in Nineveh that repented, and there are some today among the modern cruel rulers and who are held under their rule that flee from the religious totalitarians, and who devote themselves to God, and these will find refuge in the hour of stress. Such are persons of good will who must flee now and seek meekness and righteousness that they may be hid during Armageddon.
48 Ancient Nineveh “dwelt carelessly” and said in her heart: “I am, and there is none beside me.” She trusted in her own power and that of the demons. She built her organization which she expected to stand for ever, just as Hitler now says: “Our building is for a thousand years.” Today modern Ninevites taunt God’s covenant people, even as the Assyrians said to the Israelites: “Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria. Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?” (Isa. 37:10,11) Likewise today the religious totalitarian rulers say to Jehovah’s faithful servants: “What can your God do for you? Look to us; we are mighty.” They boastfully say: “I am the great one; I am the state, the citizen is nothing.” Then that totalitarian ruler says to the women : “You must present the state with more babies for gun fodder; you must do my bidding.” Similar boasting was done before the people of Jerusalem when Hezekiah was king. And then in one night God sent his officer who slew the boasting Assyrians. In one hour the totalitarian rule shall come to an end and perish from the earth.—Isa. 37: 3G.
47	Recently a number of Jehovah’s witnesses have been compelled to stand before Hitler’s firing squad and for a time were bullied and browbeaten by the officers in an attempt to compel them to confess that Hitler is the mighty one. Refusing, they were next told to be blindfolded, that they might be shot. These faithful witnesses refused to be blindfolded while they were being shot down. Those faithful men trusted in Jehovah to the end and were instantly raised to life in God’s glorious realm. They did not quail before their murderers.—1 Cor. 15:51,52.
48	The totalitarian misrule now defies The Theocratic Government, and in this such is fully supported by its religious allies, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. This unholy combine will soon come to a terrible end. In this hour of distress when Armageddon is approaching God warns the people who de
sire salvation to flee to The Theocratic Government. (Mark 13:14) This is the time when “the abomination of desolation” stands in the place where it ought not to stand. It claims to be the rightful ruler of the world. Therefore this is the time when those of good will must “flee to the mountains”, God’s organization, if they would be hid in the time of the battle of that great day of God Almighty.
48	The prophet of Jehovah, having at God’s command uttered His words, sarcastically directed against modern Nineveh, then says: “How is she become a desolation!” That means that, following Armageddon, the totalitarian rule, made up of religious, political and commercial mighty men, shall never function again. It shall then be a complete desolation. And who will witness that complete change? Those people of good will who now flee to the “city of refuge”, to the organization of Jehovah God under Christ Jesus. Zephaniah the prophet was given a vision of that and wrote it down. The faithful servants of God now have a vision by faith of what is shortly to come to pass, and those persons of good will who now turn wholly to the Lord also see vhat is soon to come to pass and will have a demonstration of the desolation of the wicked within a shoit time after Armageddon is fought.
80	The battle of that great day of God Almighty will leave none of the wicked. Only those who have served God and his King shall survive. Until the time after the dead bodies and bones shall be removed or buried as prophesied by Ezekiel (Ezek. 39: 9-15), the desolate places will be occupied only by wild beasts that have participated in slaying the wicked by God’s command and direction. (Hab. 2:17; see The Watchtower 1935, pages 168, 169) Therefore the words of Jehovah spoken by his prophet are concerning that wicked organization: “Ho v is she become ... a place for beasts to lie down in !” In 1:L due time Jehovah will make a covenant with the v. ild beasts, and no more will they be enemies of man. —Hosea 2:18.
51	As to the organization of the totalitarian religious institutions, such will be for ever m co::tempt in the eyes of all people who live. The smoke of the torment of such shall ascend for ever and ever (Rev. 14:11); that is to say, the memory of such, like smoke, will go up and disappear for ever. “Every one that passeth by her shall hiss, and wag bis hand.” The great nightmare of distress will then be gom* for ever, and the survivors of Armageddon will shed no more tears for those departed wicked ones. The faithful people who will form the “great multitude” will then be free and will rejoice forever.
52	Today as the faithful servants of God by fmth see what shall shortly come to pass they have much cause to sing for joy. Even while the totalitarian
172
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
spirit of demonism is sweeping over the nations of the earth the faithful followers of the Lord Jesus Christ rejoice because they know what will be the result. What is now taking place in the governments ruled by the dictators may soon come to pass in Great Britain and America. Even though this does come to pass the faithful servants of God will not be in the least deterred from doing the work which God has committed into their hands. The wicked deeds of the religionists and their allies will not discourage the faithful in the least, because they know what will be the final result. The confidence of these faithful ones is now strong because they trust wholly in Jehovah and his King, and by their action and their countenances they say: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”—Ps. 13:5.
53	Seeing that Jehovah will soon vindicate his holy name and avenge his faithful servants, the “remnant” and their “companions” calmly and serenely wait
upon the Lord. To those of good will Jehovaji, by Christ Jesus, now says: “Come out from lier [Satan’s organization], my people.” The “great multitude” are coming and together with the remnant are rejoicing and singing the praises unto Jehovah and unto his King. (Rev. 7:9,10) When Jehovah is making inquisition preparatory to the destruction of the wicked and as to the humble or obedient ones he will not forsake them. Over them is his protecting hand. He will shield them from the assaults of the enemy and bring them off victorious through Christ Jesus, and provide a place of safety for those persons of good will who fully devote themselves to him. By faith these see the day of deliverance is near. While waiting for the great and final conflict to take place they continue to seek righteousness and meekness. They desire more instruction and are anxious to be instructed, and the Lord has more instruction in store for them.
{To be continued)
CONVENTION
COLUMBUS, Ohio, July 24 to 28. That is the place and the time. Jehovah’s witnesses and companions will assemble there to consider ways and means to further the Theocratic interests. Those too far away from Columbus to attend there in person will go to the convention nearest and most convenient.
At the time when all nations are in great distress the occasion will be appropriate to give comfort to many sincere persons who are of good will toward the Most High. Encourage all persons who desire peace and righteousness to attend the convention.
Dictators and their allied enemies prevent the convention extending to countries outside of America. That is a greater reason why persons of good will in America should now assemble togadier to comfort and edify each other. There may not be many more such conventions before Armageddon. Those who love the Lord will do what they can now to aid others to see and to appreciate the great convention that shall follow Armageddon.
All the pioneers, all the zone workers, all the regional servants and all the Bethel family will attend some one of these conventions. By “America” Canada is included.
All persons of good will toward Jehovah and his King and who love righteousness and hate iniquity will be welcome, and this regardless of any religious institution with which they may be associated.
Those who have the Nazi spirit and are bent on doing injury to others or disturbing the peace of others will not be welcome.
That convention will be for the purpose of doing good to all persons who desire to see peace and righteousness prevail in the earth and who desire to see justice administered to all.
That will be an assembly of persons who worship Jehovah God in spirit and in truth. Therefore let all now keep the matter before the Lord in prayer that it may be a season
of great refreshment for those who love righteousness and a great advertisement for The Theocracy. Trust in the Lord implicitly and let your heart rejoice in the blessings he has in store for those who love and serve him Encourage your neighbors to attend and participate in the presentday blessings.
Anticipating that the spacious Fair Grounds at Columbus will not be adequate to accommodate the great multitude that will attend the convention, arrangements have already been made to simultaneously hold conventions in more than thirty other cities in the United States. All these will be tied in by private land wires so that it will in fact be one convention, all of one mind and one spirit, all united in the cause of righteousness. The other convention cities arc named below
At Columbus, Ohio, the assemblies will be at the Ohio State Fair Grounds, which the City of Columbus and the State of Ohio have graciously put at the disposal and use of the convention during the days above mentioned From the Columbus Coliseum all activities will be directed. Memorial Hall, in the downtown section of Columbus, will be used for special meetings, announcement of which will appear in due season.
Information now received shows that many will attend from Canada, Mexico, and from such European points from which they may be able to get steamship passage to America
The time will be devoted to meetings for study, for discourses to be delivered by able speakers and for service meetings, for the conducting of Model Study classes and for consideration of other ways and means to further the Kingdom interests.
The convention will be opened Wednesday, and it is expected that the president of the Society will deliver the opening address.
The peak of the convention will be Sunday, July 28, at which time all these assemblies will be addressed by the president of the Society on the subject “Religion as a World
June 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
173
Remedy”. The time for this address will be as follows:
4:	00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time
5:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time
3:	00 p.m. Central Standard Time
2:00 p.m. Mountain Standard Time
1:	00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time
The convention cities tied in with Columbus, Ohio, will
be the following: Atlanta, Ga. Bangor, Maine Beaumont, Texas Boise, Idaho Boston, Mass. Burlington, Vt. Des Moines, Iowa Duluth, Minn. El Paso, Texas Fargo, N. Dak. Fort Worth, Texas
Great Falls, Mont. Honolulu, Hawaii Jackson, Miss. Kansas City, Mo. Lincoln, Nebr. Long Beach, Calif. Medford, Oreg. Memphis, Tenn. Montgomery, Ala. Pueblo, Colo. St. Paul, Minn.
San Antonio, Texas San Diego, Calif. San Jose, Calif. Savannah, Ga. Seattle, Wash. Sioux Falls, S.Dak. Spokane, Wash. Tampa, Fla. Tulsa, Okla.
ADVERTISING
Extensive advertising will be carried on by all the publishers throughout the United States and Canada directing the attention of the people to the principal lecture by Judge Rutherford, who speaks on the subject “Religion as a World Remedy”. Fifteen million handbills are now being printed extending an invitation to all the “other sheep” to attend one of these conventions. These invitations will be consigned to all the companies for careful distribution from June 15 onward. Be sure that all persons on the back-eall list are called upon and given this information.
Everyone should have in mind that our commission is to aid those persons of good will. Controversies are undesirable. Avoid engaging in controversies while advertising the meeting or engaging in field work. If any opponent endeavors to engage you in controversy, merely say, “Come to the convention and your questions will be answered.” Remember that you are ambassadors of the Theocratic Government and should deport yourselves with calmness and dignity in keeping with that government. In the convention cities themselves there will be much additional advertising done for the benefit of the people in the vicinity of the convention.
BOOK ROOM
Each convention will have a book room where publishers can be supplied with the literature to be offered. During the convention one bound book with three booklets will be offered on a contribution of 35c. If any desire they can bring their supply with them, or they can obtain their literature at the convention book room.
Magazines for the magazine work can be obtained at the conventions, also. Publishers should bring with them their magazine bags, and their current supply of magazines if they are not needed for distribution in the local company. Come equipped with witnessing bag and phonograph.
CAFETERIA
Arrangements are being made for each convention to operate its own cafeteria, wherever this is possible. Three meals a day will be served at a nominal cost. The amount charged for meals is to cover the cost of the food and expense of operation.
AUDITORIUMS
The names and addresses of the auditoriums in the convention cities will be announced later. Each of these auditoriums will be equipped with public-address system, so that persons attending can easily hear. Brethren capable of handling a public-address system or who have had experience in this work before should register at the convention they are attending and offer their services. It is very important that reliable, experienced persons handle this work.
INFORMATION
Booths will be established at all convention points, where people can receive mail, telegrams and local information.
ROOMING
All persons desiring information concerning rooms and hotel accommodations at Columbus, Ohio, can address
Watchtower Convention Committee 187$ S. High St., Columbus, Ohio.
Addresses for other convention cities will be published soon Requests for accommodations should be made in writing, and in all cases brethren should address the Watchtower Convention Committee in the city they expect to attend. The committee will be ready to make assignments after June 1. In writing for accommodations be very specific as to the requirements, setting out the following in a letter:
Name, street, city, state or province.
Nationality, and white or colored.
Date you expect to arrive in the convention city.
Date you will leave.
Kind of accommodation you desire—residence or hotel. Number of rooms required.
Number of persons in party.
Number of married couples.
Number of single men. Number of single women. Single or double bed.
State definitely the amount you want to pay per person per day.
Good accommodations can be had at 75c per person per day in rooming houses, two or more in a room One m a room, $1.00 and up. In almost all convention cities there will be some accommodations at 50c per person per day in rooming houses. Very good rooming houses will charge as high as $1.00 per person per day. Hotels will vary. So that the brethren may have an idea of what can be obtained m first-class hotels in Columbus, and most likely in other cities, the following rates are set out:
Single rooms with bath: $2.50 and $3.00 per day.
Double rooms with bath, double bed: $3.50 and $4.00 per day.
Double rooms with bath, twin beds: $4.00, $4.50 and $5.00 per day.
Large-capacity rooms with bath, single beds, 3 persons to a room, $2.00 per person per day.
Large-capacity rooms with bath, single beds, 4 persons to a room, $1.50 per person per day.
If anyone wishes to stay in a lower-rate hotel, please make request for such. The convention rooming committee will see what they can do for you.
Your accommodations will be mailed to you It will not be necessary to report at the rooming assignment booth at
174
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the convention on your arrival, but you can go direct to your accommodations. The hotel or people operating the rooming house where you are to stay will be notified by the Convention Committee that you are coming and be told how long you will stay.
It is requested that all attending the conventions obtain their rooms through the rooming committee rather than hunt their own rooms. Your co-operation in this matter will greatly aid the committee and there will be less confusion.
It is especially requested of those persons attending the Columbus convention and desiring the same room they had the last time that they make their arrangements through the Convention Rooming Committee at Columbus, giving them the name and address of the party where they stayed previously and any other brief details that would assist. If the committee can arrange this, it will be done, but your request should be in before June 20, so that these particular accommodations will not be assigned to someone else. This is mentioned because requests of this kind have come in.
HOUSE-CARS AND TRAILERS
At Columbus there is a certain space assigned for the ‘'trailer city”, in the Fair Grounds, with properly arranged streets, and persons arriving with trailers and house-cars will be assigned a location for parking during the duration of the convention. There is no need to write in advance for this accommodation. Persons attending conventions other than Columbus with trailers or house-cars should write the Rooming Committee for the exact location of the camp.
SOUND-CARS
All sound-cars in good condition may be brought to the conventions. Some of them will be used for overflow meetings; others, for announcing the public meeting in small towns, villages and probably in the convention city where operation of sound-cars is allowed.
SERVICE IN THE FIELD
A convenient number of hours during the convention will be devoted to field activity. At Columbus particularly, and the other conventions in general, arrangements must be made to give all the brethren some portion of the field activity, because of the large number attending. The following will be the four ways of advertising the Kingdom.
1.	Regular door-to-door witnessing with phonograph and literature and handbill distribution.
2.	Magazine publishers working daily at assigned locations.
3.	Special groups to handle all back-calls previous to the convention and those turned in during the convention.
4.	Information marches and the distribution of handbills on the streets.
Detailed instructions on these methods of service will be furnished at each convention. Reports of your field service in any of the above-mentioned ways should be turned in at the convention. Your report should also be turned in to your home company when you return there.
PARKING SPACE
At Columbus ample parking space for cars is provided in the Fair Grounds free. All parking will be done accord
ing to the direction of those in charge of the traffic. Other conventions are making the best arrangements possible.
CHECK ROOM
A room for cheeking packages and other like things will be provided. Those in charge of the check room will not be responsible for anything left in the check room after 9 •. 00 p.m.
FOREIGN-LANGUAGE AND COLORED MEETINGS
In the cities of Atlanta, Ga., Jackson, Miss., and Montgomery, Ala., special arrangements have been made for the assembly of the colored brethren. This is particularly noted here because of the numerous colored brethren in the South. Colored brethren, of course, are welcome at any convention.
For the benefit of the Spanish-speaking people in Mexico and the Southwest special sessions in the Spanish language will be arranged at El Paso and San Antonio, Texas. At Columbus, Ohio, if a sufficient number of brethren request a meeting in their own language, such can be arranged, and announcement of the same will be made at Columbus.
IMMERSION
At each of the conventions arrangements will be made for an immersion service for those who desire to symbolize their consecration. The baptismal talk will be given Sunday morning at eight o’clock, at which time the candidates will assemble in the main auditorium for further instructions. All persons desiring to be immersed will bring with them their own bathing suits and towels.
HOSPITAL
Doctors and nurses should register at the information booth if they desire to offer their services in case of any emergency. Where doctors and nurses are available they will take care of anyone who may become ill.
NURSERY
Where possible a nursery will be provided where mothers can take care of their infant children. The care of the children is the responsibility of the parents, and the parents can work out their own arrangements among themselves for the care of these infants. Children under five years of age should not be brought into the convention auditorium if other arrangements can be made , and if they are brought in, the one taking care of the child should take a rear seat near an aisle, so as to be able to leave without causing a disturbance.
“THE MESSENGER”
The Society will publish The Messenger immediately after the convention. All persons who desire to receive this report may subscribe for their copies through their company servant, giving him ten cents for each copy desired, which will cover the cost of publishing this report. The company servant will keep a list of all those persons subset ibing, and on July 1 mail to the Society, together with remittance, the order for the number of copies of The Messenger wanted. The Messenger is not chargeable to accounts. Remittance must accompany the order. Please send in only one order Be sure to have all subscriptions from the brethren prior to July 1. Some companies will want a few extra copies for back-call work. These should be ordered at the same time, together with remittance. If the brethren order through
June 1, 1940
Me WATCH TOWER.
175
the company servant it will save much time and correspondence on the part of the Society. We hope to publish The Messenger about September 1. As soon as published it will be mailed. Pioneers will be furnished one copy free by the Society. If they want extra copies they will have to order them, enclosing a remittance.
MUSIC
It is hoped that in most of the conventions a good orchestra can be arranged so as to lead in the music. Persons playing musical instruments well will please bring them to the convention they are attending and report to the convention committee. Those persons playing musical instruments and planning to attend the Columbus convention will please write in advance, stating what instrument they play. Address your letter to Watchtower Convention Committee, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
TRANSPORTATION
Railroad and bus lines have recently reduced their fares. Many of the conventloners will use these modes of travel; others, their private cars. Almost all railroads have special rates on round-trip tickets. An even better rate is arranged when 25 or more persons travel in a group going to the convention city, but they are allowed to return on any train within a certain number of days. Examples are set out here to show what advantages there are if traveling in groups, both by train and by bus.
Example - New York city to Columbus and return:
By rail, first class, round-trip rate—$35 40
Round-trip coach fare, person traveling alone, good for 60 days—$18.95.
Special parties of 25 or more, round trip, good for 20 davs—$17 10.
Persons in groups of 25 or more must travel together from same starting point to the convention city, all having similar tickets, but they can come back on any train within 20 days on the same railroad, or, in some instances, if arranged with the ticket agent, they may return on a different railroad. Tins arrangement must be made m advance
If 150 persons group together, getting the $17 10 roundtrip coach fare, a special train can be made up out of New York to Columbus, otherwise, special cars for the group can be attached to any regular tram New York to Columbus
From New York to Columbus the same rate would apply on the Pennsylvania, the Baltimore & Ohio and the New York Central railroad. If a group of 25 wish to go to Columbus on the Pennsj Ivania railroad and some of this group want to return on the New York Central, they could have their ticket so arranged before they leave. Persons desiring to go to Columbus via Baltimore & Ohio could also return by the New York Central.
These illustrations are given here so that you might inquire of your local railroad agent as to his best arrangement for an individual trip or a group out of your city to your nearest convention point or to Columbus
BUSES
Bus companies offer rates lower than the railroads As an example, a person traveling from New York to Columbus, one way, would pay $9 25. If he purchased a round-trip ticket it would be $16.65. Where groups of 10 or more travel
together going to the convention city, a round-trip ticket is $15.00 They may return on any regular scheduled bus « ith-in six months. Round trip to Columbus, 25 or more in a group, $13.90 each The same rule applies as in part les of 10
Chartered buses out of New York to Columbus, 33 passengers in a bus, $422.00 for the bus; average cost approximately $12.80 each. If a sufficient number of passengers can arrange for the big cruiser type Greyhound 37-passenger bus, the charge would be $467.00, making an average cost per person of $12.60 for the round trip The party going out as a group in one bus may return on anv regular scheduled bus, or if the group desires to return m a chartered bus it can be arranged.
All large companies, in particular, should select of e brother to investigate all means of travel and report to the company, so that the brethren can use the best means of travel at rates convenient to themselves In man; instances companies within one zone might find it a saving to go to one central point and from there charter a bus or make special arrangements with the railroad The zone seiv.int m these instances might well look into the details, communicating with the passenger agent of the railroad best serving Ins territory.
ISOLATED PUBLISHERS IN SMALL COMPANIES
Brethren in this group desirous of coming to the Columbus convention, in particular, might communicate vsi’li large companies such as Los Angeles, San Francisco. Chr-a-go, if in that vicinity, and see what arrangements they arc making. It may be that these brethren can join a special train or special car or bus that they are arranging All companies making arrangements for any special trains or buses should, as soon as it is definitely settled, communicate this information to the Society, so that publicity can be made either in The Watchtower or in the Informant for the convenience of other brethren on route who desire to tn in
Brethren in the New York area desiring to ’.-ke adva■; tage of this group arrangement, either on S.durd.iv, Jidv 2b or on Tue.sd.iv evening, July 23, si o ild «i iti to
Watch Tower Bible & Tract S< ty Convention Traveling Committee
117 Adams St , Brooklyn, N 5' and the information concerning special eai-s attaci id to regular trains, and schedules of chartered buses, w 2 be given them. In their letter they should state whether the. desire to travel by train or bus, how main m the paity. and on what day they wish to leave New York.
In a world of distress and perplexity Jehovah's witnesses will rejoice in the blessed privilege of assembling ,.t the Theocratic Convention. Every one of the “other sheep ' will look to The Theocracy as the only hope and vv ill make every effort to attend this convention Evervone will b-diligent in trying to arrange his vacation for tins period and will conclude his plans so that he will be at Columbus or at one of the other convention cities provided bv the Lord for his aid and comfort. All lovers of righteousness look to the Theocratic Convention of Jehovah’s witnesses as a provision of the Lord and will truly say as the psaimist did. “Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies thou anointest my head with oil , mv .-up runneth over ”—Psalm 23- 5
FIELD EXPERIENCES
ECCLESIASTICAL OPPOSITION ALSO IN INDIA
“War conditions have not affected the kingdom work as yet. There has been a registration of Europeans, but so far no conscription laws have been put into force.
“The reproduction of the ‘Fascism or Freedom’ lecture has brought forth some opposition, but this has been met in the proper way and Jehovah has given us his blessing. Bangalore is a town in southern India noted for being religious. The giving of the ‘Fascism’ lecture there led to a petition, signed by 150 people, including three Catholic priests, being made to the police authorities, complaining against the ‘insult’ to the Catholic church. The local magistrate ordered an enquiry by the police. The result was that both the magistrate and the police officials had the message placed squarely before them; the complaint was rejected as groundless, with a warning that if any of the signatories interfered with or did harm to the ones operating the transcription machine all the 150 would be held responsible. Since then we have had no trouble, but police1 have been on the spot each time the message has been given and both the ‘Fascism’ lecture and ‘Government and Peace’ (and others) have been given several times. The local newspapers came out with some publicity also, which helped forward the witness.
“I have just returned to Bombay from a short tour in the Punjab. The message of truth has taken hold there amongst the simple village folk, but not amongst the more educated townspeople. I found the local missions making frantic efforts to win over these people by erecting schools for them, but the witness given during the last few years has identified many sheep amongst these simple people. I gave them the ‘Snares’ article from The Watchtower, and it proved most timely. A number of village headmen, along with the more mature minds in the community, showed sensible appreciation of the warning against ‘religion’ and complete disregard for the missionaries. The inability of the missionaries to answer the questions these simple folk put to them has truly made them a laughingstock. Truly the Lord has caused the wisdom of the wise to perish in that locality.
“I am sending you a booklet recently published by a local Catholic priest, entitled The Vatican and International Policy, which might interest you. The last page is particularly interesting, revealing the cherished hope of the Hierarchy. I quote the following: ‘It will be a grand day for them [Catholic patriots] on which a Papal Nuncio will present his credentials to the Indian Government and an Indian ambassador will be a member of the Diplomatic Corps at the Vatican.’ ”
MAGAZINE ROUTE BY MAIL IN ONTARIO, CANADA
“Many siokly brethren can try this out and thus have a part in the Kingdom service. I have begun a route by mail. I have sent out letters to my friendly people I have kept listed, and a copy each of the magazines. I have already three permanent ones on my list of mailing, two of which take both magazines and one The Watchtower. One subscriber I had called on twice for a six-month or year subscription for The Watchtower, and now I have heard from her as wishing both magazines this new way. I just wasn’t going to be left out because I was too sickly to walk around, and so I took it upon myself to try this method.”
WORKING BUSINESS IN WARTIME LONDON
"As a business-house pioneer it has been my privilege to bear witness to some of the big business houses in the city of London. Today I called on a businessman in one of the largest offices in the city and presented to him the Kingdom message, and also that the Devil’s organization (which I fully explained) would be utterly destroyed by Jehovah in the great battle of Armageddon to make way for The Theocracy. ‘My dear boy,’ he exclaimed, ‘the sooner it is done the better.’ He further said: ‘This is one of the Devil’s palaces, and we are all here for the one purpose of making money.’ I said: ‘You have surely spoken the truth, but 1 feel sure in this building there must be some people of good will, who, if they knew of God’s kingdom, would earnestly desire it.’ He willingly gave me a contribution for a bound book and Government and Peace and said he would be glad if I would call later on and see him. Another Big Business man at first was a bit indignant that I had managed to get into his private office, but when I boldly and fearlessly told him I had come to bring him a message of comfort and hope in these times of distress, he quite changed and told me that he had been brought up to be very religious, but in face of all that is happening in the world today, he said, ‘all my beliefs are in the melting pot.’ I assured him that these books would prove God’s gracious purpose for the comfort and protection of all those who took their stand firmly for Jehovah and his King and kingdom and against all religion He also willingly took the books and wished me all the best in my work. In checking up to this point, in two and a half hours I had placed six bound books and twelve booklets right in the heart of Big Business.
“By this time London’s blackout was due, practically all lights out by 4:30 p.m., and then one has to grope around the best he can. I wanted to get into St. Mary Axe and could not in the darkness quite judge the way. So I asked one of the group of four men the way, and he directed me, and in doing so said, ‘But there is no more saint left about it.’ I said, ‘You are quite right; it is the Devil’s business.’ This gave me an opportunity to give these four businessmen a brief pointed witness. They took a booklet and all promised to read it, and as they went on in the blackout sang out ‘Good-bye, old boy, many thanks, and all the best1’
“Going home by train about one and a half hours’ journey from London I nearly always have the privilege of witnessing to my fellow passengers. Tonight three in train listened very attentively and each took a booklet. Arrived home a bit tired, but full of joy. This is a rather lengthy letter, but I felt sure you would rejoice to know there are many businessmen in the city of London who are anxious to know of Jehovah’s King and kingdom.”
ROUTE WORK SUPERIOR IN IDAHO
“The route system of placing the individual magazines here works well and does better than the street method. In forty hours of service in the field I placed 31 Watchtower and 60 Consolation copies, having a route in two territories. Some have tried the street method, but not so successfully. The route gives one a better opportunity to get into the homes and thereby acquainted with the people. To my mind people would rather talk to one on spiritual things at their homes. Three children were out this month in the work, and thirteen adults reporting for this Pocatello company.”
170
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford, President___W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun ; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS Journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
■United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Gs. American remittance* should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British...................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ...........-.....Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every cas&
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Wotch-tower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
notice to Subscribers; Acknowledgment ot a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y , under the Act of Uaroh S, 1879
"LOCUST ARMY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Summer’s opening is marked by the “Locust Army” Testimony Period, during the whole month of June It is a movement of Jehovah’s “locusts” against religion by a campaign to increase yet more the subscription list of The Watchtower. The unusual offer in effect during the campaign is operating greatly to that result, to wit, one year’s subscription for The Watchtower together with the premium of a choice of any bound book and a self-covered booklet on a contribution of but one dollar, foreign countries, $1.50. This Testimony Period is the final of a three-month campaign with The Watchtower. Now is not too late to arrange for some part therein, as to territory, equipment, tune, supplies, distributor’s copies, etc. If unacquainted with an organized company of publishers in your locality, notify this office of your wish to get in touch with such for this Testimony. Those in foreign countries should write the branch office having supervision. The informant (which is free) goes into greater detail on this.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of July 21: “Instruction” (Part 6),
fl 1-25 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15,1940.
Week of July 28: “Instruction” (Part 6),
fl 26-60 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1940.
VACATION
The annual vacation period of the members of the Bethe1 family at Brooklyn this year is from Saturday, July 20, to Sun day, August 4, inclusive. This will allow them a diversion from their regular activities at headquarters, and especially to avail themselves of the privileges of the 1940 Theocratic Convention of Jehovah's witnesses and of the increasing opportunities for field witnessing The normal operations of the factory and office will be suspended for that period; no books will be shipped or regulai mail answered. Hence all field publishers should order sufficiently in advance that their supplies of literature to carry them through the vacation period and to the end of August may be shipped out not later than the evening of Friday, July 19. Also reserve your correspondence with the factory and office until after Monday, August 5.
THEOCRATIC CONVENTION OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
The manifest leadings of the Lord indicate that all lovers ot the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God should assemble m general convention in 1940. Columbus, Ohio, has been selected as the key city for a five-day convention of Jehovah’s witnesses The dates will be July 24-28 inclusive. Announcement is made (Continued on page 191)
SeWCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	June 15, 1940	No. 12
INSTRUCTION
PART 6
"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusteth in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength."—Isa. 26:3,4.
JEIIOVAH continues to instruct his people, that they may be very courageous, strong in him and in the power of his might. In this hour of great distress, when the demons by the use of religion are debauching the human race and the woes upon the world are increasing, the faithful servants of Almighty God, both the “remnant” and the people of good will, must continue to seek meekness and to receive instruction from Jehovah. Those who now know of The Theocracy and the blessings it will bring to the people, and who obey the great Theo-crat, must hold fast to what they have and continue to increase their knowledge and to confidently rely upon their great Teacher, the Lord. Wickedness shall not continue for long now. Jehovah God is in his holy temple. His judgments by Christ Jesus proceed. Within a short time Jehovah will bring the religious, totalitarian oppressors down from their high places and put them where they belong. “For he bringeth down them that dwell on high; the lofty city, he lay-eth it low; he layeth it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it even to the dust. The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy."—Isa. 26:5,6.
2	In this issue of The Watchtower Jehovah turns his attention again to rebellious, unfaithful and bloody “Christendom”. He emphasizes the fact that upon the skirts of the religionists of so-called “Christendom” is found the blood of many innocents. Those innocents whose blood has been shed embrace the “remnant” and their “companions”, a number of whom have recently been killed to satisfy the malicious spirit of religionists. Jehovah by his Word and his witnesses in times past has raised his voice against “Christendom” and repeatedly warned her, but the leaders of “Christendom” continue to disobey his commandments. She turns a deaf ear to Jehovah, the great Theocrat, and puts her trust in demons. She not only holds herself aloof from The Theocracy, but opposes it and prevents others from fleeing to that great “city of refuge” which God has provided for those who sigh and cry for the abomina
tions seen in the religious organizations. “Christendom’s” religious, political, commercial, judicial and military elements are loud-mouthed, rapacious and greedy, seeking the honor and praise of men, and putting on a form of godliness, posing before the people as followers of Christ but denying Jehovah God and his King. She chooses to obey and teach the traditions of the world rather than give consideration to God’s Word. She obeys the demons and rebels against the Most High.
3	The prophecy then shows that Jehovah continues to send his witnesses throughout “Christendom", commanding them to declare his judgments against the unfaithful who have professed to serve God and Christ. “Christendom” shows no shame for her unholy conduct, but walks on in darkness and in rebellious action in defiance of the Most High. In the Bible and in secular history Jehovah has given “Christendom” many examples of retributive justice executed against those who defy his name and challenge his supremacy. This, however, is not heeded by “Christendom”, and particularly by her leaders. “Christendom” refuses to consider the witness work which the Lord is causing to be carried on m the earth. His work is a “strange work” to them because it exposes the hypocritical to the view of all hone-t men. “Christendom” goes from bad to worse, and finally God commands all creation to take heed to the fact that he will wait only a little longer and then he will perform his “strange act”.
WOE TO THE REBELS
4	Resuming the detailed consideration of the prophecy at this point, note that Jehovah says to “Christendom”, and specifically to her leaders: “Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city!” (Zeph. 3:1) The announced woe of Jehovah here is upon Satan’s organization, and particularly the religious element thereof operating in the earth, and Jehovah’s time draws near when just punishment upon the wicked shall be executed. Note, then, that in this part of the prophecy Jehovah turns away
179
WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N. Y.
from modern Nineveh, that is, the political element that defies his Theocratic Government, and specifically directs his attention to religious “Christendom”, which was pictured by unfaithful Jerusalem. As Jerusalem fell away to religion and defied Almighty God, even so “Christendom” at this time has followed the same course. Today “Christendom” practices what the leaders call the “Christian religion”, professing to be in covenant relation with God and that the leaders in “Christendom” are his servants. In fact “Christendom” is made up of a rebellious crowd that do the will of the Devil and other demons. Jehovah calls “Christendom” ‘that filthy city [that rebellious city (R.P.)]’. Ancient Jerusalem rebelled against Jehovah while at the same time claiming to be the servants of the Most High. Jerusalem made a record against herself, and concerning this God caused his prophet to record: “Nevertheless they [the professed servants of God; Jerusalem] were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy prophets, which testified against them to turn them to thee; and they wrought great provocations.”—Neh. 9:26.
5	Jerusalem was more reprehensible than others because she claimed to serve God, whereas her leaders, particularly, were extremely hypocritical. They were the sons of the Devil, as the Lord’s Word shows: “And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that ha.th rebelled against me; they and their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day.” (Ezek. 2: 3) “Thus saith the Lord God, This is Jerusalem : I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries that are round about her. And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about her; for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not walked in them.” (Ezek. 5:5,6) “But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone.” (Jer. 5: 23) “Make ye mention to the nations: behold, publish against Jerusalem, that watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against the cities of Judah. As keepers of a field are they against her round about; because she hath been rebellious against me, saith the Lord.”—Jer. 4:16,17.
‘ The woes that come upon mankind from Satan are due to malicious hatred. The woes that come upon rebellious ones from Jehovah God are for just punishment. To rebellious Jerusalem Jesus said: “0 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.”—Matt. 23:37,38.
T The antitype of Jerusalem, present-day “Christendom”, rebels against God, because she openly claims to be in a covenant with God, yet persists in breaking all his commandments and turning wholly to demonism. She sides in with God’s avowed enemy and works constantly against The Theocracy and against the faithful people of the great Theocrat. “Christendom” now works hand in hand with the heathen nations which openly defy Jehovah, the Almighty God. “Christendom” is therefore a covenantbreaker and worthy of death.—Rom. 1: 31, 32.
• Within the borders of “Christendom” there have been two classes of persons: one, the ruling, religious element; and, second, those of good will toward God who have been held in subjection and in prison by the ruling element, that is to say, the clergy and the “principal of the flock”. Present-day “Christendom” includes within her borders both the rebellious class and those who shall form the “great multitude”. The religious ones are still in the dark and walk on in darkness; while those of good will are seeking the light, that they may find the way of escape. Jehovah compares the two classes in these words: “Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron; because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of the Most High; . . . Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses. He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder.” —Ps. 107:10,11,13,14.
’ God thus shows that those of kind heart and of good will toward him he delivers out of trouble. Such persons of good will escape and flee to The Theocratic Government and thus find a place of safety, while the rebellious ones remain in darkness and upon such a just retribution shall be visited.
10	The ultrareligionists are, as the prophecy says, “polluted.” It was so with unfaithful Jerusalem; so it is now with unfaithful “Christendom”, who practices the “Christian religion”. Concerning these rebellious ones the Lord says: “They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.”—Lam. 4:14.
11	That description exactly fits the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergymen who advocate wars, such as that carried on by Franco and by Hitler and others, men who,- bent upon satisfying their own ambition, have no regard for the rights or the lives of other creatures. All these unholy, uncalled-for wars have been fully supported by the “Hierarchy of Authority”. After Franco had finished his ruthless and bloody slaughter in Spain he was commissioned by the Hierarchy to offer sacrifices in the temple, as though he were a priest appointed by God
June 15,1940
WATCHTOWER.
181
for that purpose. Thus he reproached God’s holy name after having been guilty of the greatest crimes against men. The Hierarchy entered into concordats with Hitler and Mussolini, who likewise in recent years have indulged in an uncalled-for slaughter of human creatures. And now, when there is another cruel and unrighteous war on in Europe, many of the clergy, even in the United States, urge that the United States government must enter that war. On January 21, 1940, the American Press Association published throughout the land the following: “Protestant clergymen, at their meeting in New York city, issued a statement declaring that Christians cannot remain neutral in the present international conflict; that the American churches are under obligation to lead their nation in assuming a responsible relationship to these wars.” Thus they show that they are in darkness and continue in rebellion against The Theocracy.
12	Those persons of good will toward God take note of Jehovah’s denunciation of the religious leaders, whose garments are besmeared with human blood unrighteously shed. To such Jehovah says: “In thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents ; I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.” (Jer. 2:34) “But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness. None call-eth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth; they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.”—Isa. 59:2-4.
13	In the face of such plain statements of warning from the Almighty God religious leaders harangue the people about religion, the purpose being to induce the fearful to flee into their religious organizations, which are the traps of Satan. These big religionists induce the political and commercial allies to cry out to the people: “We need more religion, else our nation will perish.” Thus the religionists continue their rebellious and hypocritical course against Jehovah. Those religionists continue to claim that they offer sacrifice unto God: “Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible.”—Mal. 1: 7.
OPPRESSORS
14	Further describing the rebellious and filthy "Christendom”, Jehovah says: “To the oppressing city.” Thus God foretold that the organization of "Christendom” would oppress all who would not come under her control. “Christendom” has long oppressed the servants of Jehovah. Today they re
proach and oppress Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions in a way more cruel than at any time past. These faithful servants of Almighty God “Christendom” persecutes and oppresses without excuse or cause. Throughout all the earth the religious leaders oppress Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions and attempt to deprive them of all lawful rights and privileges and to hinder them from carrying the kingdom message to those who desire to hear. They even denounce them before the other governing factors, denying the individual rights of men to worship Almighty God as he has commanded. All this they do in defiance of God’s law. When a “stranger”, that is to say, a person of good will pictured by Jonadab, seeks the truth the clergy vex him, and this they do in violation of God’s law7: Leviticus 25:14, 17; Leviticus 19: 34.—Ezek. 22: 2, 7.
15	Unfaithful, religious “Christendom” continues to interfere with the strangers to The Theocracy and to try to prevent them from hearing the truth. When public halls are taken by Jehovah’s witnesses and it is advertised that the people might come and hear the gospel message, particularly concerning The Theocratic Government, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allies demand that the use of the hall shall be denied and that the meeting of Jehovah’s witnesses be broken up and that these faithful witnesses of the Lord be driven out. All possible influence is brought to bear by such religionists to prevent the people of good will from hearing by radio the message of The Theocratic Government. The freedom of the press and freedom of worship are denied to the faithful servants of God, and in this the Hierarchy call to their aid and into action the political and commercial elements of the governments. In the totalitarian parts of “Christendom” laws are enacted and enforced making it a crime to assemble and study the Word of God. The police are employed to arrest, assault and imprison those who bear testimony to the name of the Most High. All the facts, therefore, show that the religionists, that is to say, unfaithful “Christendom”, are both filthy and an oppressive organization. Jehovah takes notice of all such and declares that in his own due time and good way he will act.
” Further speaking of that rebellious organization “Christendom”, Jehovah says: “She obeyed not the voice; she received not correction; she trusted not in the Lord; she drew not near to her God.” (Zeph. 3:2) Repeatedly Jehovah has spoken to “Christendom” by his prophets and repeatedly brought to the attention of the religious leaders their rebellious acts against God and his kingdom. The religionists have had the Bible in their possession and have even had to do with distributing it throughout the earth, and yet they refuse to hear and to obey the instruc
182
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tion that comes to them from the Almighty God. Because she has refused to receive instruction and correction, and because she has refused to trust in Jehovah, but has turned away to demons, Jehovah says to her: “Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof.”—Ezek. 22: 21.
17	Jehovah has been long-suffering with “Christendom”, and now there is no excuse that she can offer for her rebellious spirit toward the Most High and for her persecution of the servants of the Almighty God. The messages which Jehovah sent to unfaithful Jerusalem now apply with stronger force to “Christendom”, for the reason that “Christendom” is the antitype of unfaithful Jerusalem and has had to do with the experiences of Jerusalem, and the repeated warnings set forth in the Bible: “But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people; and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you. But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward.” (Jer. 7 : 23, 24) “Therefore now amend your ways, and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God; and the Lord will repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you.” (Jer. 26:13) This latter scripture is a further warning from Jehovah calling upon “Christendom” to repent in order that she might escape destruction. There is no doubt that these prophecies were spoken primarily to Jerusalem, and there cannot possibly be a doubt that they apply more fully to “Christendom”, because it is plainly written: “Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples [types (margin)] ; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.”—1 Cor. 10: 11.
18	As Jeremiah spoke primarily to Jerusalem the message of Jehovah God, so now the antitypical Jeremiah, Jehovah’s witnesses, at the command of the Most High, brings Jehovah’s message to “Christendom” and calls her attention thereto and that of all who have a hearing ear. God tells all such that they must hear and obey, otherwise they cannot receive his protection and blessing. Repeatedly these commandments of the Lord have been called to the attention of “Christendom”, and particularly that of her religious leaders, but the message of warning is refused. The religionists disdain God’s servants and denounce them as meddlers in religious affairs. “Christendom” imagines herself to be a law unto herself, with no one having any right to criticize her or call attention to her rebellious course of action. Jehovah’s witnesses carry the message of God to “Christendom”, and not their own message. Therefore the
opposition on the part of “Christendom” is against The Theocratic Government.
CORRECTION REFUSED
12	Self-centered, arrogant and scornful, the religious leaders refuse all instruction offered to her by the Lord, and therefore he says of her: “She received not correction [that is to say, instruction].” When Jehovah’s servants take his message throughout “Christendom” the leaders say, in substance: “We are clergymen; no one can teach us. Away with you! We have the Bible; we do as we like.” At all times these men have had the Bible. They have no excuse for being ignorant of what the Scriptures contain. They have claimed to teach and to discipline the heathen nations, but they refuse to correct their own course of action. They could have received the knowledge of the truth and faithfully imparted it to others, and this they have not done. Concerning their course of action Jehovah says: “He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct* he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?” (Ps. 94: 10) As Jehovah warned unfaithful Jerusalem, so he now continues to warn “Christendom”: "Be wise now. therefore, 0 ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.” (Ps. 2:10-12) “Be thou instructed, 0 Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee; lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.” (Jer. 6: 8) Instead of appreciating such instruction from the Lord religionists, particularly “Christendom”, refuse to hear. The leaders in “Christendom” see only the frail servant-of God, who have brought to them God’s message, and vent their spleen upon these creatures rather than give heed to the words of the Lord set forth in the Bible. Jehovah foreknew this, and he caused hi-prophets to forewarn “Christendom”.
20	Have the religious leaders trusted the Lord God ? He answers: “She trusted not in the Lord.” For thi-reason “Christendom” has no claim for protection during Armageddon and shall receive none. Only those who seek righteousness and meekness, trusting fully in Jehovah and his King, have any promise of being hid at Armageddon. To those faithful ones, pictured by Jonadab and Jonathan, Jehovah says: “I will surely deliver thee [from the Executioner], and thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee; because thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 39:18) “Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.” (Jer. 35:19) These words of the Most High apply at the present time.
®>e WATCHTOWER.
June Io, 1940
21	“Christendom” trusts wholly in human influence brought forth by the Devil for the purpose of deceiving: such inventions as peace pacts, protective associations, armies and navies, Papal concordats, traditional lies, the power of money, the assurance- of dictators, the words of the pope or others of the Hierarchy; and then continues to howl before the people and harangue them, saying, “Give us more religion.” All of these things are the result of the influence and power of the demons upon those who practice religion. These opponents of The Theocracy make idols and trust in them, because the demons have induced them to defy the Almighty God and disobey his commandments. Therefore God says to them: “What profiteth the graven image, that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?” (Hab. 2:18) “He that trusteth in his riches shall fall; but the righteous shall flourish as a branch.” (Prov. 11:28) “He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool; but whoso walk-eth wisely, he shall be delivered.” (Prov. 28: 26) The leaders in “Christendom” have not drawn near unto Jehovah God. Now the great Theocratic Government holds no interest for them whatsoever. They defy the Almighty's righteous government and continue to oppose it.
ROARING LIONS
22	The high-ups in religion, politics and commerce are designated as princes because such rule. These princes or mighty ones put the people in fear to keep them in subjection, and of such princes Jehovah says: “Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.” (Zeph. 3:3) Such princes brag and roar, hoping thereby to frighten the people into submission and obedience to their edicts. The pope and others of the Hierarchy roar over the radio to impress their importance upon the people of the world. Hitler, Goebbels, Mussolini, Roosevelt and others likewise roar out their words, hoping thereby to cow the people into subjection. They require the radio stations and public press to repeat their roarings, and thus they frighten their prey by their big noise. Jehovah knew their number from the beginning and he recorded it for the benefit of those who now trust in him. Such roaring ones are after their prey: “The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.” (Ps. 104: 21) These newly elevated lions thus described by the Lord have no regard for the people’s rights but to use the people for their own selfish purposes. They open their mouths and howl and roar like mad lions and bulls: “They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion.” (Ps. 22:13) Today the roaring of the reli
1S3
gious and political lions continues with ever-increasing noise. Their roaring frightens everybody except Jehovah’s witnesses and their faithful companions, who serve God and who therefore fear no creature. These mighty roaring princes claim to be the higher-ups and higher powers, but they are not.
2S	Concerning the judges Jehovah says they are “evening [night] wolves”; “they leave nothing till the morrow.” (Rotherham and Revised Version) “Christendom's” political, religious judges are anxious to please those mighty men of their organization, and therefore they lend their ears to the big religious princes. Such is particularly true in many places in New Jersey. Those judges send Jehovah’s witnesses to prison merely because they bring to the attention of the people the message of God for the consolation of the people that they might have hope. When the witnesses of Jehovah are haled into court some big influential Roman Catholic exercises his influence, and the decision against Jehovah’s witness is a foregone conclusion. When the higher-up princes in the Hierarchy libel or slander anyone who speaks the truth concerning that rebellious organization, the courts announce that they have a right to thus indulge in slander and libel for the protection of then-flocks. God will not overlook such judicial conclusions. The Lord God likens them unto wolves that leave nothing over until the next day but clean up right now and remove all the bones that might obstruct and hinder the march of the religious princes.
24	Throughout the prophecies Jehovah recounts the many wrongful deeds of his typical people; and such record applies with greater force now to “Christendom”, because she is unfaithful and more reprehensible than her prototype. The prophets that served unfaithful Israel were not all sent of God. Many of those prophets (preachers) in Israel claimed to be the servants of God and to speak for him but were false prophets. (Deut. 13:1-5) Such false prophets are today serving in “Christendom”, particularly those who are of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. They try to induce the people to believe that they represent God, but they do not. Of them Jehovah God says: “Her prophets are light [leaping ones] and treacherous persons; her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.”— Zeph. 3:4.
25	They leap into prominence for selfish show and gain. They are proud and vain-glorious in their attempt to appear before the political and commercial element as very important and very necessary. They seek the chief seats at political gatherings and feasts and on any and all occasions. They are clothed with unusual garments to impress the people as being very great and very good.-Matt. 23:1-11; 2 Tim. 3: 5.
26	The modern-day "prophets”, particularly the
184
3Ee WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Roman Catholic Hierarchy, are, as stated, “treacherous persons”; that is, deceitful, lying and misleading the people. They put on a pious face and then secretly confer with the political and commercial element to do violence to others who are pursuing a righteous course. What God said of the false prophets of Israel and Jerusalem exactly fits the conditions that now exist amongst the Roman Catholic Hierarchy clergy, who claim to serve God and yet who resort to all manner of treacherous lies for selfish purposes. (Isa. 28:15) “Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me.”—Jer. 3: 20.
27	As they deal treacherously with God’s servants, so they deal treacherously with him: “For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the Lord. They have belied the Lord, and said, It is not he, neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see sword nor famine; and the prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them; thus shall it be done unto them.” —Jer. 5: 11-13.
28	Those clergymen have turned entirely away from Almighty God and Christ Jesus and have turned wholly to demonism or religion. Claiming to represent God, they treacherously act by claiming to preach God’s Word to the people while going contrary to that Word themselves. They put forward the doctrines of men, which originated with the demons. They deal treacherously with the Lord and with his witnesses, hiding behind the strong-arm squad and their ignorant dupes to carry out their wishes. They torment the people who serve God, by committing all manner of treacherous acts. They cause the arrest of Jehovah’s witnesses and induce political judges to inflict punishment upon them. Outwardly those treacherous prophets (preachers) profess to be servants of God, but they are in fact committing spiritual fornication with other elements of Satan’s organization.
29	Furthermore, says Jehovah of the false teachers of “Christendom” who claim to represent him: “Her priests have polluted the sanctuary.” Antitypically, this declaration of the Lord includes all the antitypical Levites, the clergy of “Christendom” and the “evil servant” class, once begotten of the spirit, who have become unfaithful and who oppose The Theocratic Government. They were once in line for a place in the royal priesthood, but all of them together, that is to say, the clergy and the “evil servant”, constitute the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition.” —2 Thess. 2: 3.
80	“Christendom’s” priests have polluted what they falsely call God’s sanctuary, and the others of the “man of sin” pollute God’s real sanctuary. Therefore God says of such: “Moreover, this they have done
unto me; they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths. For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they [with bloodstained hands] came the same day [straight from idol-worship and the spiritual slaying of those who would serve the Lord] into my sanctuary [there claiming to serve Jehovah God] to profane it; and, lo, thus have they done in the midst of mine house.” —Ezek. 23: 38, 39.
81	Otherwise stated, they have tried to mix devilworship or religion with what constitutes the worship of Almighty God, using the name of God in vain and using it to deceive the people and draw them into their religious trap and thus cause their destruction. Applying these wTords of the prophets to the “evil servant”: they have turned against God’s organization, and attempt to turn other consecrated ones away and thus bring about their destruction, and then come straightway from their bloody acts into God’s real sanctuary, that is, amongst his truly devoted people, and there falsely claim to represent him. This they do because they are under the power and influence of demons and, like the demons, are in darkness.
82	These polluters of the sanctuary also abuse and maltreat those who are in fact a part of God’s sanctuary. The clergy of the Hierarchy, in particular, swear allegiance to the totalitarian monstrosity and work with such to gain control of the earth, and compel the worshiping and “heiling” of men, and the saluting of flags, thus attributing salvation to men and earthly things controlled by the state. Thus they put the state above Almighty God, while at the same time they claim and pretend themselves to be servants of Almighty God. They have brought military men and professional politicians into their religious organizations, and they have made of them the principal ones of their flocks and induce them to support the religious practices in order to satisfy their own personal and selfish ambition. These priests have sanctified wars of conquest and brought about the shedding of blood of millions of innocents. Add to such unrighteous conduct the gambling rackets that are operated in their religious edifices, such as card playing, lotteries, bingo games, charging money for the seats or pews in their so-called “churches”, and then extracting money from their parishioners by holding before them the hideous and false doctrine of “purgatory”. Thus they have fulfilled the words announced by the prophet in Zephaniah 3:4 above stated.
88	Those political, religious priests have violated God’s law knowingly and willfully. “They have done violence to the law,” says the prophet, and have thus defamed the name of the Most High. Concerning them God speaks by another prophet these words:
June 15,1940
WATCHTOWER.
185
“Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things; they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.”—Ezek. 22: 26.
34	To those false prophets and priests Jesus says: 'Why do you transgress the commandments of God by your traditions? Thus have ye made the commandments of God of none effect by your traditions [religious doctrines and practices],’-Matt. 15:3,6,9.
35	God then announces what is the correct duty of one serving in the office of priest: “For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.” (Mal. 2:7) Contrary to that commandment of Jehovah, the priests of religion teach the people to violate God’s law and so do by bestowing honor upon men and by putting the state above Almighty God and by compelling the children to “heil” men and salute flags in order to instill into the young the theories and practices of the demons. Thus these priests pollute the sanctuary of the Lord and do violence to his law and reproach his holy name.
30	Concerning “this gospel of the kingdom”, which the Lord commands must now be preached to all the nations as a witness (Matt. 24:14), the priests not only ignore but do everything within their power to hinder obedience to such commandment. They destroy the hope of men concerning God’s provision for salvation. They deliberately fight against God and against his law. No wonder God announces his purpose to completely destroy religion and all who persist in using religion to defame his name.
37	The time is now here for the judgment of “Christendom” to be executed, and therefore it is written in the prophecy: “The just Lord is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no shame.”—Zeph. 3: 5.
38	Jehovah has installed Christ Jesus, the great Judge, upon his throne, and he now judges the nations. Therefore the Lord, being at the temple as the representative of the Most High, is in the midst of “Christendom”, not dwelling there, but as causing the present judgment of her. “God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods. How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Selah. Defend the poor and fatherless; do justice to the afflicted and needy.”— Ps. 82:1-3.
” This puts God near and affords “Christendom” an opportunity to hear and to know the truth. God and Christ Jesus are just and righteous and do no iniquity. According to the American Revised Version of this text, “Jehovah in the midst of her is
righteous.” He will do no iniquity, because God is upright. “He is my Rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.” (Ps. 92:15) Exactly opposite to the righteous Lord, “Christendom” is designated as “the oppressing city”, or organization that oppresses and does evil to mankind (Zeph. 3:1); and concerning “Christendom” (that is to say, the religious organization that claims to be God’s servants in Zion) the prophet says: “They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.” (Mie. 3:10,11) That is to say, they build up what they call “Zion”, God’s organization, with wrongdoing and shedding of blood. While performing all the wicked deeds as set forth in the above scripture, these men of “Christendom” claim to lean upon the Lord and say: “Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.” These men are so imbued with their selfrighteousness and their greatness that they brazenly say: 'Nothing evil shall come upon us.’
40	It is clearly to be seen from these prophetic expressions that “Christendom” has no excuse for her unrighteous course of action, and this is particularly true with reference to the clergy. They claim to be supported by the Scriptures. They have the Bible, but they do not follow it. In this hour when God is causing the nations to be judged by Christ Jesus, the great Judge, he says: “Every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not.” By his witnesses Jehovah gives full notice of his judgment against “Christendom”, thousands of witnesses with phonographs proclaiming the message of God to the people; millions of books setting forth the Word of God are placed in the hands of the people of “Christendom”. This message of the Lord, brought to the people, is light. Therefore God does not permit “Christendom” to have any excuse for remaining in darkness. The responsibility is upon “Christendom”, and upon her clergy in particular. The Lord calls upon them and warns them to awaken out of her stupid condition and to walk circumspectly, not as fools, but they refuse to do so. (Eph. 5:13-15) “Christendom” continues in her course of wickedness; and, says the prophet above quoted, “the unjust knoweth no shame.” The clergy and the principal of their flock have no shame before the Lord, but in the face of all his warnings they continue to practice religion, the worship of demons, and to do the will of their father, the prince of demons. God’s work of warning progresses, that is, “his strange work,” exposing the shameful deeds of “Christendom”. Instead of “Christendom” and her leaders’ giving heed to God’s Word, the clergy try to justify themselves before men and
186
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to prevent the exposure of their own wrong-doing. This they do by using every means within their power to prevent the proclamation of God’s message of truth. If these clergymen had any confidence that their course of action is right they would not be disturbed by the proclamation that Jehovah’s witnesses bring to the people.
ACTS OF WARNING
41	Jehovah was long-suffering with Jerusalem. He has been long-suffering with “Christendom”. He gave Jerusalem warning by his acts toward her and others, that she might have no excuse to continue in wrong-doing. Likewise God gives “Christendom” warning, and that repeatedly. “I have cut off the nations; their towers are desolate; I made their streets waste, that none passeth by; their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant.”—Zeph. 3:6.
42	As to Jerusalem, God had given warning in his act of cutting off the ten tribes or northern kingdom of Israel, which he did by means of using the Assyrian king Shalmaneser, whom he used as his executioner: “And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged it. And at the end of three years they took it, even in the sixth year of Hezekiah (that is, the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel) Samaria was taken. And the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria, and put them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes; because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his covenant, and all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded, and would not hear them, nor do them.”—2 Ki. 18: 9-12.
43	Sennacherib, the Assyrian king, mentioned other nations as being cut off. (2 Ki. 18:33-33; Isa. 37:11,12) Therefore God says: “Their towers are desolate”; that is, their strongholds are desolated: no one there to warn or wratch over the people. The towns are deserted, none in the streets, just left as a “ghost town”: everything reduced to ruin, and a terror to behold, all testifying to the power and thoroughness of the executioner’s work in cleaning up the unfaithful. The people that were not killed fled away or were deported into foreign lands, and none were left to rebuild. That was a warning to Jerusalem, and should be even a greater warning to “Christendom”, the antitype of Jerusalem.
44	Then came, in the year 70 (A.D.), a complete razing of Jerusalem by the Roman organization. Just as Jesus had foretold and warned the religious element, the “holy city” fell into complete desolation. Now, since the Bible plainly states that all these things
came to pass upon Jerusalem as a type or ensample as to what shall come upon “Christendom” (1 Cor 10:11), such should serve as a clear and definite warning to “Christendom” today. “Christendom's" leaders in particular, who claim to know the Bible, should give full heed thereto. “Christendom" has been thoroughly instructed and warned, both by the uttered prophetic Word of God and by his acts performed upon the prototype of “Christendom”. Does “Christendom” hear and give heed to these warnings! Does she see any instruction for her in these Biblical and historical truths published time and again? Do those acts of God speak to her more emphatically than God’s written Word?
45	In the face of such true examples as set forth m the Scriptures and of the true warnings given in God’s Word which apply to “Christendom”, she walks on in defiance of Almighty God. Upon the leaders is darkness, and the people following these leaders are in gross darkness. Now Jehovah speaks again to unfaithful “Christendom” and says: "1 said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction; so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them; but they rose caily, and corrupted all their doings.”—Zeph. 3: 7.
46	For centuries now the leaders in "Christendom" have held themselves out to the people as representatives of God and as the preachers of his Word. The clergy have had the Bible, and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, chief amongst religion, have deliberately kept the Bible away from the common people. The Protestant clergy also have had the Bible, but they have given little heed to the warning therein, and now the so-called “Protestant” clergy have ceased their protest against the unholy and wicked action--of the Roman Hierarchy and have joined up full\ with the Hierarchy in the attempt to rule the world in defiance of Almighty God. Have such religious leaders given any heed to the repeated warnings of Almighty God? Have those professed teachers of the Scriptures really sought any instruction from the Lord? The indisputable facts show they have not.
47	In the year 1918 God sent Christ Jesus his King to his temple. There Christ immediately began the examination of and testing of those who professed to be consecrated to God and in a covenant with him to do his will. The result of that judgment was and is that many consecrated ones who claimed to be devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom declined instruction and have formed themselves into the "evil servant” class. Not only have such refused to hear and give heed to the instruction from God's Word, but they have, on the contrary, opposed the proclamation of the kingdom message and vilified, abused and reproached the faithful servants of God who have proclaimed his message. Those who are there
June 15, 1940
WATCHTOWER,
187
judged, and who are sent forth to serve the Lord, and who have been diligent to hear instruction from the Lord and to obey his commandments, have been blessed by the Lord and have been sent forth to continuously proclaim the great Theocratic Government. In 1918 Jehovah shortened the trouble upon the earth in order that his witnesses might proclaim his name, and he sent them throughout the earth to do that work. Since 1922 there has been no letup of the work of the witnesses to the name of Jehovah. That period of time has been the chance of “Christendom” to hear instruction from the Almighty God to deport herself accordingly.
43	Jehovah then revealed to his faithful servants their “new name”, since when they have been properly known as “Jehovah’s witnesses”. (Isa. 62:1-3; 43: 10-12) In obedience to the Lord’s commandment these witnesses have been diligent and constant in carrying the message of God to the people of “Christendom”. Instead of hearing such message of information and warning from Jehovah and facing about and serving him, religious leaders of “Christendom” have continued to act in defiance of Almighty God and have persecuted and continue to persecute his faithful messengers. This they do because under the influence and power of the demons.
49	In the year 1922 Jehovah began to pour out the "seven last plagues” upon “Christendom”, but instead of “Christendom” taking warning therefrom the leaders of “Christendom” became angry and violent towards Jehovah’s witnesses and raised a great roar and howl, saying that the message of Almighty God “shocks our religious susceptibilities”. This they did because they were under the influence and power of the demons.
50	These ultrareligionists then attempted and have since carried on the persecution of those who obey Cod's commandments and who have brought to the attention of the people that Satan's organization is near at an end. To be sure, Satan would induce his servants to persecute Jehovah’s witnesses because they announce the rapid approach of Armageddon. The time came for Jehovah to reveal to his people their “new name” and at the same time to tell of God’s final judgment upon “Christendom”. God then contrasts those unfaithful ones with his faithful servants. To the unfaithful and defiant religious crowd Jehovah says: “But ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the drink offering unto that number. Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter; because when I called, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not."—Isa. 65 : 11, 12.
81	Then in contrast to the wicked ones Jehovah addressed the faithful: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen : for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name.” (Isa. 65:13-15) This prophecy the Lord has clearly fulfilled, and he has constantly fed his faithful servants upon the rich spiritual food from his table, and their joy has increased. The very opposite has been the state and condition of the rebellious filthy “Christendom”.
52	Jehovah in his goodness has repeatedly warned “Christendom”. And why? He answers: "So their [(7J.F.) her] dwelling should not be cut off.” Had “Christendom” given heed to God’s instruction and obeyed his voice she would not be cut off On the contrary, she has defied Almighty God; therefore Jehovah says: “Howsoever I had punished her.” (Ruth and R.V.) Jehovah inaugurated and since has carried forward his “strange work”; that is, he has sent forth his witnesses to tell the truth of and concerning ins kingdom and the punishment that shall come upon all who oppose it. The proclaiming of that truth ot God’s Word has certainly been a punishment and torment on “Christendom”, particularly of her leaders. They have gnawed their tongues and howled. Instead of heeding warning which God has given, the religious leaders of “Christendom” not only have protested violently but have resorted to all niannei of violence to prevent the proclamation of the Theocratic Government. No repentance on the part of “Christendom” has been indicated. Instead of fam g about and giving heed to Jehovah's Word, the ieli gionists have given themselves wholly over to resistance of the Almighty God, refused his warning ami instruction, and continue to indulge in the persecution of God’s faithful servants.
53	Of and concerning the course of action of “Christendom”, the religious leaders and the principal ones of their flocks, Jehovah says: “But they rose earl>, and corrupted all their doings”; that is to say, they have indulged in corrupt practices from early morning on throughout the day and night. They further corrupt themselves by joining with cruel politrial rulers who have no respect for God or man but are wholly devoted to the Devil and who oppress and regiment the people and take away all their liberty They further corrupt the people by using eveiy means at hand to prevent them from hearing instruction from God’s Word. They have been diligent da\ and night in such wicked course.
188
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
54	Right after the World War had ended these religionists got an early start by declaring that the League of Nations would furnish the means for the salvation and peaceful dwelling of the people on earth. They formed a confederacy to rule the world by man in defiance of Almighty God’s expressed purposes to rule it by Christ Jesus. Because they so did, God, foreknowing this, gave warning, saying through his prophet: “Associate yourselves, 0 ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand; for God is with us.”—Isa. 8: 9,10.
55	In further defiance of God and his King the same religious, political combine began to rage and to induce their followers to imagine a vain thing. They foamed at the mouth against God’s servants and boastingly declared that the state is above God and to be preferred and obeyed rather than the Most High. Concerning these it is written: “The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.” (Ps. 2:2,3) Then the Lord Jehovah gave them further warning, saying: “Be wise now, therefore, 0 ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.”—Ps. 2:10-12.
56	The same conspirators became more open in their defiance of Almighty God and set about to destroy his faithful witnesses in the earth who continue to carry the message to the people. This the Lord foretold; as it is written: “They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have consulted together with one consent; they are confederate against thee.”—Ps. 83: 3-5.
” Also at once the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the principal visible offspring of Satan’s organization operating in the earth, began to go about the land ‘singing her song like a harlot’ (Isa. 23: 15) and to play politics for the purpose of gaining control of the nations of the earth. That religious institution has since then continuously drawn attention to herself, thereby hoping to induce the people to believe that she has the backing of the nations that are
“fighting Bolshevism or Communism”. This she has done for the very purpose of deceiving the people and inducing them to fight against all who do not agree with her. The ambition of that religious system is to ride on the top of the world and control the political and commercial part of it. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy joins forces with Fascism and Nazism and engages in a campaign to oppose the proclamation of the name of Jehovah and The Theocratic Government, and thus she goes on in her wicked course.
“ The time arrives when the long-suffering of Jehovah toward his enemies comes to an end. That time is just the hour preceding Armageddon when God begins to maneuver his forces and the forces of the enemy for the final execution of His judgment written against the wicked. God sends forth his messengers through the land, and especially throughout “Christendom”, and causes them to sound his final warning to “Christendom” that Armageddon is near. Instead of receiving such instructions from Almighty God, and giving heed to such warning, big religious leaders say in defiance of the Most High: “We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.”—Isa. 28:15.
68	To such defiant and boastful words of the religious crowd Jehovah says: “And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.”—Isa. 28:18.
60	Now it is clearly seen that the religious leaders are marching on hand in hand with the political and commercial elements of the earth proclaiming that this combine alone can rule the world and make it a safe place for mankind. These religious leaders boldly announce that they are entirely safe from any harm and that the only means of salvation of the people is to do the bidding of the religionists and their allies. “Christendom” rushes on in darkness like the swollen waters of the Jordan rushing down to the Salt Sea. With great noise and with boldness, and in defiance of Almighty God, “Christendom” continues in her wicked course. The head of the Hierarchy and other religionists, together with the political and commercial great men, as the prophet sets forth, will soon say: “We are at peace, and we are in safety.” What will the Lord say to that boastful proclamation? What does Jehovah now say?
(To be continued)
JEHOVAH is my light and my salvation; whom shall I feart Jehovah is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraidJ —Psalm 27:1, A.R.V.
THE PRIEST AT ARMAGEDDON
THE early prototype of this true priest was a king named Melchizedek, being at one and the same time high priest of the Most High God and also king of the ancient city of Salem. Among the titles applied by Catholic prelates to the pope of Vatican City are such as “Melchisedec in Order”, “Abraham by Patriarchate,” and “Sovereign Priest”. He now faces Armageddon. The original Melchizedek was a prophetic character according to the declaration of the Most High God himself at Psalm 110:4,5, A.R.V: “Jehovah hath sworn, and will not repent : Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. The Lord at thy right hand will strike through kings in the day of his wrath.” Whom did the priest Melchizedek foreshadow V
The High Priest of Jehovah God is the one who serves him officially as his principal officer. A true-life prophecy was made foretelling that great Priest and the nature of his work. Nineteen centuries before Christ invaders overran the land of Sodom and Gomorrah, and a great conflict raged between those cities and the invaders. Abraham the Hebrew and Lot, his nephew, were there, but they took no part whatsoever in that war. (See Genesis 14:1-12.) After that war between the contending nations was all over, the invaders seized Lot and his property and fled with the same. Abraham pursued the invaders and recovered Lot, his nephew, not because he was his nephew, but because Lot was a faithful servant of Almighty God. Thus the divine rule was first established that one of God’s devoted servants is justified in acting in behalf of his fellow servants, the servants of God. The rescue of Lot accomplished by the armed forces of Abraham was fully approved by Jehovah God, as shown by what followed.
When Abraham was returning from rescuing Lot he was met by Melchizedek, who was then king of Salem [“Peace”], which position means that he was the king of peace, whereas his name “Melchizedek” means “King of Righteousness”. He gave Abraham nourishing food and drink, serving him with bread and wine, and caused Abraham to be comforted and blessed. To quote Genesis 14:18-20: “And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God. And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth; and blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he [Abraham] gave him tithes of all.”
That prophetic drama foretold the coming of a Mighty One who would fill the office of Priest of the Most High God and who would minister life-giving portions to the peoples of the earth. Jesus Christ fulfilled this prophecy and is God’s great High Priest and chief executive officer for ever, and he gave unto the people that which will bring and sustain life. (Rom. 6:23) Being God’s chief executive officer, he does and will perform all things for Jehovah and in the name of Jehovah. Concerning this it is written, at 1 Corinthians 8: 6, that ‘all things are from Jehovah and all things are by Christ Jesus’. (2 Cor. 5:18) The prophecy concerning Melchizedek shows also that the great High Priest who fills that office is at the same time the great King or Ruler in Jehovah’s Theocracy.
There was a reason, of course, why Abraham came ir. contact with Melchizedek. Concerning this the apostle Paul writes, at Hebrews 7:1-6: “For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him , to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by interpretation [of his name] King of righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of Peace, . . . made like unto the Son of God, abideth a priest continually. Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils [of victory]. And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office of the [Jewish] priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law [of Moses], that is, of their [Jewish] brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham: but he [Melchisedec], whose descent is not counted from them [the Levites], received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises.” Then Paul comments on this, saying “And without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better ” —Verse 7.
In the covenant which God made with Abraham He promised: “In blessing I will bless thee”; and, again, “In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.” (Gen 12 : 1-3) It follows then that Abraham himself must receive a blessing, and what is related in the above scripture concerning Abraham and Melchisedec shows that it is the great Priest whom Melchisedec foreshadowed that bestows the blessing upon all, including Abraham himself, who shall be resurrected from the dead and be made a ‘prince in all the earth’ under the great Theocracy. (Ps. 45:16) This prove.-, that Abraham personally is subordinate to Jehovah’s covenant and also to His royal Priest of the order of Melchisedec
When Jesus was on earth he was anointed to be King and therefore was the King at that time, but he did not assume the office of Ruler at that time. He must wait until God’s due time, which was then future, as Jesus stated to the Roman governor Pontius Pilate according to John 18:36-38. When Jehovah God raised Jesus out of death and exalted him to the highest place in heaven next to Himself, Jesus had then become the Redeemer and the One who makes atonement for sin, and he rightfully holds that title in addition to those of Priest and King Jesus then possessed the power and authority to establish immediately a righteous rule on the earth and take action against the great enemy to oust such enemy from rulership of the world and to perform the work of vindicating Jehovah’s name, and to command all the people to obey. It would have been Jesus’ greatest joy to do so then, had it been God’s due time; but God’s due time had then not yet arrived Therefore Jehovah God said to him as He had foretold through the words of the prophet David, at Psalm 110 1,2, to wit “Jehovah saith unto my lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion.” (A.Zf.V.) Paul recorded the fulfillment of that prophecy when he wrote, at Hebrews 10:12,13: “But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; from henceforth expecting [waiting] till his enemies be made his footstool.”
189
190
SEe WATCHTOWER-
Bkooklyn, N. Y.
The above prophetic statement cannot be taken to mean that Jesus must remain idle or inactive when directed to sit down, but must mean that he was to await God’s due time for taking action against the enemy to oust Satan the enemy from the courts of heaven, establish a government of righteousness, and vindicate his Father’s name. There was much other work for him to do in the meantime.
The time must come when God would subdue the enemy. Hence, “Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion [God’s organization] : Rule thou [Christ Jesus] in the midst of thine enemies.” (Ps. 110:2, A.R.V.) Jesus Christ, the King, now stands up and assumes his power and authority and begins his reign even while his enemies are still exercising power, although the enemy’s right to exercise that power has expired. Necessarily this marks the beginning of the battle in heaven by the King of glory, the loyal Son of God, and his angels on one side, against Satan, the old Dragon, God’s disloyal son, and his angels or demons on the other side. It is the fight of God Almighty in heaven against the Devil, the fight being led by God’s beloved Son and the purpose being to subdue the enemy and make the enemy the footstool of Jesus Christ the King.— See Revelation 12:1-12.
In substance, Jehovah says: “This is my fight. I am going to accomplish this work for you and those who shall willingly follow you.” No Christian who is a member of “the body of Christ” would be willing to follow the King Christ Jesus to battle until God’s due time, because he must be in harmony with the will of God When the battle in heaven begins, then is the time for the fulfillment of the third verse of Psalm 110, which reads: “Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.” They are now willing because the due time has come for Jesus Christ to take his power and begin his reign , therefore they joyfully follow him. This is exactly in harmony with the prophetic statement in Revelation 19. 11, 14 “And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make w’ar.” “And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, w’hite and clean ” It is the “woman”, God’s organization, that gives birth to The Nation , out from her comes the Kingdom. The birth of The Nation must necessarily take place at the time when Jesus Christ, the great King, stands up and assumes his regal power. As an illustration, the American nation was born at two o'clock in the afternoon of July 4, 1776, at which time the people, through their duly constituted representatives, assumed the power of government. For several years thereafter they warred against the enemy, who was in wrongful possession of their country. Likewise, God’s kingdom, the new nation, was born of God’s “woman” at the tune wiien Jesus assumed his power to reign, but after that the great fight takes place and continues until the enemy is ousted and made the footstool of the King.
For the evident purpose of identifying who is doing the work in Jehovah’s name the psalmist says further, at Psalm 110:4: “Jehovah hath sworn, and will not repent: Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.” (A.R.F.) Melchizedek wras a priest of the great Most High. He pictures the One who is bringing everything into har
mony with God Almighty. Therefore Melchizedek is a type of The Word, or Logos, of Jesus, of Christ Jesus, of the Redeemer, of the Prophet, of the Priest and of the King. Stated in briefer phrase, Melchizedek is typical of the great Executor of Jehovah’s purpose. As King and Ruler he clears out the enemy, and as Priest he ministers unto those who desire comfort. God is subduing the enemy and making him the footstool of his beloved Son, and the Lord Jesus is his executive officer in carrying out the w’ork.
Where two armies are in action and one charges the other and strikes through the ranks, the one striking through usually gains the victory and destroys the opposing army and takes as prisoners the soldiers of the vanquished army. This is exactly what is pictured by verses five and six of the 110th Psalm, to wit: “The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath He shall judge among the [nations], he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads o\er many countries.” Jehovah is here shown at the right hand of Christ Jesus and as using Christ as his great Arm and Power to destroy Satan’s organization. The time is shown to be in the day of Jehovah’s wrath. This, then, is surely “the battle of that great day of God Almighty” -Rc\ .16.14
Jehovah undertakes the work of subduing the enemy, and in doing so he uses Christ Jesus as his mighty Field Marshal to lead the fight. Psalm 45 : 3-6 pictures this mights Field Marshal, fully equipped for the great battle, with his sw’ord on his thigh, clothed with glory and majesty, riding prosperously and to certain victory The time has come for him to take his throne for ever, and the scepter, or authority for taking the kingdom, is Ins by ruiht
This great and victorious warrior and right fid Ruler is pictured at Revelation 19:11-15 as going forth to judge and to make war. In exact harmony therewith the psalmist (110:6) says: “He shall judge among the [nations] , he shall fill the places with the dead bodies ” The judimient of God is upon the nations; and this must continue until the final conflict, the great time of trouble which will end the day of God’s wrath. Concerning the great day of God’s w rath the prophecy says: “A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; for the Lord hath a controversy with the nations, he will plead with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of hosts. Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth. And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried , they shall be dung upon the ground.”—Jer. 25- 31-33
“He will strike through the head in many countries ’’ (Ps 110:6, A R.V.) “He . . . hath crushed the head over a wide land.” (Rotherham Psalms) Since this is Armageddon, the battle of God Almighty against Satan’s organization, and since to “wound”, “strike through,” and “crush'' means to render inactive or to subdue, and since “the head” well represents the power to direct the forces of the enemy, the Lord will “wound” Satan, the head over the wicked nations, and will subdue him and bind him, and this he will do in the great and final conflict. (Rev. 20 1-3) In Genesis 3:15, addressed to Satan that old Serpent, it was said concerning God’s “woman” (God’s organization, which gives birth to the Kingdom) that “her seed” (Christ Jesus) “shall
June 15,1940
WATCHTOWER.
191
bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.” This means that Satan, the head of the anti-theocratic enemy organization, is to be bruised. Speaking to the members of the body of Christ, who compose the true church, the apostle Paul says: “The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.” (Romans 16:20) The apostle John writes: “For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.” (1 John 3: 8) Thus it was the purpose of God from the beginning to use his beloved Son to destroy the works of his disloyal, treacherous son.
Summing up the 110th Psalm: After Jesus had finished his great sacrifice and ascended on high Jehovah seated him at His right hand and directed him to remain inactive against the Devil’s institutions until his due time, at which time God would make the Devil the footstool of the King of glory. The due time arrived at the end of the “times of the Gentiles”, in A D. 1914, and then Jehovah sent forth out of His organization his beloved Son to rule amongst his enemies The first work to be done was to subdue the enemy. The battle began in heaven. This fight was completed, and Satan and his demons were ousted from heaven Now the Lord Jesus Christ is the great antitypical Melchizedek priest and, as the Executor of the divine purpose, goes forth
to destroy Satan’s organization and to minister to the people of good will. The members of the body of Christ willingly and joyfully participate in Jehovah’s “strange work” as the witnesses of Jehovah and as publishers of his Theocratic Government under Christ the King. Jehovah is now at the right hand of the Lord Jesus Christ and is acting through this his beloved Son, his Arm, who shall strike through the Devil’s organization in the day of His wrath and will take Satan captive in the great time of trouble and wound his head. (Heb. 2:14) While the Lord Jesus Christ is executing his Father’s purpose in this behalf he is greatly refreshed and blessed by the experience and he greatly rejoices because the time has come to vindicate his Father’s name, oust the Devil, destroy the Devil’s unrighteous works, and erect God’s Theocratic Government of righteousness. The members of the body of Christ likewise appreciate the privilege of doing Jehovah’s will, participating with Christ Jesus m declaring the day of the vengeance of our God and announcing the incoming of his kingdom, and they are made joyful in the Lord. They, together with their earthly companions, the people of good will, look up and lift up their heads because their own deliverance is nigh and because the tune for the blessing of obedient men has come.
THEOCRATIC CONVENTION
(Continued from page 178}
this early in advance in order that Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will may have ample opportunity to arrange their affairs so as to be at Columbus, Ohio, or other cities tied in by direct wire communication and loud-speaker equipment. By the Lord’s grace, the president of the Watchtower Society will be in attendance in person at the key assembly in Columbus. For
OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
further details see The Watchtower, issue of June 1, 1940
Below is given the following information . Name and location of auditorium in each convention city; the local time at which wil. be heard Judge Rutherford’s speech on “Religion as a World Remedy”, Sunday, July 28; and the address of the local Watchtower Convention Committee (WCC), to which you may write for rooming accommodations and other convention matters
COLUMBUS, Ohio Coliseum Ohio State Fair Grounds 4pm [EST] (WCC) 187^ S High St	(MAIn 2645)
ATLANTA, Ga. Municipal Auditorium Courtland & Gilmer Sts 4 pm [C.DST] (WCC) 203^ Spring St N W (HEmlock 2511-W)
FORT WORTH.
Fort Worth Municipal West Lancaster Ave (WCC' 601 Conner
GREAT FALLS, Civic Center Auditorium (WCC) 310 10th St S
Auditorium
3pm
Mont.
2pm
[CST]
(5-5251)
[MST] (2-1659)
SAN ANTONIO, Texas Municipal Auditorium 3pm [CST ! (WCC) 134 Devine St	(Fannin 04J1)
BANGOR, Maine City of Brewer Auditorium Outer State St, Brewer, Maine
5pm [ED ST ] (WCC) 52 Holyoke St, Brewer, Maine
(3601)
BEAUMONT, Texas Exposition Building South Texas State Fair Grounds
3 p.m. [CST]
BOISE, Idaho Columbian Club Hall 9th & Washington St 2 pm. [M S T ]
• WCC) 2026 N 16th St	(2670-J)
JACKSON, Mie*.
Corner South State & Pearl Sts 3 p
(WCC) P O Box 235
KANSAS CITY, Mo.
Ivanhoe Masonic Temple Linwood Blvd & Park Ave 3pm [CST] (WCC) 3114 Paseo	(VAlentine 7518)
BOSTON, Mast. Symphony Hall Huntington & Massachusetts Aves
5 pm. [E.D S T ] (WCC) 294 Huntington Ave (Kenmore 2133)
LINCOLN, Nebr.
4-H Building State Fair Grounds	3pm [CST]
(WCC) 3341 S 42nd	(4-1763)
LONG BEACH, Calif. Municipal Auditorium 270 E Seaside Blvd	1pm [PST]
(WCC) 6599 Atlantic Blvd (Long Beach 21926)
MEDFORD, Oreg.
Medford Armory 410 N Bartlett St	1pm [PST]
(WCC) 922 N Central Ave.	(1741)
SAN DIEGO, Calif.
Plata Rae
U S Grant Hotel, 326 Broadway _____	1 p m [P S T ] (WCC) 828 Seventh St
SAN JOSE, Calif.
Civic Auditorium
San Carlos & Market Sts 1pm [PST] (WCC) Civic Auditorium, San Jose Calif
(Ballard 1441)
SAVANNAH, Ga Bijou Theater Broughton St	4 p m [E 8 T ]
(WCC) 318 E 36th St	(4097)
SEATTLE, Waih.
Seattle Masonic Temple
Harvard & East Pine St 1pm [PST]
(WCC) 800 Broadway	(EAst 0800)
SIOUX FALLS, S Dak.
Coliseum
5th and Main Ave	3pm [CST]
(WCC) 310 Minnehaha Building ( 1745;
BURLINGTON,
5
Vt.
pm. [EDS T.]
DES MOINES, Iowa Poultry Industries Building Iowa State Fair Grounds 3pm [CST] (WCC) Dox 483	(3-3313)
DULUTH, Minn.
Shrine Auditorium
201 E 1st St	3 p m. [C S T 1
(WCC) Fond du Lac (Douglas 510-W)
MEMPHIS, Tenn. The Auditorium Corner of Poplar Ave & Front St
3 p.m [CST] (WCC) 59 N Willett St	(2-1621)
SPOKANE, Wash.
Ice Arena 1407 North Elm St	1pm [PST]
(WCC) 1420 N Monroe St
EL PASO, Texas Liberty Hall Overlard & Kansas Sts 2 p.m (MST J
FARGO, N. Dak. Fargo Auditorium
13 South Broaaway	3pm [CST]
• WCC) 67 4th St N . Apt 5	(7481)
Comer
(WCC)
MONTGOMERY, Ala.
Municipal Auditorium
North Perry, Monroe & Madison Sts
3pm [CST]
2 S. McDonough St. (Walnut 1301-M)
PUEBLO, Colo. Memorial Hall
100 N Union	2 p.m [MST]
(WCC) 1317 East 4th	(5087-R)
ST. PAUL, Minn. The Hippodrome Minnesota State Fair Grounds 3 p.m [CST] (WCC) 984 Hand Ave. (HUmboldt 3604)
TAMPA, Fla. Municipal Auditorium Plant Park	4 p m [E S T ]
(WCC) lllOVi Franklin St	(M-53021)
TULSA, Okla Convention Hall Boulder & Brady	3pm [CST]
(WCC) 8 N. Vancouver	(38752)
HAWAII
Kingdom Hall 1228 Pensacola St , Honolulu 10 30 a rn (WCC) 1228 Pensacola St Kingdom Pavilion 649 Wainaku St , Hilo	10 30 a m
Jehovah's witnesses Kingdom Hall Nani and Kaniela Sts . Wailuku 10 30 a rn
FIELD EXPERIENCES
ABOARD “LADY NELSON", ST. JOHN (N.B.) HARBOR
“On account of war measures no one is allowed to go aboard ship except crew and passengers. However, I met three sailors on the dock from British Guiana. They listened to the phonograph attentively. Being broke, they could not contribute, but I gave them a booklet apiece, also a sample copy of Consolation. These fellows were Catholic; said they would have some money next day, and to come to the ship and they would get some books. I took them at their word and appeared next day. Being unable to get on board, one of the seamen located one of these fellows for me after about twenty minutes. This Catholic offered to take the literature aboard and see who desired to get some of the books. So I let him take the literature and he went aboard, and I waited, and waited, and thought he would never return. But, much to my surprise, back he came all smiles: he had placed five bound books and a number of booklets, all the literature I had given him except a few booklets. He also brought back a fellow who wanted to hear the recorded lecture. There were about sixteen on the dock, and they remarked about the truth of the record. This fellow he brought back took Salvation, and the Catholic fellow, after taking Enemies for himself, said he wanted the book Salvation. I being out of literature, we both walked to the ear a quarter of a mile away to get Salvation. On showing him some of the foreign literature he spied Enemies in German and said if he had known that, he would have taken it to a German fellow on board. I said he still could; so back we go to the ship. The German sailor was sleeping, but he woke him up and presented the book to him. The young Catholic told me all about it and was quite enthusiastic over the literature.”
70-YEAR-OLDER GOES TO RURAL SCHOOL
“This publisher past seventy years old (in the small town of Burlington, Mich.) does all his witnessing on foot, walking many miles a day working rurals. One afternoon he came to a white house with lots of windows, but, taking no particular notice, he knocked at the door. A young lady answered, inviting him in. Upon entering, he noticed many coats and hats hanging on the wall, the thought coming to his mind that the lady must have many children. After witnessing and placing a book with the lady, who identified herself as the school teacher, he went into the country classroom and spent about half an hour telling all the school children about the Kingdom and gave each of them a Kingdom News to take home. His February report is as follows: 46 books, 176 booklets, 86 hours.”
NOW ALL’S DIFFERENT IN LOUISIANA
“We have been having considerable arrests in the city of Lafayette, due to the priest’s telling the parishioners (colored), when Jehovah’s witnesses come to their doors to call the police. The results: arrests and interference. Recently, when witnessing in this city, a man told me the priest is now telling his parishioners that they made a fool of him, for they told all whom they met that he instructed them to call the police when Jehovah’s witnesses call at their doors: 'Don’t do that any more; leave them alone, don’t bother them; politely tell them you are not interested, do not care to hear the phonograph, do not want any of the books either, and they will quietly walk away and leave you.’ Result: People of good will are waking up to their privileges and seeking meekness in regard to a knowledge of Jehovah.”
WHO WAS INSANE, PRIEST OR PARISHIONER?
“This lady of Penasco, New Mexico, got some of the books from one of the witnesses. At that time she was a very devout Catholic, both herself and family. She is unable to read either in English or in Spanish, but she was able to study the different pictures in the books and by the aid of her daughter reading some to her from the books she got enough truth to see that the Catholic church is a racket She began showing the books and booklets to her neighbor s and friends. The priest worked through her husband and got her declared insane, and she was kept in the insane asylum at Las Vegas, N. Mex., for three months. During that time her husband read some of the books for curiosity. He saw the truth and went to the authorities at Las Veg; s and told them that he wanted his wife to be turned loose as he was the one that was crazy instead of his wife. He finally got his wife released, and now he and she and daughter are reading the books, taking The Watchtowci and Consolation in Spanish, and she and her daughter have a phonograph and are using it in God’s ‘strange work’.”
SMITH WAS “NOT IN” TO RELIGION
“The man answering the door said Mr. Smith was not there. I told him I had a wonderful Bible lecture which would take only 4| minutes to hear. He hesitated, then invited me in. As I was setting up the machine, he told me he had no use for the churches. I told him this was not of the churches but would tell him just what religion is. He informed me that regardless of what that record said or I said, there was only one man that he thought was giving the people the truth and that was a man by the name of Judge Rutherford. Smilingly I asked who he thought the speaker was on the record I was about to play He did not have any idea. I informed him it was the very man he said was telling the people the truth. After that he was all ears After the lecture he said: ‘I told you a lie. I told you Mr Smith was not home. I am Mr. Smith, whom you asked for in the first place, but I thought you were from some church or from “Father Coughlin”, and I did not want to have anything to do with you.’ To show his hatred of religion, he told me that if I wanted to do any gambling, he could take me to a preacher who would accommodate me He told me if I wanted any bootleg liquor, this same preacher would sell me all I wanted He told other things about two preachers he knows personally not fit to print After seeing these things with his own eyes, no wonder he hates religion.”
DESTRUCTION OF MAGAZINES OPENS WAY TO PLACE MOKE
“Near the entrance of a large office building, Providence. R.I. A man walked slowly by and over to the entrance, then came back and took a Watchtower, handing the publisher a dime. He would not accept the change, so she gave him another copy of an earlier date. He went into the building In about twenty minutes he came back out and said: ‘Give me a copy of everything you’ve got. I just laid my magazines on my desk a minute ago, and a Catholic fellow m the office got hold of them and tore them up.’ The publisher supplied him with two more copies of Watchtower and two of Consolation. He contributed for them, rolled them up carefully and said, ‘No one is going to tear these up: I’m going to see to that; there’s good stuff in them, and I am going to read them.’ ”
WShWerJ
1 'ii
1 j rt'


They shall know that lam Jehovah’
-Ezekiel 35 15.
No 13
Vol. LXI
Semimonthly
JULY 1, 1940
CONTENTS


Instruction (Part 7) .... Jehovah’s Answer Indignation .	.. .
Pure Language The Gathering . No Fear......................
Escape from “Christendom's”
Conflagration..............
Activity .........................
Letters	....
Field Experiences . . “Religion’s Doom” Testimony Period “Watchtowfr” Studies
Vacation ..	.........
Theocratic Convention
of Jehovah’s witnesses
Address Information Not Appearing in Prev ious Issue
195
195
2(H)
203
20">
194
19 1
191
194
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street »	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloied King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Fobeign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Afbica, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African aud Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch office* Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W , Australia
South African ................ Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The ll'alch-tower free upon written application to the publishers, made once eacti year, stating the reason for ao requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of n new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, "when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Broollyn, N Y , under the Act of March S, 1S19
“RELIGION’S DOOM” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This midsummer testimony period during the entire month of August follows closely the Theocratic convention at Columbus The period being named “Religion’s Doom”, the testimony activities should receive particular stimulation from the convention’s nationwide public address on “Religion as a World Remedy”. Appropriately, therefore, all Kingdom publishers will offer to the public, on a 25c contribution, the book Enemies and a self-covered booklet, preferably the new booklet Refugees, if the territory has recently been intensively witnessed to with the latest book, Salvation. Conventioners and people of good will everywhere are invited to share in this testimony. Arrange for this now through the local organized company of Jehovah’s witnesses. If not yet associated with such, write us for references. The Informant supplies full details. A complete report on each publisher’s field service for August should be subnutted, to compile the total results.
"WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 4: “Instruction” (Part 7), fl 1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1,1940.
Week of August 11: “Instruction” (Part 7), fl 23-56 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1940.
VACATION
The annual vacation period of the members of the Bethel family at Brooklyn this year is from Saturday, July 20, to Sunday, August 4, inclusive. This will allow them a diversion from their regular activities at headquarters, and especially to avail themselves of the privileges of the 1940 Theocratic Convention of Jehovah’s witnesses and of the increasing opportunities for field witnessing. The normal operations of the factory and office will be suspended for that period; no books will be shipped or regular mail answered. Hence all field publishers should order sufficiently in advance that their supplies of literature to carry them through the vacation period and to the end of August tnaj be shipped out not later than the evening of Friday, July 19 Also reserve your correspondence with the factory and office until after Monday, August 5.
THEOCRATIC CONVENTION OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
The manifest leadings of the Lord indicate that all lovers of the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God should assemble in general convention in 1940. Columbus, Ohio, has been selected as the key city for a five-day convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. The
(Continued on page 207)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	July 1, 1940	No. 13
INSTRUCTION
PART 7
"The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.”
—Ezek. 18:20.
JEHOVAH thus states what shall be the result of his final judgment. He gives warning to the wicked which they must hear just before the execution of his judgment at Armageddon. He also assures the faithful ones who have been diligent in seeking righteousness and meekness that his favor shall be upon them. Jehovah has no pleasure in the death of the wicked. It would please God if the wicked would turn from their wickedness and live. Not doing this, they must meet the conditions of the final judgment, for the reason that he is not changeable. (Mal. 3: 6) Justice is the foundation of his throne, and justice shall be administered. The final warning, therefore, is given in kindness of Jehovah to the end that those who have been deceived by the demons and led in the wrong way might have an opportunity to escape. He assures those who have devoted themselves wholly to him that they may live. In brief, this issue of The Watchtower gives consideration to that part of the prophecy of Zephaniah, chapter three, verses 8 to 13. Jehovah bids ‘‘Christendom” and all her allies who have acted so contemptuously toward him to wait for him to act, and which act of Jehovah God will be his final answer to their boastful defiance of Jehovah. He will then rise up to execute justice; and his justice being symbolized by a lion, he will go after the doomed prey and thereby give witness to all creation, and for all time, that the Almighty is Jehovah God and that his power shall be exercised against lawlessness in wiping out all wickedness. Jehovah first completes his “strange work”, and when he has maneuvered all the nations, and especially the so-called “Christian religious world”, into a proper position, including those who call themselves the "Christian front”, the final showdown will take place. The enemies of Thu Theocracy in boastful defiance openly and without disguise carry into action their conspiracy to rule the world contrary to Jehovah’s appointed way. Thus they arouse Jehovah’s indignation and fierce anger, and he then, with zeal for his government of righteousness and his glorious name, begins his “strange act”. At Armageddon Jeho
vah will, by his Executioner, Christ Jesus, devour completely Satan’s organization.
2	The preparation for this great and final event against the demons and their dupes began immediately upon the Lord’s coming to the temple in A.D. 1918. He then began to equip his faithful “remnant”, designating the same the “faithful and wise servant”, and sends them forth as his witnesses to proclaim his purpose and to gather unto himself his “other sheep”, the “great multitude”. These gathered to him participate with the remnant in proclaiming The Theocratic Government in vindication of God’s holy name. This he does by giving to them a “pure language” that they without fear of men or demons may go forward and vigorously tell the good news of The Theocratic Government to the people, that the day for vindication of Jehovah’s great name has come and that he has set up his government of righteousness, which shall render justice and blessings m particular to those who obey his Word.
3	In his preparation for the exhibition of his supreme power the Lord gathers his faithful people from many nations. The “remnant” come supplicating Jehovah and offering unto him their praise and service in righteousness. Modern-day Ethiopians, pictured by Ebed-melech, come to the remnant and join in the praise of Jehovah. The Lord God removes all cause for shame and fear on the part of these faithful servants by clearing out from them the proud, the character-developers, the creature-worshipers, and the devotees to religion. The faithful servants completely renounce religion or demonism. Under the direction of Christ Jesus the King they go forth proclaiming The Theocratic Government. In this they slack not the hand, but go on courageously until the “strange work” is completed and the “strange act” begins.
JEHOVAH’S ANSWER
4	Religionists who lead in “Christendom” boast of their greatness and goodness and defy the Almighty God. “Christendom” claims to be safe from all harm.
195
196
5He WATCHTOWER.
“Christendom” and allies claim the right to rule the world, and this in defiance of the Most High. To those boastful enemies Jehovah says: “Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.”—Zeph. 3: 8.
5	Here the Most High is telling “Christendom” and all others of Satan’s organization to “wait” for just a short time and then all the enemies shall get what is justly coming to them. Then no longer will the execution of judgment be delayed. “Whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their [destruction] slumbereth not.” (2 Pet. 2:3; A.R.V.) The end of all demons and of all earthly agents of demons has come, and judgment shall be executed quickly.
• According to the Revised Version this text (Zeph. 3: 8) reads: “Wait ye for me, saith the Lord.” “Christendom” and others of God’s enemies, by the course of action taken, have defiantly challenged the Almighty God to take action, and this they have done as though God did not exist or as though he were impotent and had not the power to carry out his expressed will. The indisputable facts are that “Christendom” and her allies have willfully and deliberately disobeyed the commandments of Almighty God and continue to defy him. He acts in his own due time. To that boastful challenge and rebellious conduct the Lord God replies through another prophet: “Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord 1 to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.” (Amos 5:18, 23, 24) Thus Jehovah warns of his purpose to act, and he will act in his own due time. The hour for Jehovah to strike has not yet arrived; hence he says to the enemy: ‘Just you wait until my time to act, and then you will change your boastful cockiness, when you fully know that Jehovah is the Most High and the all-powerful, almighty God.’ Jehovah is self-contained, and he depends on nothing, and he acts when he gets ready to act.
r Wait how long? ‘Until that day’; which they will know only when sudden destruction is upon them. Concerning the same matter Jesus says: “But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only. But as the days of No'e were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man [the Executioner at Armageddon] be. For as in the days that were before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that No'e entered into the ark, and knew not,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.”—Matt. 24:36-39.
8 The enemy did not know the day that the Lord would strike them down; but Noah did know, to wit, ‘seven days from the day he was told to enter with his family and animals into the ark.’ (Gen. 7:1-10) Noah, entering into the ark, was, however, a sign to the enemy that the day and hour was very nigh. Likewise the present day, with all the physical facts flung world-wide, shows that conditions existing in Noah’s day were similar to those which now exist upon the earth. All may see that the hurrying of the people of good will now to God’s organization is an indisputable sign and proves that the day of Jehovah's wrath upon all of Satan’s organization is due to strike very shortly.
’ Many times Jehovah has declared his purpose to destroy enemy organizations. The time must come when he exercises that power to accomplish his purpose. Therefore all the enemies, all of the Devil's organization, all that constitute a prey or booty, will be taken by violence exercised by Christ Jesus, the representative of Jehovah God. For this hour of execution Jehovah bids the enemy to wait for Him, for then, says he, ‘I will rise up to the prey’; that is, to make an attack and take the spoil. Why will Jehovah bring on such destructive results* ’To make himself an everlasting name.’ A picture of such great result was made when Jehovah led the Israelites out of Egypt by the hand of Moses and at the lied sea divided the waters thereof and caused his people to cross over on dry land and then engulfed the Egyptian army in the waters and destroyed them. That was a great miracle performed, showing the supreme power of Jehovah God, and the purpose announced by the Lord himself was, “to make thyself a glorious name.”—Isa. 63:12,14.
10 Other versions of Zephaniah’s prophecy read: “Wait . . . until the day when I rise up as [a] witness.” (Rotherham; Septuagint, and Syiiac) For some time Jehovah has sent forth his witnesses to declare his name; and this work is his “strange work”, in which these witnesses have a part. When his witnesses have completed the work committed to them, then Jehovah will perform his “strange act”. (Isa. 28: 21) That rising up was also pictured by the battles of Perazim and Gibeon. That rising up in those battles was a witness to Jehovah's name and served notice upon the enemies. God’s “strange \\ ork" is now about completed and the time for his “strange act” is about to begin. These prophetic statements are exactly in harmony with Jehovah’s declaration to Satan concerning His purpose, to wit: ‘For this cause have I permitted thee to remain, that I might show thee my power, and that my name might be pro
July 1, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
197
claimed throughout the whole earth.’ (Ex. 9:16) Armageddon will be a time of the exhibition of Jehovah’s supreme power and will be such a complete witness to all creation that none can have any doubt about the fact that Jehovah is acting. Religion and religionists have completely rejected Jehovah's name and his kingdom, but the express purpose of the Most High is that all shall know that he is the Supreme One, “whose name alone is Jehovah.”
X1 When Armageddon begins and after the Most High rises up to the prey, those who are of Zion and who have maintained their integrity toward God will be safe. Concerning this the prophet of Jehovah says: “For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king; he will save us. Thy tacklings are loosed [that is, the commercial religionists are cut loose so there is no more religious commercialism] ; they could not well strengthen their mast; they could not spread the sail; then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame [that is, those who have appeared lame, Christ Jesus and his faithful followers, the ‘bruised reed’ class of The Christ] take the prey. And the inhabitant [that is, those of Zion who have proved their integrity] shall not say, 1 am sick; the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.” (Isa. 33:22-24) All the world will realize then that Almighty God is backing up his people, that his everlasting arms are beneath them, and that his strength is exercised in their behalf. (Deut. 33:27; 2 Chron. 16:9) The faithful with Christ Jesus will then rejoice with fullness of joy because they shall witness the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Referring to the above prophecy of Isaiah: “The people that dwell therein [in Zion] shall be forgiven their iniquity [lawlessness]” means that the lawlessness of Zion, because of fear or otherwise, faults committed in 1918, have been forgiven. The Lord evidences this forgiveness, and from and after 1922 particularly the joy of the faithful ones has increased and reaches its fullness at the execution of Jehovah’s “strange act".
12	The judgment of Jehovah does not change. He having entered his judgments of record, they stand for ever. Referring again to Zephaniah 3: 8, note that the Most High says: “For my determination is to gather the nations.” The word “determination” here used means “judgment rendered”. He entered his judgment long ago that the nations must be gathered, and since the coming of Christ to the temple in 1918 “the goats” are gathered together into a common corral and into united opposition to The Theocratic Government and to the message that God sends forth by his witnesses to be delivered. The judgment of Jehovah is that the nations shall be gathered to Armageddon. That judgment executed means not one nation will be omitted. He then adds
the purpose of his gathering them, saying: “That I may assemble the kingdoms.” These nations and kingdoms mean those to whom Jehovah has said: “Wait ye upon me,” or, “Wait ye for me.” That means that not one of such nations or kingdoms shall escape and that the “nation” of “Christendom”, with all the elements that go to make up the same, will be handled just like the others, only “Christendom”, having practiced more fraud and deception, will bear a greater degree of punishment, if possible. “Christendom'’ has had no excuse to line up against The Theocratic Government, but has done so, and must drink the bitterness of the cup poured for her.—Jer. 25:15-29.
13	Among the many nations, all of whom are assembled, there are some people of good will toward God. The nation or kingdoms as a whole, Jehovah shows, are not worthy of saving; only those individuals under such nations who show their good will toward Jehovah and who Hee to his organization, the antitypical “city of refuge”, can hope to be saved. “Christendom” claims to be serving Jehovah God; but she is not. At Armageddon the Lord will prove what “Christendom” really is, and all survivors will forever look upon “Christendom” with contempt. All will then see and fully appreciate that religion is a fraud and snare and a racket and the defamation of God’s holy name.
INDIGNATION
14	Why has Jehovah determined to “assemble the kingdoms”? He answers: “To pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger.” This language proves conclusively that the gathering and assembling of the nations means that all such are against The Theocratic Government; otherwise there would be no reason for God’s showing his indignation against them. Jehovah has all such in derision, and hence he gives them warning as stated in Zephaniah 2: 2, 3. At the same time Jehovah warns all those who are of good will toward him to flee from the enemy organization and to seek the Lord: “Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate; and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven, and the constellations thereof, shall not give their light; the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine. And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir. Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.” (Isa. 13: 9-13) “My people, go ye out of the midst of
198
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, X. Y.
her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord.”—Jer. 51: 45.
18	Then adds Jehovah by his prophet: “For all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.” (Zeph. 3:8) “The earth” consists of the visible part of Satan’s world organization, of which “Christendom” is a part. Now “Christendom”, under the influence of the demons, has openly taken the side of dictators of the totalitarian rule. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the great religious organization, takes the lead in this and backs up the totalitarian rule. Such is the modern-day “oppressing city”; meaning the organization that oppresses, that is to say, “Christendom.” This oppressing religious organization, God declares, “is filthy and polluted.” (Zeph. 3:1) But when the fight at Armageddon begins the oppressive city shall go down, and nothing can save her. Upon that organization God pours his righteous indignation, and all the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon her. Only those who are of good will toward Jehovah God can possibly be saved. Jehovah’s indignation being poured out upon all the nations of earth, the entire earthly, visible rule shall cease; and this is true because the demons now exercise power, influence and control over the nations. (Dan. 2:39) As to the result, God through his prophet says: “The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.”—Isa. 24:5, 6.
PURE LANGUAGE
18	The Word of God, addressed to those who love him and who are therefore given an understanding of his Word, reads: “For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.” (Zeph. 3:9) Human interpretation of prophecy is seldom, if ever, correct. When God brings to pass the physical facts in fulfillment of prophecy, then man can understand and appreciate that prophecy, provided he is devoted to God and His service.
11	In this text, Zephaniah 3: 9, the word “then” does not mean immediately following the battle of Armageddon. It does not mean that immediately after Armageddon all languages will cease and a new, general language will be adopted. There is nothing in the Scriptures to support that conclusion. The word “then” means that, before the battle of Armageddon begins, the “sheep” class, that is, those who are on the side of Jehovah God, will be given the truth and together speak the truth, a pure, undefiled message. The Scriptures show beyond all doubt that those who
are on the side of The Theocratic Government and act in harmony with and support of that government will be the only ones that will survive Armageddon. The oppressors will be destroyed at Armageddon. Therefore the words “a pure language” could not be given to those, who are destroyed. The literal and marginal reading of this text is, “a pure lip”; that is, lips that are given wholly to the praise of the great Theocrat and his King.
18 In 1918 Christ Jesus at Jehovah’s command straightway came to the temple and gathered unto himself the faithful “remnant” of those who had consecrated themselves to do the will of God. That was in “the day of Jehovah”, which had begun in 1914. The faithful remnant were brought into complete unity in Christ Jesus as a result of that temple judgment. Thereafter the Lord began to gather his "other sheep", which “other sheep” will form the "great multitude”, and which company must also speak the truth in unity with the faithful remnant. The remnant goes forth then with this pure message, “pure lip," a language of praise to Jehovah, and the "other sheep", their “companions”, join with them in such pure lip. They work together in unity to the praise of Jehovah and thus harmoniously support The Theocratic Government. The words of the text, to wit, "For then will I turn to the people a pure lip,” necessarily mean within the time, that is to say, within the day of Jehovah. That day of Jehovah began when Christ Jesus was enthroned as King, in 1914. The day of judgment began when Christ Jesus began, in 1918, the gathering unto himself and the cleansing of those who had made a consecration to do the will of God. and these gathered and approved ones must offer an oHering in righteousness. (Mal. 3:1-4) All such ones gathered and who continued faithful came to see clearly that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the real issue, and therefore they all united in proclaiming the praise of Jehovah. Only those who speak the truth in unity will survive Armageddon. When the purpose of Jehovah is seen and appreciated, then a better understanding is had and the meaning of the prophecy becomes clear. This "pure lip” or pure message must be proclaimed before Armageddon.
18 The Devil used Nimrod in an effort to cement the people together in wickedness and for the purpose of bringing reproach upon Jehovah’s name. God broke up that wicked united movement to reproach his name. (Gen. 11: 7-9) The Devil makes an attempt to again reunite all the wicked. Just before Armageddon he puts forth a desperate effort to turn all the people against Jehovah, and for this purpose he employs the totalitarian methods first put in operation through Nimrod. By the totalitarian rule the Devil attempts to bind the people and to regiment them and to completely carry out unity of
July 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
199
action against The Theocratic Government. In this the big religionists fraudulently claim to represent God and lead the people into the trap of the enemy. Thereupon God gathers to himself his own people and brings them into full unity, and gives them his message, that they may all speak the truth while the opposers of The Theocratic Government rush madly on to destruction.
20	Therefore within the day of Jehovah he turns to his people, the remnant and their companions, “a pure lip,” that is to say, a lip that gives praise to and glorifies the name of the great Theocrat and his government of righteousness. In harmony with this it is written, in Hebrews, these words: “Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name.”—Heb. 13:13-15.
21	These words here quoted are addressed to the spiritual class. Such faithful ones joyfully bear the reproaches that come upon God and Christ. They have no abiding place in the organization of Satan, but are seeking that great city or organization, The Theocratic Government. In the name of Christ Jesus, the Head of the remnant, all his faithful servants ‘offer unto Jehovah an offering in righteousness’. They offer “sacrifice of praise to God continually”; that is, their lips are given to praise his name. A plain picture of the cleansing of the lip by fire is given in the prophecy which states: ‘The angel took from the altar a coal of fire, and put it upon the lip, and thus cleansed the lip of speech of the servant class.’ (Isa. 6:5-7) Following the cleansing of the faithful ones at the temple judgment these faithful ones are represented as saying: “0 Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.” (Ps. 51:15) "With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth. Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy word.” (Ps. 119:13,17) "The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying tongue [now wagging world-wide, uttering many foolish theories] is but for a moment.” (Prov. 12:19) All the theories of peace, prosperity and world happiness advanced by men shall continue only for a very short while. Stating the rule with reference to creatures, the Lord says: “Righteous lips are the delight of kings; and they love him that speaketh right.” (Prov. 16:13) Thus do those who are kings and priests unto God and Christ speak the praise of Jehovah and his kingdom: “He that loveth pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the king shall be his friend.” (Prov. 22:11) Concerning those who have a pure heart toward God and his kingdom, who love Jehovah and his Theocratic Government
under Christ, such speak a pure message. They have the grace or favor from the Most High.
22	The Lord is in no wise the friend of those who speak the words of opposition to The Theocratic Government.
23	Spiritual Israel had displeased Jehovah at the time of the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, and this is shown by the prophecy at Isaiah 12:1-3. To spiritual Israel these words properly apply, to wit: “0 Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord; say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously; so will we render the calves of our lips.” (Hos. 14:1, 2) The words of the psalmist are here appropriate: “What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.” (Ps. 34:12-14) “For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile; let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it. For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers ; but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil.”—1 Pet. 3:10-12.
24	The speech or lip cannot be pure if it does not honor Jehovah. There must be a pure heart devotion to Almighty God and his kingdom, and then the speech will be pure. “For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.”—Matt. 12: 34.
23	In the face of all wicked opposition to The Theocratic Government the faithful servants and devotees thereof continue to offer praise of their lips unto God and his King.
26	The dividing line must be clearly marked. A great gulf is between those who oppose and those who are fully devoted to The Theocracy. Therefore the Lord turns to his people a pure lip and a pure speech, “that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.” First, those of the “remnant” are brought into full unity in Christ; and then come those who will form the “great multitude” and who are made the “companions” of the remnant.
2T	This text of Zephaniah could have no application to the world, which is in confusion. The Scriptures abundantly prove, and the facts fully support the Scriptures, that the world is under the dominating control of demons and therefore in confusion. These human creatures in confusion are not and will not be converted to righteousness. The language of Zephaniah’s prophecy, therefore, could not apply to them, as above stated. Only those who are of good will, who turn to the Lord, and who seek righteousness and meekness, have any prospect of understand
200
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ing and being hid in the day of the Lord's anger: “And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered; for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call."—Joel 2:32.
” Beginning with 1918 the temple judgment progressed. The approved were then commissioned and sent forth to offer unto the Lord sacrifices of righteousness. They were commissioned to do the witness work to Jehovah’s name and also that those who will form the “great multitude” might learn, receive instruction, and flee to the kingdom. Therefore it is written, in Romans 10:14-16: “How then shall they [the Jonadabs, who will form the ‘great multitude’] call on him [Jehovah] in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent [with a pure lip and pure message of truth free from all religion and hypocrisy] ? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things! But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?" The apostle Paul quotes these words from the prophecy, and in fulfillment of the prophecy God does his “strange work”, using his witnesses until Armageddon.
29 The remnant and their companions, the “great multitude” company, join together “to serve him with one consent”. Note the marginal reading is, “with one shoulder”; that is, all of the witnesses joyfully shoulder the burden and carry on the witness work in unity, illustrated by the twelve witnesses for the Lord with Joshua gathering up the stones and putting them on their shoulders and carrying them forth as a witness to the name of Jehovah God. (Josh. 4:5) It is only those persons of good will, meaning the “remnant” and the Jonadabs, that employ the “pure lip" or pure speech, that stand firm against the Devil and all his agents, and that continue to declare the name of the Lord and his kingdom. It is only such that survive Armageddon. They continue their songs of praise unitedly until and then after Armageddon.
THE GATHERING
20	The work performed by the witnesses of the Lord has to do with the gathering. The people that are anxious to see and enter into the righteous government are gathered to the Lord. Those who are opposed to The Theocracy are gathered for destruction. Spiritual Israelites scattered about the nations are gathered unto the Lord in unity: “From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, even the
daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.”—Zeph. 3:10.
31	Ethiopia in the type was a warlike ally of Egypt. In the type Ethiopia pictures Satan’s visible organization prepared for and engaging in selfish pursuits and in war for spoil. Spiritual Israelites, although surrounded by the organization of Satan, have no part in the wicked organization of Satan. Ethiopia, therefore, here represents the Devil's organization, out from which some of God’s people are gathered. By the hand of Moses God gathered his chosen people out of Egypt and from her allies. The time comes for God to gather his spiritual, chosen people out from the Devil’s organization. This really means the second time of gathering; therefore it is written: “And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time [since the day of Moses] to recover the remnant of his people [spiritual Israel], which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. And he shall set up an ensign for the nations [to which the remnant of spiritual Israel were scattered], and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.’’ (Isa. 11:11,12) Thus the Lord by his prophet foretold the gathering of the spiritual Israelites in bringing them to the temple judgment.
32	During the World War many of the consecrated were frightened and became negligent of their duties They were spattered and messed up with religion, which resulted in their lawlessness of lips unto the Lord. They failed to proclaim his name. To such Jehovah speaks in Hosea 14:1, 2: “0 Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips."
33	To the cry of these to take away all their iniquity God replies: “I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely; for mine anger is turned away from him [spiritual Israel].” (Hos. 14:4) Then apply the words of the prophet Jeremiah, to wit: “In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping; they shall go, and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten.”—Jer. 50:4,5.
“The prophecy of Zephaniah (3:10) according to another version reads: “The daughter of my scattered ones [Young] shall bring my offering.” These dispersed or scattered ones are all a virgin class. They have not been tied up with religion, but have
July 1,1940	WATCHTOWER	201
been-kept under the influence of the world organization. Desiring the righteous government they flee from Satan’s organization and come to Mount Zion, that is, the kingdom under Christ, and bring their offering, to wit, ‘the calves [strength of a young bullock] of their lips.’ (Hos. 14: 2) They bring all the strength they possess to the service and praise of The Theocratic Government. (Heb. 13:15) Jehovah shows his favor to those who thus devote themselves to him: “I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will heal him.” (Isa. 57:19) “In that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the mount Zion.”—Isa. 18: 7.
” Following the World War and the releasing of God’s people from restraint, in 1919, the work of gathering from the far-away countries began. Some in antitypical Ethiopia showed good will toward God, and they came with the remnant of spiritual Israel. This is shown in the prophetic drama of Jeremiah, who was befriended by Ebed-melech. These are they that shall form the “great multitude”. (Jer. 38: 7-13) As to the rest of the Ethiopians or Cushites, that is, those who are against The Theocracy, Jehovah says: “Ye shall be slain by my sword.”—Zeph. 2:12.
’s Particularly after 1922, when the witness work took on an increased fillip or greater energy, the remnant of spiritual Israel was gathered. “In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed against me; for then I will take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy pride; and thou shalt no more be haughty because of mine holy mountain.”-Zeph. 3:11.
87	Prior thereto spiritual Israel had transgressed because of fear, and also still held to some religious practices, which they had brought with them out of Babylon. Jehovah then cleansed the temple class by his great Refiner. (Dan. 8:14; Mal. 3:1-4) The proud and haughty amongst the professed followers of Christ were taken away from the faithful, obedient ones by means of revealing to the faithful the truths then due: “Light is sown for the righteous”; and thereafter such began to walk in the increased light and straightway vigorously engaged in the witness work, giving the strength of their lips in praise to Jehovah.
88	The proud were relegated to the “evil servant” class. They were not willing to receive instruction. (Matt. 24 : 48-51) Such proud ones gloried in their human leaders, especially their one human leader. They also took pride in “character development” and other religious practices and prided themselves on
the expectation of being shortly taken to heaven and helping the Lord rule the universe. Therefore they discriminated against the earthly class, the “great multitude”, and refused to put forth any effort whatsoever to take the truth to them. They remained idle, ‘waiting for the Lord to take them home and relieve them from their great labor.’
88	Pride and haughtiness and self-importance must cease amongst those devoted to The Theocracy. To such the Lord says: “And thou shalt no more be haughty in my holy mountain.” (R.F.) From that time forth the words of the prophet have been appropriate, to wit: “Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord! or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully." —Ps. 24: 3, 4.
80 God’s faithful servants, receiving instruction from the Lord, learned that the vindication of his great name is of all-importance, and that took away from them any cause for acting or even thinking haughtily. By 1925 the faithful were w’ell rid of religious folly and of haughty thinking. God revealed to his people in the year 1926 [The Watchtower May 1) the folly of “character development”. The faithful spiritual Israelites then saw that each one is required to be faithfully devoted to The Theocracy.
41 The temple judgment, which began in 1918 by the Lord Jesus Christ, cleared out the “evil servant”, and then the faithful went straight on with their assigned duties. All spiritual Israelites must come to a unity of the faith and all must serve Jehovah harmoniously; therefore says the Lord to those in a covenant with him: “For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord God, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the land, serve me; there will I accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations, with all your holy things. I will accept you with your sweet savour, when [ bring you out from the people, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have been scattered: and 1 will be sanctified in you before the heathen.”-Ezek. 20:40,41.
42 God’s sanctuary must be cleansed, and such cleansing work began when Christ Jesus came to the temple. The “evil servant” class must be cleared out and the witness work must be done by the faithful: “I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord.”—Zeph. 3:12.
48 Here the Lord tells of his purpose to clear out the evil servants. (See also Matthew 13:41, 42.) The faithful servants must now do the work Jehovah assigns to them. By his prophet God foretold the purpose to clear out the rebels and to bring the faithful into the bond of the covenant for the kingdom : “And
202
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.”—Ezek. 20: 38.
44 The proud ones gathered out, there was left in the land “a people humble and poor" (Young); that is to say, a people disciplined by the Lord’s purging work and by his directing, that they as his sons who had wholly devoted themselves to his Theocratic Government have God’s approval. (Heb. 12:7,8) The faithful trusted in the name of the Lord, and they trust not in men who act as visible leaders. The faithful servants of God do not trust in any creature, religion or thing. They are weak and poor in themselves, and all their strength is in the Lord, upon whom they depend. At the present time the “remnant” see themselves encompassed by a mass of enemies, which enemies reproach the name of Jehovah and ill-use his servants. The faithful are not divided in their work, but they look forward to the day of deliverance and continue to sing to Jehovah: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”
4li The dividing or cleansing work accomplished, in 1931 the Lord revealed to his approved ones their “new name” and showed them that they were his witnesses. Then quickly followed the wicked persecution of all the faithful ones in Europe, who boldly declared the name of Jehovah. In that persecution the Roman Catholic Hierarchy took the lead, and in this they were aided by the “evil servant” class, and such persecution has extended to all parts of “Christendom” where God’s people are to be found.
46 Jehovah selected a people for his name, which people constitutes the remnant of spiritual Israel: “The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth; for they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.”—Zeph. 3:13.
41 What would specifically constitute iniquity as here mentioned? Anything that is done in opposition to God’s law because of fear or because of failing or refusing to go about and boldly preach the gospel of The Theocratic Government as commanded. Anything that would induce one to fail to declare the day of the vengeance of our God upon all the opposers of The Theocracy. The holding to religious practices or rules which make the commandments of God void, as, for instance, formal religious services used instead of following the divine rule; also any practice of bestowing honor and praise upon the creatures, which constitutes “the sin of Samaria”. All of these things are iniquitous in the sight of the Lord; which must be cleared out. (Mark 7:1-13; Job 32:21,22; Amos 8:14) From and after such cleansing the “remnant” must keep clean and free from lawless
ness. Any one of the instructed who becomes defiled by religion or religious practices automatically ceases to be of the remnant. “As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people from henceforth even for ever. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.”—Ps. 125: 2, 3.
“ The remnant must not “speak lies”: the preaching of any religious doctrine; or adding to God’s Word anything like that of “the ‘Great Pyramid’ witness”, as though it taught a doctrine of the Lord; or such things as “character development”. (Prov. 30: 5, 6; Rev. 22:18,19) The restored remnant must do what? “These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates; and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath; for all these are things that I hate, saith the Lord.”— Zech. 8:16,17.
4* As stated in Zephaniah 3: 9, the Lord has turned to his people a “pure lip”; and hence he says: “Neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth.” The faithful remnant are not guilty of having sworn a vow of consecration to the Lord and thereafter failing to carry out that vow. They are not like the “elective elder” class, who promise to do and then fail to do that which they promise. (Matt. 23:3) The faithful remnant do not take the name of God in vain by failing or refusing to be active witnesses to the name of Jehovah. (Ex. 20: 7) They are true witnesses of the Lord: “A true witness deliv-ereth souls; but a deceitful witness speaketh lies.” —Prov. 14: 25.
so The Lord’s angels cleared out all the ’ evil servant”, who ‘served not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and who by good words and fair speech deceived the hearts of the simple’. (Rom. 16:17,18) Some of such have been gathered out recently.
NO FEAR
01 The faithful remnant trust wholly in the Lord, and they do not fear creatures. They trust in Jehovah and are at rest. “For they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.” (Zeph. 3:13) There is no famine amongst God’s faithful people for hearing the Word of the Lord. (Amos 8:11) To restored spiritual Israel, “the remnant of her seed,” Jehovah now says: “But now I will not be unto the residue of this people as in the former days, saith the Lord of hosts. For the seed shall be prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things."—Zech. 8:11,12.
July 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
203
52 This further precious promise Jehovah gives to his faithful spiritual Israelites: *T will also save you from all your uncleannesses; and I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you. And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen.”—Ezek. 36: 29, 30.
53 During the World War the enemy said to Jehovah’s dispersed people: '’They are done for.” But their saying is different now, because everyone sees the ‘’remnant” active in the proclamation of The Theocracy : “And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste, and desolate, and ruined cities, are become fenced, and are inhabited.” (Ezek. 36: 35) The faithful do not lie down on the job; they go straight on in the witness work and God gives them rest and peace.
54 Why should any of God’s people be afraid of what men or devils may do to them? Jehovah has made it clear to his people that the power of the demons is exercised chiefly by the religious men. The faithful know they are surrounded by both invisible and visible enemies, but they trust in the power and protection of Jehovah of hosts. The faithful are perfect in love, that is, in their entire devotion to The Theocratic Government; and hence perfect love casts out all fear of man and demons. They have boldness in this day of judgment in declaring the truth. (1 John 4:17,18) They do not put on the soft pedal concerning the Theocratic message, nor do they yield to the demands of religious agents of the Devil. They obey God rather than men.—Acts 5: 29.
55 Looking back to 1922 and the way Jehovah has led his people from that time onward, there is every reason for Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions to rejoice. From the human viewpoint the way has grown much more difficult, but from the viewpoint of those who are wholly devoted to Jehovah God the way has grown brighter with each succeeding year.
Jehovah has opened the windows of heaven and poured out upon his people the richest blessings. He has revealed to them an understanding of his prophecies written long ago, and with the unfolding of such prophecies the faithful have more clearly seen that all these things were written for the aid and comfort and increased hope of those now on the earth who are devoted to The Theocratic Government.
50 Satan, seeing that his time to get ready for the battle is short, has hurriedly gathered all nations against Jehovah’s witnesses, with the expectation of crushing such witnesses. The religionists have taken the lead in the wicked persecution of Jehovah’s servants, and the religionists have brought into action as their allies in wickedness the political, commercial, judicial and military branches of world organizations. These are the “mighty men” against The Theocratic Government. The Devil’s monstrosity, the totalitarian state, raises its wicked head and boastfully declares that Jehovah’s witnesses shall be destroyed; and these, together with other visible and invisible elements of Satan's organization, use every means available to bring about the destruction of the faithful, but they cannot succeed. Jehovah in the heavens has his enemies in derision. He sends forth his faithful servants to sound the final warning that destruction shall shortly come upon them. The enemies rage and defy God, spurn his message, and persecute his messengers. But all their efforts shall fail to bring about the destruction or injury of those who serve the Most High. The faithful know what will be the final result. They know that Jehovah is all-powerful and that He will carry out his purpose, and that very soon complete deliverance shall come to all who love and serve the Most High. What, then, should be the attitude of the faithful servants of God now on the earth? What is their attitude, and then-condition of mind and heart? Jehovah, by his prophet long ago, answers these questions.
(To be continued)
ESCAPE FROM "CHRISTENDOM’S” CONFLAGRATION
(( 1 ’IRE and sulphur from heaven . . . destroyed them j"’ all ” That conflagration took place “on the day that Lot went out from Sodom”. The great Teacher, Christ Jesus himself, gives us his word for it, at Luke 17 : 29, and then, what is important to us today, he adds: “Thus will it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed."— Luke 17 : 30, Emphatic Diaglott version.
“Christendom” particularly is modern Sodom. We know that Sodom prophetically pictured Satan’s organization on earth, and particularly that part called “Christendom”, because it is written that, after the death of the Lord Jesus Christ, the witnesses of God on earth were killed by the
beastly organization and their dead bodies lay in the street of “the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom . . . where also our Lord was crucified”. (Rev. 11: 3-8) The inhabitants of Sodom were practitioners of the Devil religion and were exceedingly wicked. Lot was a nephew of the patriarch Abraham and dwelt in the plain near Sodom. The record reads:
“And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar. Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot
204
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
journeyed east: and they [Abraham and Lot] separated themselves the one from the other. Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom. But the men of Sodom were wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly.” (Gen. 13:10-13) “Behold, this was the iniquity of . . . Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good.” (Ezek. 16:49,50) “Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.”—Jude 7.
Because of the great wickedness that existed in Sodom Jehovah God sent his angelic representatives to Sodom to ascertain the facts concerning the abominations done there and to destroy Sodom. On the way those representatives of Jehovah informed Abraham of God’s purpose. “And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous; I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.” (Gen. 18:20,21) Abraham, having in mind his nephew’ Lot, who would be subject to destruction unless protected, made an earnest plea before the Lord God that Sodom might be spared from destruction if a certain number of persons there were found to be righteous. God informed Abraham that if as many as ten righteous persons could be found in Sodom He would not destroy it.—Gen. 18:22-33.
But that number could not be found in Sodom. There a violent mob of Sodomites stormed the house of “just Lot”, “that righteous man,” and they howled for the bodies of Lot’s angelic visitors, that they might commit sodomy with them; and that mob also attempted violence upon Lot. Without any question that mob was under the influence and control of demons. (Gen. 19:1-11; 2 Pet. 2: 7, 8) Only Lot and his wife and two daughters were found to be the ones who had faith in God. The Lord showed his mercy toward Lot, his wife and tw’o daughters, and caused them to be led out and away from the place of destruction. “Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone, and fire from the Lord out of heaven; and he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.”—Gen. 19:24, 25.
Until quite recently God’s faithful people on the earth understood that most of the peoples of the earth would pass through the great tribulation of the battle of Armageddon. This understanding corresponds with Abraham’s expressed hope that the city, picturing “Christendom” down at this end of the world, would be saved because of some righteous ones there But now it is seen that it is only those who seek Jehovah God and righteousness and meekness that have the promise of being “hid”, spared and taken through Armageddon. (See Zephaniah 2:3; 1 Peter 4:18.) The Scriptures state: “God spared not . . . turning the'cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that
after should live ungodly; and delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked; (for that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds;) the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.” (2 Pet. 2:4-9) Sodom is set forth as an example of those whom God will destroy at Armageddon.—Jude 7.
The angels of the Lord appearing on earth as men and as the Lord’s representatives led Lot and his family out of Sodom before the destructive fire was sent down upon the city. “The men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the Lord being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.” Then the angels warned them as to what they should do: “Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.”—Gen. 19:16, 17.
The final fulfillment of this prophetic picture, without doubt, is at the end of Satan’s world, where we now are, and after the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the reason that Jesus said: “Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, the} planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. In that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his stuff in the house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the field, let him likewise not return back. Remember Lot’s wife.”— Luke 17:28-32.
In this prophetic picture Lot and his family represented or foreshadowed those persons who are of good will toward Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government under Christ and who now hear the warning concerning the great destruction that will come upon Satan’s world at Armageddon. That warning is now being sounded throughout the earth by Jehovah’s witnesses. It is certain that the destruction of Sodom pictured Armageddon, and that Sodom particularly foreshadowed that part of Satan’s organization called “Christendom”. Unfaithful Jerusalem also pictured “Christendom”, and to the rulers of religious Jerusalem Jel.oxal: by his prophet said: “Hear the word of the Lord, ye ruleis of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah: to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand to tread my courts? Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto me ; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth. they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them. And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you ; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed;
July 1,1940
fEe WATCHTOWER.
205
judgQ the fatherless; plead for the widow. . . . But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword [Armageddon] ; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.” —Isaiah 1:10-20.
The nations which are known as “Christendom” have in these latter days become exceedingly wicked, and such religious practitioners are the ones that wickedly persecute Jehovah’s witnesses because these stand for God and his kingdom and insist on obeying God and Christ Jesus in proclaiming the message of the kingdom. According to Matthew 25: 32-46, Christ Jesus counts the persecution and punishment inflicted upon his faithful followers, his “brethren” on earth, as though it were done unto himself. The conditions that obtained in and about Sodom exactly fit the conditions that now exist in “Christendom”. Jesus, speaking of the conditions that would prevail upon earth at the time of his second coming, in glory as a divine spirit, likens such conditions unto those in ancient Sodom, thus further proving that the destruction of Sodom was a type or prophetic pattern and that it foreshadowed what shall come to pass upon “Christendom” at Armageddon. “So, too, in the days of Lot. People were eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building; but, on the very day on which Lot came out of Sodom, it rained fire and sulphur from the skies and destroyed them all. It will be the same on the day on which the Son of Man reveals himself.”—Luke 17: 28-30, Twentieth Century New Testament.
The facts now conclusively prove that throughout the land of “Christendom” the men who operate the religious systems do so for selfish reasons and by these religious systems they carry on a racket and are entirely oblivious to the warning God is causing to be sounded in their presence concerning the approaching time of Armageddon. Thus it is clearly seen that the prophecy of the Lord Jesus is now being fulfilled.
Not only faith, but also obedience, is emphasized in the picture of Lot fleeing from Sodom. The angels of the Lord, having led Lot and his family away from Sodom before destruction began, then warned them in these words: “Escape for thy life; look not behind thee.” “Then Jehovah rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of heaven; and he overthrew those cities, and all the Plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground. But his wife looked
back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.” (Gen. 19:24-26, Am. Rev. Ver.) Lot’s wife utterly disregarded the warning from the representatives of the Lord, and her looking back was an act of disobedience, and the result was that there a pillar of salt stood forth as a monument of her disobedience and clearly appears to say, in substance: “When one undertakes to obey the Lord, he must then continue in faith and faithfully obey God’s commandments. Obedience to the Lord must be continuous and unconditional.” At Luke 9:62, Jesus said: “No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.”
Hence Jesus, describing conditions that will prevail on earth at the time of Armageddon, said: “In that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his stuff in the house, let him not come down to take it away; and he that is in the field, let him likewise not return back. Remember Lot’s wife.” (Luke 17:31,32) And thus Jesus emphasized the importance of full obedience. Having once started to follow the Lord, then he who turns back shall not survive. This was pictured by Lot’s wife looking back and by the one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back or turns back. There is only one way that leads to life; and when one starts in that way and then turns back, destruction is ceitain to result, because, said Jesus, “strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life; and few there be that find it.” (Matt. 7:13,14) Life is a gracious gift of God through Christ Jesus; and when one having learned the way of life starts in that way and then turns back, he draws back to perdition, destruction; and such is his fate —See Hebrews 6: 4-6 and 10: 26-29, 39.
Lot and his family received the warning to flee, and they fled before destruction fell upon Sodom and Gomorrah. Likewise those who form the “great multitude” of persons of good will that will be “hid” during the battle of Armageddon receive the warning to flee, and they must flee to the Lord’s Theocratic Government before Armageddon begins. Further, they must abide under the Lord's protection, seeking meekness and righteousness, until the fire of Armageddon has completely burned out; otherwise they will be destroyed together with “Christendom” and all the re->t of Satan’s organization. These things are recorded in the Bible as a pattern or guide for those who today undertake to serve the Lord now and for ever.
ACTIVITY
JEHOVAH is always faithful to his covenant. For his own name’s sake and in fulfillment of his word he will carry out his covenant, regardless of what those in the other side of the covenant do or may not do. Through his prophet Moses as mediator Jehovah made the Law Covenant with the organization of his typical people Israel when that organization was yet young or was in its youth. Except for a remnant of that organization, the Israelites rebelled against the Law Covenant, and God cast that organization away; but to the faithful remnant he said: “Nevertheless, I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.”—Ezekiel 16: 60.
Likewise Jehovah now has remembered his new covenant made through Christ Jesus as Mediator, and made with the organization of his chosen ones in the days of the youth of that Christian organization and before rebellious members thereof produced what is called “Christendom” or “organized Christianity”. It is “Christendom” that claims presumptuously the sole interest in the covenant for the heavenly crown and for the kingdom of heaven, and yet “Christendom” has been entirely unfaithful to its implied covenant with God.
Jehovah has been long-suffering with “Christendom”, but he has not forgotten his word spoken for the benefit of his faithful remnant of anointed witnesses In A.D. 1914,
206
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
agreeable to his promise and in fulfillment of prophecy, he placed his King, Christ Jesus, upon his heavenly throne and he fully established his covenant and kingdom. It is through this covenant-kingdom that the people of good will who flee out of “Christendom” and to the kingdom and who obediently serve God and Christ the King will have opportunity for everlasting life on the earth and all the blessings thereof. All such clearly recognize that “religion is a snare and a racket” and they diligently avoid that snare and instead learn and do righteousness. To the religionists of “Christendom” it has happened as with typical Israel, to wit: “Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded.” (Rom. 11:7) The “election” means the kingdom class elected of Jehovah God, to wit, Christ Jesus and the 144,000 members of “his body, which is the church”, and these will administer the affairs of Jehovah's Theocratic Government for the blessing of all who forsake Babylon, the Devil’s organization, including “Christendom”, and who willingly join themselves in joyful activity as God’s people, serving Him unselfishly wherever under his organization they may be assigned to work.
The primary purpose of Jehovah’s “new covenant” which he makes with the spiritual Israel is for the vindication of his holy name, and by its operation he takes out from among the nations a “people for his name”, to act as his witnesses on earth. (Jeremiah 31: 31-34) The new covenant has already been made with Christ Jesus as Mediator, the Elect of God and the Head of his anointed ones, the members of his body. A remnant thereof arc to be found on earth since A.D. 1918. Ashamed of their former ways due to exercising a measure of religion and fear of creatures, they have turned to Jehovah God in devotion to his Theocratic Government under Christ. They are called “the daughter of Zion”, and to them Jehovah says concerning others who arc not spiritual Israelites but who become earthly companions or associates with the spiritual remnant: “Then thou shalt remember thy ways and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger; and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant [the Law Covenant with typical Israel].”— Ezekiel 16:61.
“Christendom” has made vows or covenants unto God and has broken them all, and therefore God, by reason of “Christendom’s” unfulfilled part of her implied covenant or vows, is under no obligation to “Christendom”. Jehovah made the new covenant with Christ Jesus as the representative of the “people for his name” who should be taken into that covenant, and now since A.D. 1918 Jehovah has confirmed and inaugurated that new covenant toward his faithful remnant on earth, to whom he has given the “new name”, to wit, “Jehovah’s witnesses.” As it is written (Ezekiel 16: 62) : “And I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) Now also a “great multitude” of people of good will come from among all nations, kindreds, peoples, and tongues, as foreshadowed by ancient Sodom and Samaria; they come in response to the witness concerning Jehovah’s kingdom by Christ, The Theocratic Government, and they associate themselves with the spiritual remnant and join with them in giving the witness. They become the “virgins, her com
panions”, the earthly companions of the bride of Christ, the church.—Psalm 45:14.
After the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple of Jehovah in 1918 the remnant who had responded to the call for the kingdom were tested and approved, and were set in a company to themselves, that they might “offer unto [Jehovah] an offering in righteousness”. (Malachi 3:1-3) It was then that the prophecies began to be unfolded to these approved ones, and then they must, by Christ Jesus the Head of the temple, offer a righteous sacrifice of praise unto God continually. (Hebrews 13:15) In doing such the temple class must, as God’s chosen witnesses, serve notice upon “Christendom” of her abominations and of the thing that is coming to pass by reason thereof. The facts must be put before “Christendom” in order that she might justify her extravagant kingdom claims, or else admit the truth and be condemned; and God’s witnesses must serve the notice. —Isaiah 43:10-12.
Now God reveals to his people an understanding of the prophecies long ago written ‘for their learning’, that they may be encouraged and know that they are in the right way, and that their hope may be made strong. These faithful ones, seeing that they may have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, enter into the joy of the Lord and delight to proclaim Jehovah’s doings to the people. The witnesses of Jehovah are not slacking their hand in the work and calculating whether the days will be few or many. On the contrary, with singleness of purpose and e\er-increasing boldness they go on, busily declaring Jehovah’s truth, his ‘high praises and judgments’ (Psalm 149), serving notice concerning the day of God’s vengeance and of the continuing “increase of his government”, which government “shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms” and which alone, as The Theocracy, shall abide for ever (Isaiah 9: 6, 7 ; Daniel 2:44) Confidently they work, knowing that Almighty God will take care of the result in his due time. The “servant” class thus has a part in the work of vindicating Jehovah’s name, and likewise al) persons of good will who consecrate themselves to do only the will of Almighty God have a share in that work, all acting unitedly under the leadership of Jehovah’s Leader and Commander. Christ Jesus, the King—Isaiah 55 -4
Throughout the Scriptures Jehovah’s kingdom is made prominent. Following the rebellion of his creatures at Eden God’s first promise was that he would provide a King and a kingdom. (Genesis 3:15) It is that righteous go\eminent, The Theocracy, that will vindicate the word and name of Jehovah before all creation When, in 606 B C , God dethroned Zedekiah his typical king o'er Israel, because of Zedekiah’s wickedness, God declared that no one would again rule in His name “until he come whose right it is” (Ezekiel 21: 27) In due time Jesus came. After the temptation of Jesus in the wilderness Jehovah made a covenant with him that he should be the King of the world and the one “whose right it is” to rule.
During the ministry of Jesus Christ he spoke moie thoroughly of God’s kingdom and emphasized it more than anything else, and most of his speech concerning it was in parables or dark sayings, which may now be understood Jehovah had likewise spoken by his prophets who preceded the ministry of Jesus on earth. Now that kingdom is here1
July 1,1940
WATCHTOWER.
207
Now that government “upon his shoulder” is functioning' (Isaiah 9:6,7) Now the publishers of the Kingdom joyfully and incessantly announce God’s judgments already written in the Bible against the “man of sin”, against “Christendom”, her rulers, and chief men, and against all who have defamed the name of the Most High. Fearlessly
Oh sing unto Jehovah a new song:
earth. Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice .. . before Jehovah; . . . for he cometh to judge the earth: he will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples with his truth. —Psalm 96:1,11,13, A.R.7.
and clearly they sound the warning of the great tribulation just ahead for all that dwell upon the face of the vv hole earth, and they make known how some may be shielded and protected and carried through that greatest of all calamities, in which the power of the Eternal One shall be shown in “his strange act”.
sing unto Jehovah, all the
LETTERS
RESOLUTION
Dear Brethren:
We, the Jefferson [Wis.] company of Jehovah’s witnesses, acknowledge Jehovah God as the great Theocrat, that his organization is a theocracy, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof.
We are in full accord with Jehovah’s Word, the Bible, and his explanation of the Bible which he is now revealing to us through his earthly channel, the Watch Tower, and realize it is our duty as his chosen servants to work together shoulder to shoulder in proclaiming his Kingdom message.
We resolve to let nothing hinder us in carrying out Jehovah’s will, and will work together in unity under the direction of the Theocracy, with the hope and full assurance that we shall have Jehovah’s approval and blessing.
DECLARATION
Dear Brethren:
We of the Waupun [Wis.] company do hereby declare that we are wholly devoted to Jehovah’s Theocracy under Christ;
That we absolutely refuse to consider the malicious letters which those of the “evil servant” class have been circulating among the brethren, seeking self-justification and sympathy;
That we will not co-operate with that class who oppose Jehovah’s Theocratic Government under Christ.
THE CHANNEL THE LORD IS USING
Dear Brother Rutherford and All the Bethel Family:
Haling read the article “Information” in the October 15 issue of The Watchtower, we wish to express our disapproval of the things done by 0 R. Moyle against the family at Bethel.
We do not know the contents of the letter written by Mr. Moyle, nor do we care to know. It is enough for us that our great God. Jehovah, is pleased to use you all tn his service, and is showering you with blessings.
We believe that the Society is the channel the Lord is using to carry on his Kingdom interests in earth at this time, and that our brethren at Bethel are being spent in that service.
We never listen to accusations against Brother Rutherford or any faithful servant of God who is performing his given service in the Theocratic Government; for to do so would be disobedient
(Continued from page 194)
dates will be July 24-28 inclusive. Announcement is made in advance in order that Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will may have ample opportunity to arrange their affairs so as to be at Columbus, Ohio, or other cities tied in by direct wire communication and loud-speaker equipment. By the Lord’s grace, the president of the Watchtower Society will be in attendance in person at the key assembly m Columbus. For further details see The Watchtower, issues of June 1 and 15, 1940.
and dangerous to ourselves. All of the faithful, having been warned, would do well to be on their guard against the wiles of those “wild waves of the sea, . . . for whom the blackness of darkness hath been reserved for ever”. (Jude 13, A R V ) These do not discern the body, but, as Jude says, ‘show respect of persons for the sake of advantage.’—Jude 16.
Owing to force of circumstances while I am still ‘tent making’ we are seldom where there is a company of servants We know that the faithful all over the earth will hasten to stand openly on the side of our brethren at Bethel, and against all wicked accusers We, also, wish to be found fighting shoulder to shoulder with our brethren, and to let it be known that, by Jehovah’s grace, we shall ever be found standing for Jehovah God, his King Christ Jesus, the Kingdom, and all who faithfully serve that kingdom.
With much love, we remain,
Your brethren and fellow locusts,
Granville E Fiske, Grace Fiske, Pioneer.
RESOLUTION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The brethren of the North unit [of Chicago, Ill , company] of Jehovah’s witnesses have unanimously adopted the following resolution:
“We, Jehovah’s witnesses of the North unit will be on the alert for any information from the enemy in relation to the things Brother Howlett brought to our attention Sunday, October 1, 1939, relative to 0. R. Moyle. We are one hundred percent back of you in the Theocratic Government, pushing forward to publish the Kingdom as commanded by the Almighty God through his Vindicator King Christ Jesus.”
IN HARMONY WITH ACTION TAKEN
We, the Racine [Wis.] company of Jehovah’s witnesses, wish to express our disapproval of the actions of 0 R Moyle against the Society and its president. We do hereby acknowledge the Watch Tower Society as the visible channel of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, and we are in complete harmony with the action taken by the board of directors. We are thankful to the Society for sending Brother Howlett in our midst to explain tne matter, which he did so well.
ADDRESS INFORMATION NOT APPEARING IN PREVIOUS ISSUE
Beaumont, Texas: (Watchtower Convention Committee) (9292) 1355 Cottonwood St.
Burlington, Vt.: (WCC) Box 75, Shelburne, Vt.
Duluth, Minn.: (WCC) Box 2, New Duluth, Minn.
(Douglas 510-W)
El Paso, Texas: (WCC) 3020 Tularosa St. (MAin 5407) Memphis, Tenn.. 4 p.m. [CDST]
FIELD EXPERIENCES
MAGAZINE WORK VICTORY IN CHICAGO NORTH UNIT
“March 9 fifteen publishers were placed at one of the busiest intersections which incorporated the large Scars and Roebuck store. After working about an hour a police officer came and informed us we could not do this work. We answered we were within our God-given rights as w’ell as the right of the Supreme Court. The officer then said if we did not discontinue work he would haul us in. We refused to leave. About 20 minutes later two detectives began rounding up all the publishers in front of the Sears store. The large signs worn by the publishers were a great attraction to the public. One publisher took advantage of telling the officer that we could not buy the advertising through the public press that wc were receiving there then. The police wagon came, picked up the 15 publishers (6 men, 3 ladies, and 6 children), and took them to the station. We asked the sergeant what the charge was. The reply was, the complainant would be there shortly and the charge would be filed later. The officer stated the real complainant was Sears & Roebuck, but rather than be exposed they put the burden on the owner of a small dress shop. The men and women were separated and placed in cells accordingly and the children were sent home. All were fingerprinted as though desperate criminals.
“Shortly after the chief, sergeant and another man came into the cell and began questioning, cursing and threatening us if we ever came back. Brethren then arrived to offer bail, that the publishers might be released until trial, but to no avail. Next morning another effort was made. Sergeant informed us that $100 cash bond or $400 property bond was required for each. We got in contact with Judge Schiller to sign the property bond, but because of some misunderstanding at the station with the officials the judge became very angry and took upon himself the responsibility of baiL ing out the publishers, at no expense to us. This did not set well with the chief and sergeant for the reason that they were Roman Catholics. Publishers were then released and case set for the following day. Next day we were called before the Municipal Court. We requested our case be tried by jury. Three weeks later our case was called at the Criminal Court and tried before Judge McCormick, who dismissed it because the complainant did not appear. The complainant was misinformed of our work, and when he learned the real purpose he refused to appear against us This, however, did not stop the arrests. Following week six more were arrested, and two weeks following two more. In the two latter cases the officers were signed as complainants. An issue was made of these cases, and through much prolonging of the courts we finally succeeded in getting our case before a jury. The jury, which found the publishers guilty, was composed of 9 Catholics and 3 others. We were fined $1.00 and costs. This, of course, caused us to ask for an appeal. The judge was not impressed by this because of the small fine involved. Our attorney insisted upon bringing to the attention of the court the ruling of the Supreme Court on cases similar to the one before this court. The judge permitted a continuance, asking the attorneys to investigate the law a little further. This was done, and upon presenting the four cases, plus the South Holland (Ill.) ease in evidence, the decision of the jury was reversed and our case was dismissed.”
HUNGER CASE IN ANCIENT BAGDAD, IRAQ
“While a witness was away from his hotel room, a friend visited him but found the door locked. He went to the proprietor and told him it was very important to get into his friend’s room, and received permission to break the glass to enter. After he gained entrance he eagerly supplied himself with the latest publications of the Society and II’ctcA-tower and Consolation magazines. He left a note: ‘Dear Friend: Not having seen you for a long time I became very hungry for the precious truth as contained in the Watchtower magazine and kindred publications. So in order to get a new supply I made up my mind to visit yon When I arrived at your hotel and found you were out I was sadlj disappointed. Immediately I went to the hotel proprietor and told him I came to visit you from another town and found your room locked. Therefore, in order not to return with empty hands I got his permission to enter your room through the broken window and I supplied myself with the Society’s publications.’ Later, after he read and studied, he determined to serve Jehovah and his Theocracy. At the school where he was teaching the school board enacted a law contrary to God’s law and tried to enforce it upon him. He refused because it was against his conscience and Jehovah’s law. On this account he resigned his good position, and now is planning to enter tile pioneer service and devote Ins full time to The Theocracy. This experience took place in the exact spot, Babylon, where centuries ago Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were thrown into the fiery furnace because they refused to yield to Satan’s representatives.”
A JEW INWARDLY (BROOKLYN)
“The lady had said, asking her husband for a quarter: ‘Oh, it is one of those books I used to read about God / must get that book, I can’t pass it!’ I called back. 1 found she, though a Jewess -by birth, was really a Jewess at heart, accepted Jesus as the Messiah and her Savior, and had all of Judge Rutherford’s books with the exception of two or three. I made several back-calls, placed with her the three books she did not have, also ten booklets, besides supplying her The Watchtower and Consolation weekly. She confided that she loved Jehovah from a child, tried to learn as much as she could about Him from the rabbi, read books and magazines extensively, but was never satisfied until she received the truth. The net result is that she has definitely taken her stand for Jehovah, goes out witnessing, her fust witness being to the rabbi, and desires to be immersed at the first opportunity. She has also been influential in getting her husband to believe in the ‘New Testament’ and Christ ”
TWO MONTHS PREVIOUS AN ATHEIST (TEXAS)
“No one at home. A Kingdom News left. Later a call, buc no one was there. A Salvation folder left, with address of the meeting place. Soon, the couple living in that house came to the place of meeting desiring to be associated with the Kingdom workers. On arrival of the Society’s zone servant he called on them. The following Sunday they, with five others, were immersed. They ordered a new Bible, a phonograph, two series of records and several miscellaneous recordings, also contributed $--- to the zone servant. They
are both now in the service. This shows the importance of leaving a slip with the meeting-place address at the door.”
2 OS
Me WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world ; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadeasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian .............. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian ......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ................ Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is requited by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N Y , tinder the Act of March 3, 1S79.
“RELIGION’S DOOM” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This midsummer testimony period during the entire month of August follows closely the Theocratic convention at Columbus. The period being named “Religion’s Doom”, the testimony activities should receive particular stimulation from the convention’s nationwide public address on “Religion as a World Remedy”. Appropriately, therefore, all Kingdom publishers will offer to the public, on a 25c contribution, the book Enemies and a self-covered booklet, preferably the new booklet Refugees, if the territory has recently been intensively witnessed to with the latest book, Salvation. Conventioners and people of good will everywhere are invited to share in this testimony. Arrange for this now through the local organized company of Jehovah’s witnesses. If not yet associated with such, write us for references. The Informant supplies full details. A complete report on each publisher’s field service for August should be submitted, to compile the total results.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 18: “Instruction” (Part 8),
1-25 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1940.
Week of August 25: “Instruction” (Part 8),
26-50 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1940.
VACATION
The annual vacation period of the members of the Bethel family at Brooklyn this year is from Saturday, July 20, to Sunday, August 4, inclusive. This will allow them a diversion from their regular activities at headquarters, and especially to avail themselves of the privileges of the 1940 Theocratic Convention of Jehovah’s witnesses and of the increasing opportunities for field witnessing. The normal operations of the factory and office will be suspended for that period; no books will be shipped or regular mail answered. Hence all field publishers should order sufficiently in advance that their supplies of literature to carry them through the vacation period and to the end of August may be shipped out not later than the evening of Friday, July 19 Also reserve your correspondence with the factory and office until after Monday, August 5.
THEOCRATIC CONVENTION OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
The manifest leadings of the Lord indicate that all lovers of the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God should assemble in general convention in 1940. Columbus, Ohio, has been selected as the key city for a five-day convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. The (Continued on page 223)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol LXI	July 15, 1940	No 14
INSTRUCTION
PART 8
‘ H/A he (nought foith his people with joy, and hts chosen with gladness.”—Ps. 105:43.
JEHOVAH never fails those who delight to do his w ill Obedience is always rewarded with joy. In the concluding part of the prophecy of Zephaniah Jehovah puts this song of gladness upon the lips of his faithful sen ants. All who are of Zion he bids to sing out boldly. The "iemnant”, together with the sti angers", that is, those who will form the “great multitude'’, he commands to shout aloud his praises. He has lifted his adverse judgment off the faithful, restored spiritual Israelites, the remnant; he has cleared out from them the hypocritical enemies and made his own faithful servant to stand out separate and distinct from all who practice religion. The faithful, appreciating the presence of the Lord at the temple* and that the great Theocrat is blessing and guiding those who maintain their integrity toward him, have full confidence that the Lord is shielding them from the assaults of the enemy and therefore that they have every reason to rejoice.
- The prophecy shows that the violent opposition to The Theocratic Government will soon come to an all-time high point; and concerning this Jehovah bids lib faithful witnesses and all who are of good will tow ard him to cast away all fear of men and demons. He commands that fear must not paralyze them or cause them to slack their hands in the kingdom service To stiengthen Ins people Jehovah assures them that he is with them and will fully deliver them from the enemy. He makes them know that he is pleased with their faithfulness and those who maintain integrity shall be forever blessed. This full assurance causes the servants of Jehovah to sing for joy. No more shall the faithful halt between two opinions. They are blind to everything but The Theocratic Government, and hence they rejoice in declaring the name of the Most High, regardless of all opposition. They are certain to share in the victory of the Lord. Jehovah gives his Word that he will save his people; and therefore they fully trust him and will rejoice in his salvation.
TIME FOR REJOICING
3 By many of the prophecies Jehovah shows his faithful servants that the present is the time for rejoicing, and therefore he says to them: “Sing, 0 daughter of Zion; shout, 0 Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the heart, 0 daughter of Jerusalem” (Zeph. 3:14) One of the emphatic and encouraging dramas was enacted when the Israelites under the commandment of Jehoshaphat marched out from Jerusalem to face the combined armies of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which armies had conspired to destroy the Israelites. (2 Chron. 20:22) That prophetic picture finds its final fulfillment upon the spiritual Israelites. The visible part of Jehovah’s organization Zion, pictured by his “woman”, are those of the “remnant”, the “daughter” of Jehovah and his organization. According to Young’s translation the text from Isaiah 12:6 reads: “Cry aloud and sing, 0 inhabitant [(Roth.) inhabitress] of Zion ; for great in thy midst is the Holy One of Israel!” It is the time when the members of Christ’s body, the 144,000, both those in heaven and those on the earth, must together sing the new song unto Jehovah. (Rev. 14:1-3; Ps. 149:1,2) All the people of good will, and who therefore see and who delight to support The Theocratic Government, must join in that song of praise: “Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit; let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains. Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his praise in the islands.”—Isa. 42:10-12.
4	When the remnant discerned that Christ Jesus is at the temple the song began: “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy King cometh unto thee; he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass.”—Zech. 9: 9.
5	This message is directed to the real followers of Christ, the faithful of Jerusalem, and not to those who are of the religious, political, unfaithful crowd, as stated in Zephaniah 3:1. The time for sanctimonious appearance and gloominess is past. (Isa. 58: 3-5; Zech. 7:3-7) The faithful now have a deep 211
212
S^e WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and genuine joy. They rejoice because they see that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is certain to be accomplished in the near future. That was the joy of the Lord, and such joy is the strength of the remnant. They see that The Theocratic Government of righteousness is come and that now they will rejoice for evermore. (1 Thess. 5: 16) Such is the ‘time of restitution of all things’ pertaining to The Theocratic Government under Christ. It is the ‘time of refreshing’ and calls for great rejoicing on the part of all those who love the Theocrat and his government. (Acts 3: 19-21) Exactly the opposite is the condition of big religionists, that is, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies, the antitype of Tyre, who is singing as a harlot, and who now sings the seductive song to inveigle others into her trap. To the harlot and allies Jehovah says: “Thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin [because she is violated by her illicit relations with political and commercial fornicators], daughter of Zidon; arise, pass over to Chittim; there also shalt thou have no rest.” —Isa. 23: 12.
’ Since 1922 the remnant, under the command of the Lord Jesus, began to carry on an aggressive publication of The Theocratic Government, and that has brought no joy whatsoever to religionists, and never again shall religionists have rest or joy. God’s message of truth burns and torments the religious system. Their religious susceptibilities are shocked by reason of the proclamation of the kingdom message, and they heap greater persecution upon the witnesses of the Most High.
7	During the World War the consecrated, because of fear of man, failed to do their duty, and therefore the Lord rendered his unfavorable judgments against them. In 1919 the faithful began to awaken to the real situation, and when they discerned that Christ Jesus was at the temple their joy in reality began. To the faithful Jehovah then said: “The Lord hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy; the king of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee; thou shalt not see evil any more."— Zeph. 3: 15.
’Jehovah took away the unfavorable judgment against them, and the spirit of the Lord rested upon the faithful, and with joy they said (Isa. 12:1): “And in that day thou shalt say, 0 Lord, I will praise thee; though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.” The “prisoners” restrained by “Babylon” were then released from Satan’s organization because the adverse judgment of Jehovah was taken away and because the faithful had repented and turned with full devotion to God and his King. (Pss. 102:19,20; 146:7; Isa. 61:1; 42:7; 49:9) The enemy was removed from God’s organization, and thereafter the rod of the
wicked was not permitted to rest upon the lot of the righteous. (Ps. 125:3) Thus Jehovah delivered the captives from Satan’s organization.
’ One noteworthy event was this: that in 1928 God revealed to his people the truth concerning “the higher powers”, showing his faithful people that the “higher powers” are not the political elements that rule the world, but that Jehovah and Christ Jesus are the Higher Powers. Then the clearing out of “elective elder” bosses of the companies was another revelation that brought joy to the faithful. In the year 1938 Jehovah revealed to his people that the democratic system of government is not the rule for Jehovah’s organization, but that God’s organization is necessarily theocratic. All of these things brought joy to God’s people, and their faith and hope and comfort increase.
10	To his faithful servants Jehovah revealed that “the king of [spiritual] Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee”. That king is not Caesar, nor the state, nor the pope of the Hierarchy, falsely claiming to be the official representative of Christ; but that king is Jehovah, “the King of Eternity.” By his official representative, Christ Jesus, He is present with his faithful servants. As a result of Jehovah's presence by Christ Jesus with the faithful “remnant’' gathered to the temple and made witnesses of the Theocrat, the people of good will heard the message. These “strangers” began to come from many nations, and still they come, and, coming, they join in the song because their hearts are made glad: “Sing and rejoice, 0 daughter of Zion; for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord. And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people; and I will dwell in the midst of thee; and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee.” (Zech. 2:10, 11) “Thus saith the Lord, I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be called, A city of truth; and the mountain [The Theocratic Government] of the Lord of hosts, The holy mountain.”—Zech. 8:3.
11	No more shall the Lord punish his faithful people : “Thou shalt not see evil any more.” (Zeph. 3:15) The remnant, continuing faithful and obedient to the Lord, will maintain their integrity toward him, and therefore there will be no more occasion for Jehovah to visit evil upon them as he did in 1914 to 1918: “And there shall be no more curse; but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him; and they shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads.”—Rev. 22: 3,4.
12	The cruel persecution that now comes upon God’s people at the hand of the Hierarchy and totalitarian allies and their tools is not any evil from Jehovah. That does not express Jehovah’s displeasure con
JI LY 15, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER
213
cerning his faithful ones. That persecution is evidence from the Lord that the remnant and their companions are his own people permitted to bear the reproach that fell upon Jehovah and Christ Jesus long centuries ago. Because the remnant bears the name of Jehovah and because the Jonadabs are the “other sheep” of the Lord, they are subjected to the persecution by the Devil’s organization. By their standing firm on the side of Jehovah and trusting in his salvation they are made strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. The remnant are in The Theocratic Government, and the Jonadabs are under the protection of the Lord, and hence these ‘men [of God] dwell in it [the kingdom], and there shall be no more utter destruction ; but Jerusalem [God’s faithful organization] shall be safely inhabited’.—Zech. 14:11.
13	The faithful servants of Jehovah know that no evil shall prevail against them, and they say to the Lord, as written in the prophecies: “But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” (Ps. 13:5) They know that their salvation is assured. That brings much joy to their hearts.
14	The “day of Jehovah” began in 1914, when he enthroned Christ as King. Therefore Jehovah says: “In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not; and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack.” (Zeph. 3:16) Jehovah speaks through Christ Jesus, the King and great Prophet. In the year 1919 Christ Jesus, through his earthly servants and by his selected means of communication, began to say to those in the covenant with Jehovah: “Fear them not”; meaning, Do not fear any of the enemy; fear only God. (See The Watchtower August 1 and 15, 1919, "Blessed Are the Fearless.” Also The Watchton et April 1, 1923, “Slack Not Thine Hands.”) This message of comfort and assurance is to the remnant of spiritual Israel, who are citizens of the New Jerusalem, and to the ‘strangers that are within her gates', that is, the people of good will, the Jonadabs. Both classes must observe the same law and obey the same commandments of God.—Ex. 12:49.
15	This admonition to the remnant and to the “other sheep” proves that Satan was then cast out of heaven and down to the earth, and hence after 1918 and onward would be and are “perilous times”; and that these are the "last days”, and that the name of Jehovah must be vigorously declared until the battle of the great day of God Almighty begins. This also proves that Catholic Action would be organized, vigorously warring against The Theocracy, and that the totalitarian state would grab control of the earth. It also proves that these, together with the Boman Catholic Hierarchy, claiming the right to rule the earth, constitute “the abomination that inaketh desolate" and that it would stand “where it ought not” to stand. Furthermore it shows that the perse
cution of Jehovah’s servants would increase, marking the time when all persons of good wall who have hope for salvation must flee to The Theocratic Government. (Matt. 24:15,16) From that time on those covenant people of God must not fear man or demons. Fearing only God and diligently obeying his commandments makes them safe from the Devil’s trap. —Prov. 29: 25.
’• Zion is Jehovah’s capital organization with Christ Jesus the Head thereof and associated with him the spirit-begotten 144,000, all of whom must now be busily engaged in Jehovah’s service. To Zion Jehovah says now: “Let not thine hands be slack.” No time now for idleness or weakly refraining from the kingdom witness work. Even though the enemy challenges the legality of the witness work and heaps great reproach and punishment upon those engaged in that work, the faithful must not slack their hand. No one in Zion must fear the enemy. They must be bold as the lion, which represents justice. They must joyfully continue to obey the commandments of the Lord. God is our strength, and him only shall we fear.
" Jehovah caused to be made and recorded many prophetic dramas as examples and for the encouragement of his people in this day of peril upon the earth. One of these examples was that concerning Nehemiah when he was sent of the Lord to rebuild the walls of ancient Jerusalem. Sanballat, together with other enemies, conspired against Nehemiah and raised the false charge of sedition against him and his companions. Nehemiah prayed to Jehovah: “Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands.” (Neh. 6:1,7-9) Likewise God’s faithful servants, in doing their work since 1922, have continued to pray, and Jehovah has heard their prayers. The enemy tried the same Deviltactics when the temple was being rebuilt at Jerusalem by the faithful restored remnant of fleshly Israel: “Then the [enemy] people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in [their] building; and hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia.”—Ezra 4:4,5.
18	Another example was that of the Gibeonites, who were desperately in need of help and who called upon Joshua, sending him the message: “Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us.” (Josh. 10: 6) There the Gibeonites pictured the people of good will, the “other sheep” of the Lord now being gathered, who now need help; and so the remnant the Lord commands to push on with the witness work and slack not the hand. Jehovah’s witnesses must be diligent and very active up until Armageddon, ever rejoicing in their privilege of bearing the reproaches that fell upon the Lord for His name’s sake.
214
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
” Why should Jehovah’s witnesses have no fear of man or demons ? The answer is given in the prophecy: ‘‘The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love ; he will joy over thee with singing.”—Zeph. 3; 17.
10	Jehovah has commanded that his name shall now be declared throughout the earth. He is in the midst of his covenant people, and he is almighty. He is Jehovah of Hosts, the God of battle, and none can successfully withstand him. The battle is his, and not man’s, and His complete victory is absolutely certain. (2 Chron. 20:15) He has appointed and commissioned his King, Christ Jesus, who is “The mighty God”. (Isa. 9: 6) To Zion, the temple mountain, Jehovah says: “Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle.” —Ps. 24: 7, 8.
11	Salvation belongs to Jehovah, and not to any earthly agency: “He will save [hig faithful people].” That does not refer to saving from death due to Adam’s sin, but does mean salvation or deliverance from the Devil's organization, which threatens destruction to the servants of God. It refers to deliverance of God’s faithful people, both the remnant and the “other sheep”, at Armageddon. Many times have these been delivered since 1919, and complete deliverance will come to the faithful at Armageddon, and that deliverance will be for the sake of Jehovah’s name. (Ps. 106:8) Seeing that the day of salvation is now at hand, this is no time for idleness, but the time for great energy and activity in proclaiming The Theocratic Government and the deliverance it will bring.
22	The faithful children of Zion and their companions now prove by the Word of God, which he has commanded them to carry to the people, that Satan is a liar and that all religion is from the demons. God is pleased with such faithful activity in proclaiming his name and his kingdom. Therefore it is written : “He will rejoice over thee with joy.” (Zeph. 3: 17) Jehovah is manifesting his good pleasure toward his servants because of their fearlessness and faithfulness in advertising The Theocratic Government and declaring the name of the great Theocrat. Those faithful servants fear Jehovah, lest they should come short of service and not receive his approval. They delight to do his will amidst all opposition. The words recorded by the prophet Jeremiah are now appropriately and properly applied to the faithful servants of Jehovah God, whom Jeremiah foreshadowed: “And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Yea, 1 will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart, and with my whole soul.” (Jer. 32:40,41) God’s favor is made known to the faithful by giving them a “new name”, the witnesses of Jehovah. (Isa. 62: 2-5; 43: 10-12) Furthermore, he says to the “evil servant” class: “And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen; for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people; and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days; for the child shall die an hundred years old ; but the sinner, being an hundred years old, shall be accursed.”—Isa. 65:15,19, 20.
23	Because Jehovah rejoices over his faithful people he bids them that are his witnesses on the earth to rejoice also, and they do greatly rejoice now. (Isa. 65:18; 66:10,14) Since receiving their "new name” the remnant, being fully identified with the organization under Christ, joyfully sing: “I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.”—Isa. 61:10.
24	Furthermore Zephaniah records: “He will rest in his love.” (Zeph. 3: 17) The marginal reading is: “He will be silent in his love.” Jehovah rests or keeps silent from rebuking Zion, that being no longer necessary, because the children of Zion, the faithful remnant, are zealous and obedient to Jehovah’s commandments and are active, therefore, in his service. This is Jehovah’s attitude toward them because of his love for his faithful ones. All his acts toward them are by reason of his loving-kindness Therefore he bids his people to sing, for the reason that now is the time for them to make manifest their joy in him. Then says the Most High: “[I] will joy over thee with singing.” This he does because the time has coine to vindicate his name by his Theocratic Government. The time is here for the deliverance of his faithful ones, and they are commanded to sing. Jehovah communicates to them this “new song”, and they sing: “And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders; and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.”—Rev. 14: 3.
23	At the birth of the man child Jesus the angelic host of heaven sung a prophetic song, and again that song is being fulfilled : ‘And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising
J uly la, 1940
WATCHTOWER.
215
God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace toward men of good-will.’ (Luke 2:13, 14, Rotherham) To the people of good will, the “other sheep” of the Lord, he gives commandment: “Rejoice, 0 ye nations, with his people; for he will avenge the hlood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.” (Dent. 32: 43) Jehovah’s organization is now in a joyful place, because now is the time for the fulfillment of prophecy: “And the ransomed of the Lord shall return [from Babylon], and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” (Isa. 33:10) "Theiefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.”—Isa. 51:11.
ASSEMBLY
26 In 1918 Jehovah’s people were cut off from enjoying their assembly together, and this by reason of being taken away captives by the enemy. Some were actually imprisoned, and all were restrained of their liberty. In 1918 Christ Jesus came to the temple and the saints who had long been dead were resurrected and gathered unto the Lord. The captives sorrowed, waiting for the gathering to the temple on Mount Zion : "And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.”-Rom. 8:23.
21	Another rendering of the text (Zeph. 3: 18) is: "The sad exiles from the appointed meeting have I gathered.” (Rotherham) Those exiled during 1918 from God’s appointed place of meeting rejoiced when they were gathered together in 1919 and when the Lord revived the work of The Theocracy. Therefore the regathered spiritual Israelites say, and continue to sing: "I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, 0 Jerusalem. Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.” (Ps. 122:1,2,4,8) “My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth, for the courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God. They go from strength to strength; every one of them in Zi6n appeareth before God.” (Ps. 84: 2, 7) "My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear before God! When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me; for I had gone with the multitude; I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with
a multitude that kept holyday.” (Ps. 42: 2. 4) “0 God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee; my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is; to see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary.”—Ps. G3:1, 2.
28	With this statement of the facts the following part of the prophecy will be appreciated by the anointed and companions: “I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden ” (Zeph. 3:18) Who are gathered! The prophecy answers: Those “who are of thee [from thee had they been (Roth.)]”. Those consecrated ones had been absent from the Lord’s organization because of being in captivity or prisoners or restrained ones, held by the enemy organization during the World War. It was a burden to them to be in captivity: "A burden on thee [and] a reproach!” (Rotherham) The consecrated had not maintained their integrity, but had slacked their hands during that period in giving testimony of the kingdom. Thus in 1918 and 1919 they had contributed to the reproach upon Jehovah’s organization. Those who were in the “evil servant" class were not gathered after 1918, but were “cut off from the [holy] city”. (Zech. 14:1,2) The faithful were sorrowful, and when they were regathered to the Lord their joy really began.
29	Jehovah says to the afflicted ones who remained faithful: “Behold, at that time I will undo al) that afflict thee; and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and I will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been put to shame.”—Zeph. 3:19.
5C The first part of this text, according to Rotherham, reads: “Behold me! dealing with all thine oppressors at that time”; then, following the beginning of the “strange work” by Jehovah, and in that he gives his faithful ones a part. The “strange work” exposes the hypocritical religious afflicters. In that “strange work” a series of grievous “plagues” are poured out upon “Christendom”. God produces a “famine” in their land by denying the religious meddlers a vision of his purpose. They are like the demons; they go into darkness and remain there. (Rev. 16:1-21; Amos 8:11) The religious susceptibilities of these oppressors being shocked, they begin to howl. During the “strange work” some of the oppressors and supporters appear to repent: “The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.” (Isa. 60:14) Thus is described those who had been oppressors but who now turn to the Lord and seek his salvation. Thereafter
216
3Te WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
comes the “strange act”, and the oppressors will never escape from Jehovah’s Executioner: “For in those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning of the creation which God created unto this time, neither shall be.”—Mark 13:19.
31	Who will be saved? The Lord answers, “I will save her that halteth”; that meaning the remnant of Zion, to whom is committed the testimony of Jesus Christ. During the World War these halted between twro opinions, trying at that time to obey human rulers because they believed them to be “the higher powers”, and also desiring to be faithful unto Jehovah God; but, they being of honest and sincere heart, Jehovah restored the remnant: “In that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted; and I will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far off a strong nation; and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever.”—Mic. 4:6,7.
32	The religionists watched for opportunities to rid the earth of God’s consecrated people, but the Lord saved and delivered those who were faithful to him: “But in mine adversity [halting {margin')} they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together [against the remnant] ; yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear me, and ceased not: with hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth.” (Ps. 35:15,16) “For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.”—Jer. 20:10; Ps. 38: 16-18.
33	This halting between two opinions resulted in lameness on the part of the remnant. Jehovah gave them ci edit for being ignorant of the truth concerning the “higher powers”, and hence had mercy upon them and gathered them and restored them, in 1919, and then, later, about 1929, revealed to his faithful people that the “higher powers” are not the earthly rulers, but Jehovah God and Christ.
34	Furthermore concerning the faithful Jehovah says: “And gather her that was driven out”; that is to say, driven out of the “Holy Land” of the service, which was denied God’s people in behalf of the kingdom interests during the World War. God permitted them to be driven out because of their fear of man and because of holding to much of religion and religious ceremonies. This was foreshadowed by the fleeing of Elijah from the devil-worshiping female lepresentative, Jezebel. (1 Ki. 19:1-15) Further-moie, as foreshadowed by Elijah’s returning, by the returning and gathering of the remnant of Zion Jehovah therefore nullifies and reverses the action of
the enemy against God’s faithful people. A further picture of this God caused to be recorded by his prophet Ezekiel: “Then he said unto me, Son of man. these bones are the whole house of [spiritual] Israel; behold, they [during 1918] say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost; we are cut off for our parts. Therefore prophesy, and say unto them. Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel [which prophecy began to have fulfillment in 1919]. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves [a deadness as to activity in God’s kingdom service], O my people, and brought you up out of your graves.”—Ezek. 37 :11-13.
35	Furthermore Jehovah says: “And I will get them praise and fame.” (Zeph. 3:19) “I will make them a praise and a name." (R.F. and Roth.) The deliverance of the remnant from the enemy and their restoration to their own land, that is, to kingdom service, was then and has continued to be a praise to Jehovah and to the honor of his name. Jehovah has also given his faithful remnant a “new name” to his praise. All of this favor of God upon his people has brought dismay to the enemy, and particularly to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. (Rev. 11:11-13) Jehovah then causes them to be called his witnesses and to shou forth his praises and to exalt his name before other s, and not to exalt men. “And in that day [of restoration] shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name [{margin) proclaim his name], declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things [to wit, has set up The theociuci and delivered his people from Satan's organization] ; this is known in all the earth.”—Isa. 12:4, 5.
30	During the World War the remnant were put to shame in their land. Concerning them God says: 1 will make them a praise and a name “in every land where they have been put to shame''. God's people were made to have a shameful appearance ; but when they were regathered by the Lord and restored to his service a different picture appears. Now in every land of “Christendom” the religionists are forced to take notice of Jehovah’s witnesses. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy at last recognizes that there is a people on the earth who refuse to yield to their inducements and who never quail before their inquisitors The faithful now are fulfilling and obeying that admonition which is written in the Sciiptures, to wit. “Only let the lives you live be worthy of the [gospel] of The Christ, in order that, whether I come and see you or, being absent, only hear of you, I may know that you are standing fast in one spirit and with one mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith of the [gospel]. Never for a moment quail befoie your
.1 uly 13,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
217
antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them a sure token of impending destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation—a token coming from God.”—Phil. 1: 27, 28, Weymouth.
" Now Jehovah turns the tables and makes those of “Catholic Action” and their allies turn black in the face. The enemy see that they are exposed, and they see that the people of good will toward Jehovah are fleeing from the demon organization and finding rest and safety under God’s organization. Jehovah foretold this day of triumph of those who serve and worship him in spirit and in truth: “But ye shall be named the priests of the Lord; men shall call you the ministers of our God; ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves. Lor your shame ye shall have double, and for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion; therefore m their land they shall possess the double; everlasting joy shall be unto them.”—Isa. 61: 6, 7.
TEMPLE SERVICE
38	At the temple judgment, which began in 1918, those who passed the test were anointed and commissioned and sent forth to the service of The Theocratic Government, and concerning them Jehovah by his prophet says: “At that time will I bring you again [bring you in (R.V.)], even in the time that I gather you; for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your eaptivitv before your eyes, saith the Lord.”—Zeph. 3: 20. "
39	At the temple the approved ones were brought into the service of The Theocracy. To them the Lord committed the kingdom interests. They must now offer unto Jehovah an offering in righteousness, and this thex did when sent forth into the earth to perform their assigned work under Christ Jesus, their Head and King.
The gathering or restoring has no reference to ■'Israel after the flesh”, because they were a typical people. The gathering here refers to spiritual Israel. It means the bringing of the spiritual Israelites, the faithful witnesses of God, into visible unity. Now God’s people have been brought into full unity as the Lord foretold by the apostle. (Eph. 4:13,14) “Thus saith the Lord God, When I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell in their land that 1 have given to my servant Jacob. And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them; and they shall know that I am the Lord their God.” (Ezek. 28.23,26) “And I will bring again the captivity of
my people of Israel, and they shall build the wastecities, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. And I xv ill plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given them, saith the Lord thy God.” (Amos 9:14,13) These scriptures show that Jehovah’s faithful servants now on the earth shall never again be scattered by the enemy, but shall continue for ever to serve Jehovah and rejoice in his salvation.
41	Jehovah’s people, the remnant and their companions, are now carrying forward a campaign of publicity in full unity and solidarity. Some notable examples are these: In London, England, 193S, was held a convention of the remnant and companions, which convention was tied, by electric appliances, with many other assemblies throughout Great Britain, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, Canada and America. Also in the year 1939 a like assembly, the key of which was in New York city, tied together with many other cities and radio stations. By this means Jehovah’s witnesses and companions in every part of the land of “Christendom” were gathered together and harmoniously proclaimed the name of the great Theocratic Government.
4S	“For I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth.” According to Young’s translation: “I will give you [restored spiritual Israel] for a name, and for a praise, among all people^ of the land.” From about 1878 Jehovah began taking out of the nations a “people for his name”. (Acts 15:14) These he put to the test at the temple judgment in 1918, and sent the approved ones forth to do his work. The Scriptures and the physical facts exactly agree and show that now is the time when Jehovah puts his favor upon those who trulv love and serve him; and this proves the fulfillment of the prophecy concerning their commission. The “tabernacle of David” was typical and pictuied the kingdom. In 1914 the King, Christ Jesus, was enthroned and the kingdom set up. The commissioned remnant went forth at his command to proclaim the name of Jehovah, that is, to declare his name and his govei n ment. To this agree the words of the prophet set forth in Amos 9:11,12. (See Acts 15:14-18.) Whj was this done? The Word of Jehovah answers: “That the residue of men [a people for his name] might seek after the Lord,” and those of good will of all nations might flee to The Theocratic Government. All this Jehovah foretold from the very beginning; and his purpose must be accomplished.—Acts 15. 14-18.
FULL ASSURANCE
43	The remnant and companions are now fully assured of what shall come to pass. They are no longer
218
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
in doubt, and no longer do they fear. Jehovah has spoken, and his word shall not return to him void, but shall accomplish his purpose. Having purposed it, he will also do it. (Isa. 46:11; 55:11) When will Jehovah do all these marvelous things? He answers: "When I turn back your captivity before your eyes”; or, according to Rotherham: ‘When I cause all your captives to return before your eyes.’ Jehovah has gathered his faithful witnesses in the course of action taken, that all who desire may discern and know that Jehovah is the Almighty and that now his prophecies are being fulfilled to the praise and to the vindication of his name.
44	Had all the consecrated in 1918 taken a course of idleness and never thereafter organized and carried forward the witness work in a zealous and fearless manner, no one on earth would have seen or known of the restoration of spiritual Israel and that these are the true servants of Jehovah God, who declare his name and his government. In fact, there could have been no restoration were it not for the fact that some remained true and faithful to the Lord and these constituted the “remnant”. In 1919 Jehovah’s consecrated faithful people were restored, their restraint being removed. Thus the faithful were made a praise to the name of Jehovah. Religionists, and political and commercial people, were made to realize that now there is a people on the earth who are wholly devoted to Jehovah and who without fear or hesitation engage in proclaiming his name and advertising The Theocratic Government as the only hope of mankind.
45	Now the religionists realize that Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions are a people entirely out of the ordinary and separate and distinct from the religious politicians of the earth. They see that such are a peculiar people. These faithful witnesses put Jehovah and his kingdom above everything. Their testimony concerning Jehovah and his Theocratic Government fills the religionists and allies with malicious hatred of the Almighty and his kingdom, and thus the enemy openly oppose everything that pertains to The Theocratic Government. The Lord God causes the enemy to thereby fix their own destiny. They openly espouse the cause of the Devil and work in harmony with the demons opposing the Most High and all who represent Him. He makes his people a praise to his name in the earth.
BE INSTRUCTED
48	The Scriptures were written that the man of God might be instructed and duly equipped to serve the Most High and his kingdom. (2 Tim. 3:16,17) The wise are those who diligently seek righteousness and meekness. They are anxious to know the will of God and diligent to walk in the way he has commanded.
“And when the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.” (Prov. 21:11) One who is instructed by the Lord and receives knowledge has an appreciation of his relationship to Jehovah and to his king. (Prov. 8: 10, 12) “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and the knowledge of the holy is understanding.”—Prov. 9:10.
47	Jehovah’s time arrives for the fulfillment of the prophecy of Zephaniah, whose name means ’‘hidden of Jehovah”. Zephaniah pictures, first, the “remnant”, and, later, their “companions”. In the temple judgment, which began in 1918, the approved ones were healed and built up into Zion. Then they were all sent forth to warn “Christendom” in particular and to give warning to all of Satan’s organization that the end had come and that the battle of the great day of God Almighty is near. Also their commission required them to proclaim the name of Jehovah and his government to all who had a hearing ear, to the end that the Lord’s “other sheep” might be gathered. The faithful remnant immediately began to carry out that commission, and have continued to do so. As they continue thus to obey God’s commandments he continues to instruct them by revealing to them the meaning of his prophecies. In this time the Lord gathers his “other sheep”, and these are made the companions of the remnant and joined with the remnant in declaring The Theocratic Government and in sounding the warning that final judgment is about to be fully executed. Those who are wise heed the warning and receive the instructions and immediately flee to The Theocratic Government and have promise of being hidden there.
48	“Christendom” spurns the instruction from the Lord. The commercial and political and military elements join the religionists in opposition to The Theocracy, and, all together, they join in persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions In their opposition to The Theocratic Gom.rnment “Christendom” and allies boast that they will rule the world in defiance of Jehovah God and his King.
48	Then Jehovah says to the rebellious ones: “Just wait for me.” But rebellious “Christendom” gives no heed to the warning. On the contrary, the religionists and allies increase persecution upon Jehovah’s servants. Will Jehovah avenge his faithful witnesses? Jesus answers: “I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?” (Luke 18: 8) Those now on the earth who have full faith and confidence in Jehovah and his King will not longer fear demons nor any of the human agents of the demons, but with boldness and zeal peculiar to the house of the Lord they will go forth in the proclamation of the message committed to their hands, declaring God’s purpose. By so doing they will prove their faith in Jehovah
3Te WATCHTOWER
219
July 13, 1940
and in his government, and will thereby maintain their integrity toward the Most High.
50	Jehovah’s time is here to oust the enemy. Therefore let all who trust fully in the great Theocrat and his King rejoice. God rejoices over them and commands them to rejoice. Therefore let no one of the remnant or of the Jonadabs now tremble or fail to perform his full duty. Let no one of them slack his hands. Let the witness work be pressed on with everincreasing vigor. Rejoice and sing for joy, all who are privileged now to be on the side of The Theocratic Government. Victory is certain, and it is nigh.
All the Scriptures and all the physical facts fully prove that the great battle will begin shortly. As Jehovah spoke to typical Israel through his faithful servant Joshua, so now he speaks to spiritual Israel and companions through the Greater Joshua, to wit: “Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.” (Josh. 1:9) Salvation belongeth to Jehovah, and he will deliver those who trust in him. Therefore as we go let us sing: "My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”
WAS THE HUNTER "GYPPED”?
££'T~'SAU was a cunning hunter, a man of the field,” r“like Nimrod, after whom it was said: “Even as
Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord.” (See Genesis 25: 27 and 10: 8-10.) Doubtless both of these hunters knew of the great divine promise given in the paradise of Eden concerning a coming Seed, a Deliverer of humankind, to wit: “And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; . . . and I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.”—Gen. 3:14,15.
Esau’s home was in the tents of his father, Isaac. Isaac was the son of Abraham, the man who was called “the friend of God”. With Abraham God made a solemn contract or covenant, in these words: “In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed iny voice.” (Gen. 22: 17, 18) This is called the Abrahamic covenant. Note that the covenant with Abraham stated that there would be an offspring or “seed” which would bless “all the nations of the earth”. Before the blessing promised could come to the peoples of earth, the seed which was promised must first come. It was therefore expected that one of the natural descendants of Abraham would become their king and that through that king and his kingdom all the nations of the earth would be blessed according to the will of God the great Theocrat. For this reason the faithful looked forward with great expectancy to the birth of the one who was to be their king. They based their hopes upon the repeated promise by Jehovah God. Without doubt it was thought by some that Isaac, the son of Abraham, would be the one through whom the blessing would come. “And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahai-roi [the well of the Living-Seeing One].” When Isaac was about sixty years old there were born to him and his wife Rebekah two sons, twins, who were named by them Esau and Jacob.—Gen. 25:11, 26.
To escape a famine Isaac then went to live in the land of the demon-worshiping Philistines. While there, God said to Isaac: “Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and
will bless thee: for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I vvill give all these countries; and I will perform the oath which 1 sware unto Abraham thy father. And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries ; and m thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” (Gen. 26: 3, 4) Thus the Abranamiv promise was renewed to Isaac Before the death of Isaac upon which of his twin sons would he pronounce his blessing, and which son wmuld thereby become the successor of ins father to the Abrahamic promise?
Under the rule of descent at that time in the Orient, the firstborn or eldest son was the heir of the father’s estate and of any other rights or privileges that went with, that estate, unless for some cause there should be an exception to the rule. Esau, having been born a few moments before ins brother Jacob, would under the operation of this rule be the successor of the Abrahamic promise and heir to his father. His birthright, therefore, would include the promise made to Abraham. But Jehovah God clearly indicated that there should be an exception to the rule in this case and that Jacob should be the heir, and not Esau When it was known that Rebekah the mother would bear offspring, and just before the time of the birth, she inquired of the Lord concerning the expected offspring, and the Lord said unto her that two sons would be born to her and that the older should serve the younger. “And the Loid said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger.” (Gen. 25: 22, 23) This definitely shows that it was God’s purpose that Jacob, who was born last, should be the heir and successor to the Abrahamic promise
These two sons grew to manhood’s estate Esau became a great hunter and loved the outdoor sports ; while Jacob was a plain man, remaining quietly at home. Esau showed that he did not appreciate the birthright, namely, the Abrahamic promise, even if it were his, which in fact it was not, since God had foreordained that it should belong to Jacob As the inspired commentator thereon writes: “And not only this; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac; (for the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God, according to election, might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth;) it was said unto her. The elder shall
220
STie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklxn, N.Y.
serve the younger. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.” (Rom. 9:10-13) Esau thought more of his own selfish, immediate comfort than of anything that might come to him by reason of the Abrahamic promise.
Came the day when Esau was in the field hunting. He returned hungry and faint. He found that Jacob had prepared a pot of lentils. When Esau smelled this appetizing food he said to Jacob: “Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage, for I am faint.” Then Jacob, not out of line with the decree of Jehovah God, said to Esau: “Sell me this day thy birthright. And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die; and what profit shall this birthright do to me ? And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto Jacob. Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way. Thus Esau despised his birthright.”—Gen. 25: 27-34.
Genuine, real right and title to the birthright was now Jacob’s for two good and sufficient reasons: (1) because it was so ordered by the Lord before Jacob’s birth, as above stated ; and (2) because he had bought it in an open and fair transaction with his brother Esau. Jacob and Esau were then men, both capable of entering into a contract; and they made a contract which was binding upon both.
Notwithstanding these two good reasons why Jacob was justly entitled to the birthright, Esau attempted to deprive him of it. The birthright carried with it the privilege of the special blessing from their father Isaac. Isaac waxed old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see; and he knew that the day of his death might be near. (Gen. 27 :1, 2) He directed his son Esau to go into the field and take some venison and bring it to him that he might eat, and give Esau his blessing.
The Bible does not clearly show that Isaac knew God had foreordained that this birthright should belong to Jacob, nor does it show that Isaac knew Esau had sold it to Jacob; therefore the old father can be excused for thinking it was his duty to bestow his blessing upon his son Esau. It was when Isaac was 131 years old and his sons Jacob and Esau were men of mature years, each 71 years of age, that Isaac bestowed the blessing. Rebekah the mother, knowing of both the reasons why Jacob was entitled to the birthright, knowing that Esau did not appreciate it, and knowing of his wrongful intent to deprive his brother Jacob of the privileges and blessings incident to the birthright, advised Jacob what to do in order to protect his own rightful and proper interests. The mother, therefore, was carrying out God’s will in this respect. She was doing what all honest persons should do: try to protect the rights and privileges of those that are near and dear to them. She therefore directed Jacob to slay two kids of the goats and bring them to her and she prepared some savory meat, while Esau was away hunting. Then, in order that the blind father might not obstinately refuse to aid them in carrying out the divine purposes, and in order that he might think he was blessing Esau, the mother Rebekah fastened upon the arms of her son Jacob the skins of the kids and also put the skins about his neck that he would appear as a hairy man like unto his brother Esau.
Jacob then came in before his father and presented the savory meat. His father kissed him and laid his hand upon
him and gave to Jacob his blessing. The old father then spoke in prophetic phrase, evidently under the direction of the Lord, saying unto his son Jacob: “Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother’s sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee; and blessed be he that blessetli thee.”—Gen. 27 : 29.
Almost immediately Esau returned from the field and found that Jacob had received his father’s blessing and that he (Esau) had been unsuccessful in carrying out his purpose of defeating the open and fair transaction which he had made with Jacob when he sold him his birthright. Esau hated his brother Jacob and determined to kill him as soon as his father Isaac was dead.
It seems rather strange that many religionists have severely criticized Jacob and his mother Rebekah in this transaction. It has evidently been due to the fact that thex were ignorant of the record. No part of Jaeob’s action in connection with the birthright is reprehensible. Jehovah God later showed that Esau prophetically pictured the peoples of earth who are Christians in name only, but nut in truth and in fact, and who are hypocritical, and who persecute the true Christians; while Jacob pictured or foiesh.idowed the true followers of Christ who have been misrepi esented and persecuted by the merely so-called “Christians’. God showed his approval of the conduct of Jacob and his niuthei Rebekah, and showed that it was his purpose that Jacob should receive the blessing going with the birthright. Jacob had shown his great desire for the birthright, wlinh was merely a promise; while Esau had despised it. Bence later the apostle warned Christians 'fiest there be any foinnatoi. or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected for h-found no place of repentance [on God’s part), though h< sought it carefully with tears”.—Ileb 12. 1G, 17
Acting upon the advice of his mother, Jacob now tied from the wrath of Esau; but before going Isaac called Jacob and again blessed him. (Gen. 28. 1-5) As Jacob went away, he lay down and slept at a place situated not th of the present site of Jerusalem and which afterward Jacob named Bethel, which name means “House of God’’ There Jacob had a dream, in which God signified his approx..! of Jacob and pronounced a blessing upon him The faithful reeoid reads:
“And he lighted upon a certain place, and tairied there all night, because the sun was set: and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep. And he dreamed, and, behold, a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and, behold, the angels of God ascending and descending on it. And, behold, the Lord stood aboxe it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou hest, to thee will 1 give it, and to thy seed; and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth; and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south • and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee m all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land.
J uly 15, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of.”—Gen. 28:11-15.
Whom God blesses and approves all others should approve Be assured, then, that Jacob was blameless before Jehovah God in this transaction. It shows how carefully Jehovah was guarding his promise and the seed which would spiing from it ultimately and through which the families of the earth should be blessed.
Some years later God showed his further favor to Jacob by changing his name from Jacob to Israel The name Israel means “He will rule as God”. (Gen. 32:27,28) “And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be cal'cd any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel. And God said unto him, I am God Almighty : be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins; and the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thcc I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land” (Gen. 35:10-12) But what about Esau the hunter?
The nickname of Esau was Edom: “Esau, who is Edom.” (.Gen. 36:1) The name means “red”, and is a reminder of Esau’s failure to appreciate God’s favor toward him concerning the Abrahamic birthright, which Esau sold for the paltry sum of a mess of pottage, that his selfish appetite might be appeased. Genesis 25:30: “And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom”; that is, "Red” (Marginal reading) Esau married outside of Abraham’s family relation. Esau took his wives of the demon-worshiping daughters of Canaan, the cursed one. (Gen. 9: 25) It was therefore impossible for the Edomites to be God's holy nation. Esau was the firstborn of Isaac and apparently had the first elaim to the Abrahamic birthright, but it was God’s will that it should be otherwise.
The descendants of Esau, that is, the Edomites, must therefore represent a class of persons who are apparently the firstborn and in line for the kingdom of God. More specifically they stand for and represent that class of men who have organized and carried on religion in the name of (tod and Christ, but who in truth and in fact have been and are the representatives of the Devil, and hence a part of the
Devil’s organization. That clearly shows that modern-day Edomites are made up of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their Protestant and Jewish clergy allies who have used the Word of God for a selfish purpose. Today Protestantism is dead; those clergymen who carry on the so-called “Protestant religion” are joined together with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy; and it has been true since the World War, at and since which time this combined crowd has sought the death of the true followers of Christ Jesus The clergy of the Catholic and so-called “Protestant” organizations are vigorously working together at this day to destroy the true followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, who, like him, are witnesses for Jehovah God. Esau joined the Devil’s organization, and all who follow that course become a part of Satan’s organization and are put in the class of the Edomites The clergy are the antitypical Edomites and are the most deceptive and reprehensible part of Satan’s visible organization.
The Abrahamic birthright privileges were claimed by the clergy because they have always claimed to be the ones favored of God. Jehovah God foreknew that they would be unfaithful and would fall away completely to the Devil, and therefore he foretold such in this prophetic drama The Abrahamic birthright privileges as held out and claimed by the clergy, Jesus foretold would be taken away from them because they failed to bring forth the fruits (the truth) of the kingdom of God. (Matt. 21.43-45) That Abrahamic birthright pertains to the foretold “seed of Abraham” through which the blessings would eomc to humankind, and which seed is Christ Jesus, the Theocratic King. It is only the clergy that have tried to compete with Jehovah’s true saints for the kingdom privileges. This corresponds exactly with Esau’s rivalry toward Jacob for the birthright of his father. Esau tried to kill Jacob, and the modern-day Edomites likewise now try to kill and destroy Jehovah’s true witnesses, pictured by Jacob Those once in line for the birthright blessings of Jehovah God m connection with his Theocratic Government under Christ, and who dishonor the Lord, become Edomites ; and the Lord appoints their end with the hypocrites and puts them into outer darkness as to his purposes and takes away from them all the kingdom interests Those interests arc given to the faithful witnesses of Jehovah foreshadowed by Jacob —Matt 21: 43
DEAD WITNESSES REVIVED
END of the World War in 1918 found them dead, killed. A “beast” did it. Their enemies gloated and said they would never live again and bother them. “And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.” (Rev. 11:8) Not in literal ancient Egypt, but in the world, or Satan’s organization as symbolized by Egypt, was where our Lord Jesus Christ was hung on the tree, and in the same place the work of witnessing as conducted by Him through his faithful followers on earth was overcome and killed. The small bodies of men and women who were devoted to the Lord and forming the witnesses of the Lord on earth were now silent as death. Their work seemed to be completely done. As mute evidences of the injustice, fraud, lying and cruelty practiced against them
by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and its religious allies, and as proof of the violation of liberty of speech, and, above all, as evidence of the defamation of God’s Word and name, the witness work of the faithful followers of Christ lay dead in the streets, not lying in state, but in the streets and in disgrace and exposed to the gaze of the religious mockers, and considered ‘as the filth of the world, and the offseouring of all things’. (1 Cor. 4: 13) “Their careasses were as dung in the midst of the streets ”—Isa. 5: 25, margin.
They were not given an honorable burial, but were left exposed in the city (of Satan, which is called Sodom and Egypt, where Christ Jesus was murdered). The faithful witness work, which compared with the prophet Elijah’s work and which Jehovah God had caused to be given to the world particularly since A.D. 1878, was now made a stench
222
THE WATCHTOWER.
BllOOKL'iN, N. Y.
in the nostrils of all the onlookers. The clergy and their allies, from their pulpits and through the public press, made this stench as detestable as possible. They pointed to Jehovah’s servants who had been giving testimony and to their work as worse than the worst enemies of the land. It was in the Broadway of so-called “Christendom”, but which the Lord has named Sodom, that this witness work lay. In that wicked organization wherein, as in ancient Sodom, there was “pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness” and cruelty, God’s witness work had been killed and exposed as a detestable thing. In that religious organization which is in fact anti-God and anti-Christ, under the control and rulership of Satan, whose ministers claim to be Christian, the real witness work was killed and the people turned away from the true God. The clergy were chiefly responsible for this condition. They will be the principal ones to suffer in the complete downfall of Satan’s organization; and this is indicated by the names Sodom and Egypt, which suggest the manner of the destruction of Satan’s organization.
Those acts of cruelty to God’s people and insults to Jehovah have not been done in a corner, but openly before all the nations of the earth. The common people will bear witness to the fact that during the war of 1914-1918 Jehovah's consecrated servants were only telling the people why the war had come, that Satan’s “world” or uninterrupted rule had ended, that God’s kingdom was at hand, and that these were the evidences of the approaching blessings, and that their good work was ruthlessly stopped by the agents of Satan’s organization.
The clergy seized upon the war as a pretext to stop the witness work concerning God’s Word because they had contempt for God’s kingdom. The Devil had completely gotten control of them and their allies and they were bent upon doing everything possible in opposition to the kingdom of the Lord, which they now trod down under foot. To be sure, Jehovah foreknew and foretold this through Christ Jesus, saying: “And ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.” Furthermore Jesus said that this shall be used against them as a witness.—Matt. 24:9; 10:18; Mark 13: 9.
“And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.” (Rev. 11:9) Those “three days and an half” do not seem to be either literal or symbolic time, but merely a time sufficient to cause a dead body to putrefy. In this we are reminded that when Jesus’ friend Lazarus died and Jesus came to the grave and directed the stone to be taken away, Lazarus’ sister said to him: “Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he hath been dead four days.” (John 11:17-39) The embalmed body of Lazarus stank in four days. An unembalmed body exposed three days in the open streets would become a terrific stench and cause the people to turn away their heads. That is exactly what the clergy and the Devil desired to accomplish, to wit, to make the common people look upon God’s witnesses as the most detestable things.
In a short time after June 20, 1918, when the witness work was completely killed, the public press and the preachers had many things to say about the witnesses, then commonly known as “Bible Students”, which sayings made them
like a stench in the nostrils of the people Press and clergv said, in substance: “The Bible Students are done for ever." One paper had this to say about the book which the Govern ment confiscated to stop the work: “The finis of The Finished Mystery has been given.” This stench, symbolized bv the putrefying bodies, would furnish the unmistakable evidence as to the deadness of the witness work, as dead as the headless John the Baptist and as the prophet Elijah caught away in a fiery trouble. Exposing such to shame would cause putrefaction as would raise a great stench and make it a detestable thing, and such is symbolized as a thing that stinks.—Compare Exodus 5:21, margin; 1 Samuel 13:4 margin; Psalm 38.5, 22.
No honorable burial was allowed the bodies svmboli/cd by God’s “two witnesses”. (Rev. 11:3) The United States, contrary to the spirit of the fundamental law of the land, and particularly due to the now “extinguished'’ papal “Knight of St. Gregory the Great”, refused to allow the officers of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society bail pending an appeal of their case, but kept them m prison and thus increased their ignominy and caused their Chiistiau brethren on the outside to be shunned. These also were exposed to ridicule and made to appear destestable in the ev c> of the people. The ruling powers did not bury John the Baptist, but “when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb”. (Maik 6 29) Thus ended a witness work which was long ago ioreshadowed by the work of Elijah and John the Baptist The enemy, to wit, Satan’s agencies on earth who des]used Jehovah’s kingdom by Christ, had brought about that condition
And so, as indicated in Revelation 11:10, the elergv and their allies rejoiced over them and made merrv and felicitated one another because “these two piophets" that had “tormented them” were, in their opinion, done for and their work ended. No human power or influence could au.un revive the witness work of Jehovah’s servants, and the clergy had no thought that God would give a helping hand Therefore these religionists reasoned that ‘this pcsliterou.s crowd is dead and they are done for for ever’ That was thi cause of their exultation, and they felicitated one anutl ci and swaggered about, rejoicing in what thej had accomplished.
During that World War many consecrated voting men were held in the army camps and were severely abused and brutally punished because they declined to disobev God and kill their fellow man. The clergy made no protest against such inhuman treatment inflicted by the government officers, but, on the contrary, exulted over it. In manj places throughout the country religious clergymen incited and encouraged mobs to do violence to Jehovah’s servants A great array of testimony giving the names of these persecutors and their atrocious deeds was set forth in No. 27 of the magazine The Golden Age (now Consolation). No clergyman raised his voice in favor of religious ireedom or the right to speak truly the Word of God. They had completely made themselves a part of Satan’s organization. It was a holiday for these agents of Satan on earth and they exchanged congratulations because they had been instrumental in bringing about the death of God’s “two witnesses”
Some of those who had to do with destroying this witness work of the Lord were even knighted or decorated by
July 13, 1940
THE WATCHTOWER
223
the pope for their “valiant” deeds This the Lord foretold by his prophet in these words: “In mine adversity they rejoiced. and gathered themselves together; yea, the smiters gathered themselves together against me, . . . they did tear me, and ceased not; with hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth.”—Ps. 35:15,16; .4)11. Rev. Ver., margin.
However, God’s spirit is not inactive for long toward his servants. He would not permit his work of his witnesses to ‘lie dead’ beyond the time it served his purposes. Therefore it is written: “And after three days and an half the spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet.” (Rev. 11: 11) Manifestly this also refers to another short period of time sufficient to let the clergy and their allies put Jehovah’s servants out of their minds. The excitement of the war and their many duties in getting young men into the trenches to be killed drew the attention of the clergy away from these faithful witnesses of Jehovah God, who they supposed were done for ever. But all the time the faithful ones outside of prison walls, as well as those inside, were seeking some way to witness to the name of the Lord. Shortly' after the incarceration of the Watch Tower Society’s officers God’s witnesses, or rather His witness work, “stood upon their feet,” not suddenly, but gradually.
On March 26, 1919, the prison doors were opened, by the Lord's grace, and in September of that same year thousands of Jehovah’s witnesses assembled in an international convention at Cedar Point, Ohio. At that time those faithful ones saw for the first time that the “Elijah work” was done and that there was another great work to be done, which was foreshadowed by Elijah’s successor, the prophet Elisha, and therefore the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses on earth must do this work. It was then clearly seen that Elisha was anointed in the place and stead of Elijah to finish the work of witnessing to the name of Jehovah. (1 Ki. 19.16) Note is here taken of a company of certain ones claiming to be follow’ers of Christ, and yet who claim that since A.D 1918 and the end of the World War the Lord has had an entirely different society or class of people to represent him, and that none of the above faithful ones have since been engaged in his service. The Scriptural proof set forth above completely nullifies the claim of those who separated themselves from the faithful, and shows that, since Elisha was anointed to take Elijah’s place, the Lord himself raised up the same company of men to do his work, and that the organization is God’s, a Theocratic organization. and is one and the same organization. God raised up the same body, therefore proving that the same faithful persons who finished the Elijah work were used of the Lord in beginning the Elisha work of God’s remnant of witnesses. It was God who revived the witnesses, as stated in Revelation 11 • 11
Matthew 14: 1, 2 states that when King Herod, who had John the Baptist beheaded, heard of Jesus’ miracles he thought that John had been raised from the dead, and
doubtless was much alarmed. Likewise, the assembling of Jehovah’s people at Cedar Point, Ohio, in September, 1919, and the sudden reviving of the Lord’s work, struck fear into the clergymen and their allies and caused them to tremble. Hence it is written: “Great fear fell upon them which saw them [the revived witnesses].” (Rev. 11:11) It was a fearinspiring surprise to the clergymen and their supporters. —Compare Psalm 48 : 2-6, 12,13.
Doubtless the clergymen saw that they were in for a “trimming” before the people when they beheld Jehovah’s witnesses boldly coming forth and declaring the message of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and notifying the people to come and hear them tell why the clergy had stopped the witness work of the Lord’s people in 1918. Instead of hiding the fact that their officers had been imprisoned, as the clergy expected Jehovah’s people to do, these witnesses placed full-page advertisements in the papers throughout the country calling attention to the fact that those officers had been sentenced to eighty years in prison for telling the truth and would now explain to the people why. Great crowds flocked to hear, and did hear, and the witnesses’ work was quickly revived.
At the Cedar Point convention in 1919, and in The Watchtower, many scriptures were produced supporting the conclusion that the Elijah work ended in the fiery trouble of 1918 and that now the Elisha work of God’s remnant must begin. It was a voice from heaven, because it was Jehovah’s voice through his Word. “And they [God’s faithful witnesses] heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven m a cloud; and their enemies beheld them.” (Rev. 11:12) Here was the invitation from the Lord to his covenant people to “gather yourselves unto me—ye my men of loving-kindness, who have solemnised my covenant over sacrifice”. (Ps. 50: 5, Rotherham') The Lord was gathering unto himself those who had been cast out by the religionists (Ps 147 : 2) The Lord was now gathering his witnesses to himself to become a part of the “new heavens” and to do his kingdom witness work. Isaiah’s prophecy (52: 2,1, 60.1, 2) then applied: "Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, 0 Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, 0 captive daughter of Zion. Awake, awake; put on thy strength, 0 Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.” “Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee ”
‘Ascending up to heaven in a cloud’ pictures the fact that God’s servants, rising out of the dust of humiliation and deadness, were lifted up to heavenly privileges of service, this being attended by the glory of God, and they were given a part in His heavenly kingdom work, to witness for the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus. And their enemies now behold them thus engaged.
(Continued from page 210)
dates will be July 24-28 inclusive. This final announcement is made in order that Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will may be reminded to arrange their affairs so as to be at Columbus, Ohio, or other cities tied in by direct wire communication and loud
speaker equipment. By the Lord’s grace, the president of the Watchtower Society will be in attendance in person at the key assembly in Columbus. For further details see The Watchtower, issues of June 1 and 15, and July 1, 1940.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEERING IN CALVERT COUNTY, MD.
“So many people are interested that we make 8 to 9 back-calls a day. We are playing the lecture records now, and next week will start on model studies. In many little communities we find 90 percent sheep. They are taking their stand now. We hardly have to instruct them, they seem to be waiting for us to come around and they welcome us with open arms. Many are all ready to take over model studies, so that we will be able to move on to other parts of the county and stimulate more who are interested. Many are already publishers to a limited extent, as the privileges of service in rurals are not as abundant as in urban sections. One Cephas has been reading the literature and left the ‘church’ on that account. One night he went back and thought he would go to prayer meeting for the last time. As he entered the church, everyone looked around in amazement, as the whole congregation knew why he had withdrawn and absented himself for two months. The preacher, thinking Cephas had repented, and knowing once any member left as one of Jehovah’s witnesses he would not return, asked Cephas to come up on the carpet and give account of himself. Cephas stalked up front and boldly declared he had come to say good-bye: Tse been reading for myself in the Bible and I know this here preacher ain’t telling us what he should! The Lord is setting up his kingdom now right here on earth [quoting Daniel 2:44] and I can read with my own eyes, and the Lord has enlightened my mind and I don’t have to support that lazy preacher any longer to know what the Lord wants each of us to find out for ourselves.’ With that he walked out of Babylon never to return. Whole communities are progressing rapidly in the truth, and, in fact, the Lord is away ahead of us. Especially in the colored sections do we find them hungering and thirsting for righteousness. They are being satisfied and filled, and even before we mention living upon the earth they tell us that they know the Lord will permit them their earthly home. Surely the great multitude is increasing' One man offered to set up a large tent on his farm, so that we could invite all the interested in that community to hear the talks and study together. In the last six years the county has been rather thoroughly worked.”
NOT A MESSAGE OF HATE
“The lady started in saying Jehovah’s witnesses ought to be shot for spreading hate against the Catholics. I said: ‘We don’t hate the Catholics, but they hate us. If we hated them we wouldn’t call on them.’ She then invited me in and, after hearing a lecture record and my explaining that we were doing people a favor to call on them with the truth, she took Salvation with Refugees. When getting this territory it was stated that no one in it was interested, yet I found all I could handle in one block of it. The police have tried to get me to quit doing sidewalk magazine witnessing in four out of seven towns. I refused, telling them I ought to obey God rather than men ; to which one laughed and said ‘All right!’ another said ‘O.K ’, and another said I was stubborn, and the last one made a lot of threats, while all four were bluffs. One way to encourage publishers to take part in sidewalk magazine witnessing is to show them in Acts 17:17 that Paul witnessed around the market places and while we are on busy street corners we are giving wit
ness to people going to market to shop. At a home, after observing palm branches, crucifix and religious pictures on the walls, I figured they were just dull, irresponsible Irish Catholics. I buried myself in the phonograph speech, and when the Catholic religion was mentioned I never took a chance to look at them. The talk over, I asked: ‘How did you like it?’ You could have blown me down with a feather when they replied: ‘It’s the truth. The Catholic church want to own and rule everything.’ They were ready to give me a line-up on how big a racket the Catholic religion was They wanted to come to the next Salvation study.”
11-YEAR-OLD MINNESOTAN GETS ACTIVE
“A model study was held in his home. He did not pay much attention at first, but later began to sit in and take part. When he learned about the magazine work he wanted to have part. He reported for field service one Saturday morning and went with the publisher to the first house. When he saw how it was done, he said, ‘That’s easy. I want to do it myself.’ So he took a supply of Refugee booklets and went from door to door by himself. In the afternoon he reported again for street-corner witnessing with magazines in the downtown business. His first day’s report 7 hours, 1 book, 28 booklets, 13 magazines, 2 sound attendance. He has gone in the service at every opportunity since that day, and has attended Watchtower study, service meeting, and Salvation study regularly. He took careful note of evenings announced for back-calls. One of the publishers who had a model study arranged to take him along. After a week or two his Sunday-seb< al teacher missed him and went to sec his mother about why he was not coining. His mother made the excuse he did not have any good pants Later the teacher came back with a new pair of pants for the boy. His mother said: ‘Now you will have to go to Sunday school to show your appreciation for the pants.’ He said: ‘I don’t want to go to Sunday school; I want to go to the Kingdom Hall, because that’s where God wants me to go. I would rather give the pants back than go to Sunday school.’ So he went out in the service instead. Next day he brought his mother along to Salvation study. The same week she went out in service herself, and now has decided to give the pants back. His first month’s report as a publisher, starting with the 13th day of the month, shows: 40 hours, 111 booklets, 28 magazines.”
ON SIDEWALKS OF NEW YORK (LOWER MANHATTAN)
“Thursday evening before service meeting. A stranger walked into the hall. He related how he had gotten a magazine on the street corner because he saw it was The Watchtower. On examining the magazine he noticed the folder which directed him to Kingdom Hall. After a brief explanation, he agreed to stay. During meeting the record ‘Instruction’ was mentioned, and its importance during Watchtower campaign. After meeting this man requested hearing the record. A back-call was immediately arranged for this. After playing ‘Instruction’ and ‘Government and Peace’ at the back-call, he readily subscribed for The Watchtower. He has started coming to Watchtower study and thinks the method of study is excellent. The street-corner work ads as a beacon light in the stream of humanity, guiding the righteous to safety.”
224
(WchWer!; .XTpli 'Jehov^jJQnJdomjJI^	™
-	.	J! e	Mri	■	-it'
Semimonthly
AUGUST 1, 1940
C 0 N T E N T S
’ J
Ji!
1 m I
©WTB. &T5.
w/Ma/WMm
2.;n
2il
231
23 4 233
23 S 240 22G
T
I )“
22S
220
Vol. LXI

‘Times and Seasons’ (Part 1)
Fixed Time
“Signs”	.
“Jacob’s Trouble” .
Armageddon
Brethren” You Know”	..	.
That Dav” As a Thief” . . In the Night” ..	.
Adverse Conditions .	.
World-Famine Relief...........
“Time No Longer" .................
Field Experiences.............
“Religion’s Doom” Testimony Period Notice of Annual Meeting Use Renewal Subscription Blank “Watchtower" Studies


22G
22(i
AJY Wl^^-AlYrJ	J A'J
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	» Brooklyn, N.YU. S. A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Ambumh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to bls creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will bear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Saran from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun ; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites carefui and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, Ji 00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Gs American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bana Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices Bemittances froui countries other than those mentioned may be made to the BrooMjn office, but by International Postal Money Order onlj
Foreign Offices
British ............................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, TV 2, England Canadian................... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian ............ 1	Beresford Road, Strathtield, N. S. W , Australia
South African .............-...... Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in everj case.
(Translations of this journal appear in set oral languages.)
AU sincere students of the Bible who by reason of inflrmity. poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Hatchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment ot a new or a renewal subscription will he sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (cariying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, .V. Y , under the Act of March 3, 1879
"RELIGION’S DOOM” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This midsummer testimony period during the entire month of August follows closely the Theocratic convention at Columbus. The period being named "Religion’s Doom”, the testimony activities should receive particular stimulation from the convention’s nationwide public address on "Religion as a World Remedy”. Appropriately, therefore, all Kingdom publishers will offer to the public, on a 25c contribution, the book Enemies and a self-covered booklet, preferably the new booklet Refugees, if the territory has recently been intensively witnessed to with the latest book, Salvation. Conventloners and people of good will everywhere are invited to share m this testimony. Arrange for this now through the local organized company of Jehovah’s witnesses. If not yet associated with such, write us for references. The Informant supplies full details. A complete report on each publisher’s field service for August should be submitted, to compile the total results.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock
a m , Tuesday, October 1, 1940, at which the usual imriuiil busn.css will be transacted.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country wheie you reside Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blunks By filling tn these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip
"WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 1: “‘Times and Seasons’” (Part 1), fl 1-18 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1940
Week of September 8: “‘Times and Seasons’” (Part 1), fl 19-34 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1940.
Week of September 15: “‘Times and Seasons’” (Part 1), fl 35-54 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1940.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	August 1, 1940	No. 15
'TIMES AND SEASONS’
PART 1
"The end shall be at the time appointed."—Dan. 11: 27.
IEIIOVAH has definitely fixed the time for the I battle of Armageddon. “Known unto God are all J his works, from the beginning of the world.” (Acts 15:18) Is there any man on the earth who knows the exact date for the beginning of “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”? “Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only.”—Matt. 24: 35, 36.
2	There are two general classes of persons now on the earth. One class trust entirely in the great Theo-crat and his government. Such persons are in the light of God’s provision and purpose. The other class is against the great Theocrat and his government. Those who are of that class are in darkness of and concerning Jehovah’s purpose. For those who are of the class first above named, that is, those who love Jehovah God and his King, God has provided comfort of mind. For those who are against The Theocracy no such provision is made. They, being in darkness, are perplexed and in much distress. The only way to find comfort is for all who desire it to hasten to put themselves under the protection of the King of the great Theocratic Government.
3	For many centuries Jehovah has made known that there is a time coming when his great wrath will be expressed against all of Satan’s organization. (Ex. 9:16) Those who have been diligent to know and to do the will of God have received comfort from God’s revealed Word. At the present time there is great distress amongst the peoples of the earth. Those who believe in God and his King and who seek righteousness and meekness clearly discern that the great climax is very near, and for such sincere and devoted people Jehovah God has provided consolation.
1 The apostle Paul was commissioned by the Lord to write words of comfort to those who fully support The Theocracy. In the fourth chapter of his first epistle to the Thessalonians (verses 13-18) are found words of comfort for those who believe in Christ and in the resurrection of the dead. All persons who think soberly are informed of the certainty of death. There
is hope for those who have died believing in Christ Jesus. Since the days of the apostles the faithful followers of Christ Jesus have had such hope. In writing to the consecrated ones the apostle tells that those who “sleep in Jesus” God will bring to life at the coming of Christ Jesus, and that those who are alive on the earth at the coming of Christ Jesus and who are devoted to God and to his King and are faithful shall be “caught up ... to meet the Lord in the air”, away from and invisible to the world; “and so shall [they] ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words.” (1 Thess. 4: 13-18) Those words of the apostle have been a real comfort to all persons who have fully trusted in God and believed in the second coming of Christ. When their beloved ones die they have not sorrowed as others who have no hope. With full confidence they have looked forward to the resurrection.
8 The holy spirit also directed Paul to write to the people of God about other things for their comfort, to wit, what shall take place at the end of God’s “strange work”. The faithful of the Lord now on earth are looking forward with great expectation to the end of the “strange work” of Jehovah and the beginning of his “strange act”.
6 Immediately following 1 Thessalonians 4: 18 the apostle says: “But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you." (1 Thess. 5:1) The conjunction but connects what immediately precedes, that is, what is set forth in chapter 4:13-18. The followers of Christ Jesus are admonished to “comfort one another” with the message concerning the dead in Christ and the resurrection of such and of the living remnant that are gathered under Christ Jesus, and in addition thereto they are admonished to “comfort yourselves together” with what is written relative to “the times and the seasons”, and particularly as such times and seasons relate to what immediately precedes the battle of that great day of God Almighty.—1 Thess. 5:11.
1 Who will be able to understand and to appreciate the words of admonition given by the apostle Paul ? No one who is in the darkness. “Light is sown for the righteous.” (Ps. 97: 11) The practitioners of religion
227
228
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
are in darkness, even as the demons are in darkness. Such will not understand. (Dan. 12:10) It is reported by some of the faithful servants of God now in the field service that they are occasionally approached by some persons, which persons once thought themselves to be in the truth but who in recent years put themselves in opposition to the kingdom message, and who continue to abuse The Watchtower and whatsoever is published therein. These opposers say to the faithful brethren: “We cannot understand The Watchtower. It is too deep for us.” This is not at all surprising, but exactly as should be expected. Only those who are wholly devoted to The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus can have an understanding and an appreciation of what Jehovah God through Christ Jesus is now revealing to those that love him. If a person has been enticed by the enemy away from the Lord and has a sincere desire to get in harmony with the Lord, the only thing to do is to fully devote himself to the Lord, seek forgiveness, and then be diligent to obey His commandments. It is not possible for any other course to lead one into the light.
’ Paul had been instructing the followers of Christ Jesus concerning the Lord’s second coming and his kingdom, and the gathering unto himself of his faithful followers, both those who died in faith as Christ Jesus’ followers and also those who should be alive on earth at the coming of Christ. This he did, as stated, that they might not sorrow for the dead as those who have no hope. Then at the beginning of the fifth chapter of Thessalonians he writes concerning “the times and the seasons”, well knowing that Jehovah’s people would desire comfort and would need comfort at the time of approaching the great battle of Armageddon. Hence he opens that part of his epistle with the word “but”. This clearly in contrast with what he had said immediately preceding: “But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you.”—1 Thess. 5:1.
’ Here the apostle uses the definite article “the”, which removes the discussion from a mere consideration of any general chronological times. The apostle was not encouraging the study of chronology to fix dates ahead of time and to ascertain what is definitely to take place at such future dates. He was certainly not encouraging anyone to speculate as to dates, nor to fix dates. The “signs” are more determinative than the dates. That would mean that the faithful should watch the signs of the times.
10	When Jehovah has not in his Word foretold to men the limits of times, such periods of time are indefinite to human creatures. Such times come to fullness at the point where God has foretold, and he furnishes the signs, that is, the physical facts, by which the fullness of times may be ascertained by
those who are devoted to him. “When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law.” (Gal. 4-: 4) Long prior thereto God had made promise that he would send his Son. When he came and the faithful watchers saw the signs, or physical facts, they had conclusive proof of the fulfillment of the prophecy written long prior thereto, concerning the Messiah.
11	At 1 Thessalonians 5:1 the English word ‘ times" is translated from the Greek word chronoi, which is the plural form of the Greek word chronos. The word kairoi is here also translated “seasons”. Chronos denotes the indefinite length or space of time. Kairo> means due or proper time; a certain fixed tune or season.
12	Examples: “For the time [Cairos] is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God!” (1 Pet. 4:17) “Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; for the time [fcazros] is at hand.”— Rev. 1:3.
15	Other texts denoting certain definitely fixed times or seasons: “Therefore judge nothing befoie the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts; and then shall every man have praise of God.” (1 Cor. 4: 5) “That in the dispensation of the fulness of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth ; even in him.” (Eph. 1:10) “Now the spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils.” (1 Tim. 4:1) “And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth.” —Rev. 11:18.
FIXED TIME
’* Evidently the words of Paul, to wit, “the times and the seasons,” refer to the time or period which began with Christ Jesus' descent from heaven and his coming to the temple of God. Paul must have previously explained the doctrines concerning the resurrection; hence his hearers were sorrowing, not because there would be no resurrection, but because those who had died in faith must wait and would not participate while on the earth in the “strange work” of Jehovah for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. He explained that the dead in Christ would “rise first” and be gathered unto the Lord, and that there
August 1,1940
WATCHTOWER,
229
after the remnant on earth would be gathered by the Lord to the temple, be for ever with the Lord, and have a part in advertising The Theocratic Government while on the earth and thus have a part in the vindication of Jehovah's name. Paul’s words thereafter, at 5:1, really apply to Jehovah’s remnant on the earth at the present time, to whom the Lord commits his goods or kingdom interests.—Matt. 24:45-47.
15	“The seasons,” or “moments” (Douay Version), refers to that period of time which begins at the time of the beginning of the sounding of the “trump of God” (1 Thess. 4:16), “the last trump.” (1 Cor. 15:52) That trump denotes that Christ Jesus has arrived to take action to the complete vindication of Jehovah’s name. It announces the beginning of his reign, and therefore the time of his enthronement in 1914. (For a more detailed discussion of this point see The Watchtower January 15, 1934, page 24.) Three and one-half years thereafter, that is, in 1918, marks the time of the Lord Jesus’ coming to the temple and the resurrection of the faithful who had “slept” in Christ Jesus. That definite and certain time was fixed by Jehovah long ago, but no man knew of the exact date until after the physical facts or signs of the times had come to pass showing that the time had come. Thus it is seen that God had definitely fixed the time, but man must wait until the physical facts disclosed the fulfillment.
“SIGNS"
16	The seasons have their signs, that is, “signs of the times.” (Matt. 16:3,4) At the fullness of the seasons Christ Jesus must have the “dispensation”, that is to say, the administration of all affairs pertaining to the kingdom, and therefore he is enthroned and straightway comes to the temple for judgment. (Eph. 1:10; Mal. 3:1-3) That is the time mentioned by the apostle Peter: “For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?”—1 Pet. 4:17.
17	“In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils.” (1 Tim. 4:1) The physical facts, or signs, now clearly show to the remnant that we are in that time. Many have departed from the faith and are under the influence of the demons. At the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple for judgment is “the time of the dead, that they should be judged”. (Rev. 11:18) Shortly thereafter the “woman” (Zion, God’s “woman”) flees to the wilderness. “And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.” (Rev. 12:14) The physical facts, or signs, show that the time mentioned in the
last above text arrived after the persecution of God’s faithful people began in 1918.
“JACOB’S TROUBLE”
18	Jacob, whose name also is Israel, represented the anointed “remnant” of God, and which remnant find themselves in trouble and distress in 1918. Concerning that time Jehovah by his prophet bad said: “Alas! for that day [A.D. 1918 and onward] is great, so that none is like it; it is even the time of Jacob’s [the remnant of spiritual Israel’s] trouble; but he shall be saved out of it. For it shall come to pass in that day [1918 and onward], saith the Lord of hosts, that I will break his [Babylon’s, or Satan’s organization’s] yoke from off thy [the faithful remnant’s] neck [in 1919], and will burst thy bonds [in 1919], and strangers shall no more serve themselves of him [the remnant of spiritual Israel]: but they shall serve the Lord [Jehovah] their God, and David [the antitypical Beloved One, Christ Jesus] their king, whom I will raise up unto them.” (Jer. 30: 7-9) The physical facts, or signs, came to pass in 1918 and 1919, showing conclusively to the faithful that the prophecy above quoted was then being fulfilled.
ARMAGEDDON
18	“The battle of that great day of God Almighty,’ at which the enemy shall be destroyed, is a time that is definitely fixed, but no man knows exactly the day or hour it will begin. But how about the signs of the times relating thereto? “For the day is near, even the day of the Lord is near, a cloudy day; it shall be the time of the heathen, and the sword shall come upon Egypt [world, or Satan’s organization], and great pain shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down. Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and Chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.”—Ezek. 30: 3-5.
20	In that time or same day religion will come in for its share; as it is written: “Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I will make thee most desolate. I will lay thy cities waste, and thou [Edom; Mount Seir; the ‘wicked servant’ class; the ‘man of sin’] shalt be desolate; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord. Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blood of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their [in 1918, the time of spiritual Israel’s] calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end.” —Ezek. 35: 3-5.
21	‘The time of the calamity’ that came upon God’s people in 1918 was that of their lawlessness, when by reason of ignorance or fear they had failed to do
230
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N.Y.
their duty. Thereafter God shows his mercy to them and they were fully restored to his favor. (Isaiah 12:1, 2) The physical facts, or signs of the times, that came to pass in 1918 and 1919 show that in those years the foregoing prophecy concerning the faithful was in course of fulfillment.
22	God has fixed a time certain and definite when his purpose shall be fulfilled; and instead of telling men in advance just what is the date or hour, he brings to pass the physical facts showing that the time previously fixed has arrived, and those who have no faith in God’s Word and who continue to practice religion and to follow their own selfish course are in the dark, and for that reason they cannot see the signs of the fixed times and cannot and do not understand.
"BRETHREN”
” It is clear that the apostle Paul, in the foregoing text in Thessalonians, addresses those who are in Christ Jesus in the temple, anointed and hence enlightened, when he says: “But of the times and the seasons, brethren.” That means that his words will be received and understood by those who are “one in Christ Jesus”, who is the Head over the body of Christ, the spiritual body, and all of whom therefore are “brethren”, all members of “one body”. These are all one, although composed of many members. (1 Cor. 12: 12-18) That his words were directed specifically to those of the anointed remnant, note that he says the following: “Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. ... So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia. For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith [by your testimony and your faithfulness in the service] to God-ward is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing.” (1 Thess. 1:4, 7, 8) “That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his kingdom and glory. For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in Judsea are in Christ Jesus; for ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews.” (1 Thess. 2: 12, 14) It is only the brethren in Christ Jesus who know their election of God, whose faith and faithfulness constitute ensamples to others and which appear by their proclaiming the message of the kingdom ; and thus because of their faithfulness they suffer even as Christ suffered.
2‘ With the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple those faithful ones who slept in Christ Jesus were awakened to life, and those faithful ones who are on earth and who were approved at the temple judgment were “caught up . . . to meet the Lord in the air”, that is, in the temple. (1 Thess. 4:17) Hence
all such are included in the words of Paul and mean all of those born of God and his “woman”, Zion, that is, his organization. All of such are the ones mentioned in the following text, to wit: “And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”—Isa. 54: 13.
25 These being with Christ Jesus, Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are their teachers, and, the eyes of their understanding being open, they see their teachers and understand the instruction received from them, all being taught of God by and through Christ Jesus : “And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers.”—Isa. 30: 20.
” It is to those who are thus taught that the apostle says: “Ye have no need that 1 write unto you”: (R.V.) “that aught be written unto you.” Why no need to write unto such! Because at the time this prophecy is fulfilled the physical facts will be brought to pass by the Lord in such clear and unmistakable way that all brethren, those of the temple class who are thus taught of God and Christ Jesus, would see that the prophecy is fulfilled. These would discern that the prophecy was written aforetime for their learning and for their comfort. (Rom. 15:4) The signs, or physical facts, brought to pass by the Loid himself make known to such faithful one- that the time previously fixed by the Lord had come. Would those who were thus taught of God. that is, the remnant, now need to have instruction concerning the necessity to love their brethren! Certainly not: “But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another.” (1 Thess. 4:9) The bond ot unity m Christ Jesus must now exist because all are with Christ and in the unity of the faith. Therefore no man is needed to teach these faithful followers of the Master.
21 That does not at all mean that there is no need to study the Word of God and to discuss the Scriptures amongst the brethren. Since the Watchtower publications constitute a means of communication to and among the brethren, there is need that the texts of the Scriptures and the physical facts, or the signs, that God has brought to pass be set alongside one another and published and brought to the attention of the people of God that they might understand and appreciate the times in which we are living. The Watchtower is not giving any man’s opinion, but, on the contrary, is setting forth the physical facts, or signs, well known to all who think; and, putting these facts along by the side of the prophetic Scriptures, those who love and serve Jehovah God are enabled to understand God’s purpose. Therefore The Watch
August 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
231
tower is not violating the rule which the apostle announced.
28 Those who at one time, that is, during the “Elijah period” of the church’s service, enjoyed the light that was then revealed by the Lord, and who then and thereafter looked upon a man as their leader and teacher, and who continue to do so, are certain to now be in the dark. Giving honor to man or any creature and looking upon such a one as the leader or teacher, is disregarding instruction of the Lord, and is a failure to give Him the praise and honor that is due. Practitioners of religion are in darkness and cannot understand; and committing the “sin of Samaria”, that is, bestowing great honor and praise upon a creature, keeps such in the dark that they could not understand. Such do not see the signs, that is, they do not see that the physical facts that have come to pass apply to the Scriptures, proving fulfillment of prophecy. They yield to the influence and power of the demons, whether they know it or not. The “evil servant” class, that is, those who oppose The Theocratic Government and refuse to support it wholly and freely and joyfully, are in the darkness and cannot understand. To all such the Watchtower publications are but a blank.
“YOU KNOW”
20 The anointed and faithful witnesses of Jehovah God know what God reveals to them. They do not follow some man’s teaching. They know that they are the children of God and that their teachers are Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, the Head of the anointed. To such the words of the apostle are addressed, to wit: “For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.”— 1 Thess. 5 : 2.
30 That text is an emphatic statement. Another rendering of the text proves this fully: “You yourselves.” (Diaglott) “Ye yourselves.” (Rotherham) Hence the emphatic form of the second person pronoun here used thus shows that the faithful remnant would in due time “come to an accurate knowledge of the truth”. (1 Tim. 2:4, Diag.) Therefore, thus coming to an accurate knowledge of the truth, “ye need not that any man teach you.” (1 John 2:27) When the apostle uses the positive words “Ye yourselves know”, the word “know” clearly implies that those addressed discern the signs, or physical facts, now before them and which constitute a fulfillment of the prophecy, and that this favor has come to them because the Lord has opened their eyes of understanding or discernment and given them a vision of Jehovah’s purpose. Such faithful ones give thanks and praise to God, and not to any man, for such enlightenment. If they gave honor and praise to men for such enlightenment they would be practicing
idolatry and, of course, would go into darkness.
51 The faithful do not guess at the meaning of the prophecy, but, says the apostle concerning them, ‘ye yourselves know perfectly [accurately (Diaglott)].’ Thus, by diligent inquiry and searching the Scriptures and in applying the physical facts well known, they are seeking meekness and righteousness and are receiving the blessings of the Lord. They that are thus blessed are the ones who unselfishly devote themselves wholly to The Theocratic Government. They receive instruction at the hand of the Lord and profit thereby. Thus they are having a part in the understanding and appreciation of the prophecies, and, as stated by the prophet Daniel, their eyes are ‘running to and fro’ searching out what is contained in God’s Word for their instruction and comfort. “But thou, 0 Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end; many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.” (Dan. 12:4) They now clearly see that the former application of this prophecy of Daniel to rapid transit is entirely wrong. They see and appreciate that this prophecy means that the faithful will be diligently inquiring and searching the Scriptures, and that, applying the Scriptures to signs of the times, that is, the physical facts, they have an increase of knowledge, understanding and appreciation thereof.
“THAT DAY”
“ What is it to which the apostle refers when he says: “You yourselves know accurately”! They know that “the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night”. This is exactly in harmony with the words of the apostle Peter, to wit: “But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burned up.” (2 Pet. 3:10) It is the day when Christ Jesus is at the temple for judgment: “In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, by Jesus Christ, according to my gospel.” (Rom. 2: 16) These texts using the word “Lord” evidently do not refer to Jehovah, but do have reference to Christ Jesus, our Lord, and to whom the apostle refers in 1 Thessalonians 4:15-17. This shows that “the day of the Lord Jesus” refers to the time of his coming to the temple for judgment in A.D. 1918, or three and one-half years after he was enthroned.
” Other scriptures fully support the conclusion that “the day of the Lord” begins with his coming to the temple:
“Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.”—1 Cor. 1: 8.
232
3Ee WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.”—1 Cor. 5: 5.
“As also ye have acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.”—2 Cor. 1:14.
“Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.” “That ye may approve things that are excellent; that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ.”—Phil. 1: 6,10.
“Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain.”—Phil. 2: 16.
“Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.”—2 Thess. 2: 1, 2.
“For the which cause I also suffer these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.” “The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day; and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou know-est very well.”—2 Tim. 1:12,18.
“Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.”—2 Tim. 4:8.
34	The time here mentioned is the time when the witnesses to the great Theocratic Government must have boldness because this is the day of judgment, when Christ Jesus is at the temple judging the nations and the individuals. (1 John 4:17,18) It is the day beginning with the temple judgment, as stated at Matthew 25: 31. From that time on it is the day which Jehovah had previously and definitely fixed. “Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place.”—Isa. 28:17.
“AS A THIEF”
35	In what manner does the day of the Lord come? The day of the Lord “so cometh as a thief in the night”. The word “so” specifically directs attention to the like manner of the coming of the day of the Lord, that is, like a thief, meaning the time when the thief comes or invades and the conditions under which he comes. The day, as a whole, or entire fixed period of time, comes as a thief. Consistently, various features of the day of the Lord and the things
that take place in that day, including the destruction at Armageddon as an expression of Jehovah’s wrath, would likewise come upon all the peoples of the earth who are not enlightened. The day of the Lord arrives first, and then after that arrival other events within that day take place; finally comes the destruction, and such moment of destruction also comes like a thief.
36	The day of Jehovah God began in 1914, when these prophetic words began to have fulfillment, to wit: “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2:6) With reference to that date take notice that as early as 1880 The Watchtower emphatically published the date A.D. 1914 as “the time of the end”, even though no one then clearly understood what the “time of the end” meant. Now we seo that 1914 marked the end of Satan’s world reign without interruption. The date was seen, but not exactly what would come to pass. Christ Jesus was enthroned by Jehovah in that year, and quickly followed a “war in heaven” between Christ the King and Satan and his host of wicked supporters. In that war the enemy was defeated and cast down to the earth. (Rev. 12:1-12) Studies in the Scriptures featured that date from 1889 onward until 1914. Books, booklets and leaflets by the millions were distributed throughout the earth announcing the date 1914. Religious leaders of the Roman Catholic organization and all the Protestant religious organizations and many others were watching for the date 1914 and waiting until it was past. Therefore the date 1914 did not come as a thief. It was generally known even though the ones announcing it were mistaken as to the events that should come to pass. The date 1914 had been properly located by students of chronology and prophecy, but such students had made a wide mistake as to what would take place on that date. Religionists, politicians and commercial men were watching. Christians were waiting. The physical facts, which came to pass, did not show the things that had been expected by many. It also furnished an opportunity for many to mock.
” But how about 1918? That did come as a thief, and this shows that the day of the Lord mentioned by the apostle Paul in the foregoing text has reference to the day of the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple for judgment and the beginning of judgment. It is true that the book The Finished Mystery had mentioned 1918, but again what was said there came far short of the real facts as to what would come to pass and did come to pass at that time. The position was taken and so published by The Finished Mystery that the 'awakening of the sleeping saints’, that is, the faithful who had died in Christ, such as the apostles, had long ago taken place, to wit, in the year 1878. That was an error, as is now clearly seen by
August 1,1940
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
233
those who are devoted to Jehovah. It was published in The Finished Mystery that in the year 1918 “Christendom” should go down to oblivion. Such conclusion was incorrect. The difficulty was that students of prophecy were trying to predict the events that would come to pass in 1918 instead of waiting for the physical facts or signs proving that the prophecy had been fulfilled. Now the words of Jesus are keenly appreciated, to wit: “Watch therefore; for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come.”—Matt. 24: 42.
38	The Lord’s day did come in 1918 “as a thief”, as the indisputable truth since then has revealed. In due time the Lord revealed to his people the exact truth, but that was after the great event had taken place. While the Lord came to the temple in 1918, no one on earth at that time, so far as The Watchtower is advised, had any definite information concerning his coming to the temple. The first information so far as The Watchtower is informed was in 1922, when the Lord’s people learned that Christ Jesus was at the temple. This was revealed to them by the physical facts or signs of the times, that Christ Jesus was at the temple for testing and for judgment. (Mal. 3:1-4; Matt. 25: 31-46) Was the coming of the Lord to the temple like unto the coming of a thief in the night? It was even so. Jesus had said to his disciples concerning his coming: “Watch therefore; for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come. But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in what watch [watches were kept at night to mark time] the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up [into]. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man cometh. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods.”—Matt. 24: 42-47.
38	Those who continued faithful unto the Lord and continued watching were rewarded in 1922, when the Lord revealed to them his presence in the temple. In September, 1922, the Lord’s people generally throughout the earth were made aware of the great truth that Christ Jesus was at the temple.
40	Some who had made a covenant to do the will of God went on a spree with the world and went into complete darkness, and to this day such do not see the presence of the Lord at the temple. “But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart [by his acts], My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; the Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour
that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”— Matt. 24: 48-51.
41	As to “Christendom”, that is, the practitioners of religion of the various religious denominations, they are still in the dark and see nothing concerning the coming of the Lord to the temple. To all such the day of the Lord has come as a thief in the night. All such are in darkness and do not see the signs of the times.
42	The day of the Lord arrived in 1918 as a thief, and darkness prevailed. “For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people ; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.” (Isa. 60:2) It was not so, however, as to the faithful. The “glory of the Lord” was seen of them because his approval had been given to them; and they appreciated the fact that he was at the temple, and went forward with zeal peculiar to his house to serve Jehovah and his kingdom. Those faithful ones who attended the convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, well remember September 8, 1922, and joyfully testify to the fact that the Lord had come to his temple as a thief and when they learned of it they rejoiced greatly.
THIEF ACTION
43	The action of thieves is used by the Lord to illustrate the manner of his day and the time when it comes to pass. For that reason Christ Jesus the Lord continued to warn his followers to be sober and watchful. ‘Thieves break in and steal.’ (Matt. 6: 19; John 10: 10) They come silently. “Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die; for I have not found thy [the congregation at Sardis’] works perfect before God. Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard; and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee.”—Rev. 3:2,3.
44	Referring to the power gathering the nations to the battle of Armageddon, Jesus says: “For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. Behold, I come as a thief [at the battle of Armageddon]. Blessed is he [who is in the temple] that watcheth, and keepeth his garments [keepeth them on as watchers do, and seeing that their actions fully identify them as for The Theocracy], lest he walk naked [in the temple], and they [the angels on guard at the temple] see his shame [and throw him out (see Matthew 13:41,42)].”—Rev. 16:14,15,
43	In like manner the Lord’s army of “locusts” who invade the enemy’s quarters come like a thief: “They shall run to and fro in the city; they shall run upon
234
STie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the wall, they shall climb up upon the houses; they shall enter in at the windows like a thief. The earth shall quake before them; the heavens shall tremble; the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining.”—Joel 2:9,10.
“IN THE NIGHT”
44	Those not watching for the coming of the day of the Lord sleep, and it is nighttime. Until 1918 Protestant clergymen were openly fighting against this gospel, or kingdom message, which The Watchtower so vigorously declared throughout the earth. They, like the ‘foolish virgin’ class, went to sleep. The other religionists were in the same condition. None of such were accepting the truth and putting forth endeavors to make known the kingdom. Thus the Protestants were asleep, as well as the Catholics. They were entirely oblivious to the coming of the Lord and therefore missed all their privileges. They were in their beds of ease.
47	Not only were such religionists asleep, but they were beastly drunken; they were filled with the strong drink of distillation and viciously persecuted the faithful servants of Jehovah God and reveled in slandering the Lord’s name, and they did their part in killing the “Elijah work”, in which the faithful servants of God were then engaged. (Rev. 11: 7-10) “For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night.”—1 Thess. 5: 7.
48	As to the result of the drunkenness and slumbering of religionists, all such were in darkness. To them it was a time of darkness and still is a dark night. They are entirely in darkness as to the spiritual understanding of Jehovah’s purpose, and they are willingly so. In their drunkenness they scoff and they continue to deride and scoff at the facts brought to their attention showing fulfillment of the prophecy. The apostle Peter refers to such, to wit: “Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming 1 for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and in the water; whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished.”—2 Pet. 3: 3-6.
4“	Being in darkness as to Jehovah’s purpose, the “day of the Lord” did overtake “Christendom”, that is, all religious practitioners and their allies, as a thief. (1 Thess. 5:4) All such religious leaders, being in darkness, led many others, including many of good will, into darkness. “Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err, that bite [into the hand-outs given to them] with their teeth, and
cry [to the giver of the hand-out], Peace: and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him; therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Then shall the seers [the prognosticators who fix dates according to their own interpretation] be ashamed, and the diviners confounded; yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God.”—Mic. 3: 5-7.
40	The opposers of God’s message as published by The Watchtower find themselves in that class described by God’s prophet. They are in the darkness and continue to walk on in darkness.
ADVERSE CONDITIONS
61	The faithful witnesses for The Theocracy continue their work of proclaiming the name and kingdom of the great Theocrat. This they do with great joy even though their work is done under conditions which are very trying to them. Many of these faithful ones in the countries of Europe work under great handicap and much suffering. Their difficulties are ever increasing, making it next to impossible for them to carry on or have any part in the “strange work” of preaching this gospel of the kingdom. In Quebec the opposition to The Theocratic Government has become so bitter and wicked that it is next to impossible to carry on the work. In the province of Quebec many of God’s faithful people are charged with sedition and thrown into prisons, and put at hard labor, and the only evidence against them is that they announce God’s purpose of setting up his kingdom and wiping out all wickedness in the earth. These faithful witnesses of Jehovah are tried before prejudiced judges upon testimony given by so-called “expert” religionists, and they are convicted of the same crime charged against Jesus, and this without any just cause. They are sent to prison and branded as enemies of humankind; yet they are the only ones in that land that are in the light and that bring good news of good and point the people to the only way of life.
52	In many places in the United States conditions continue to grow worse and faithful witnesses and their companions are subjected to all manner of cruel opposition and persecution. These conditions tend to make even the faithful weary. In this connection the apostle, addressing those who are serving Jehovah and his King, admonishes them to be of good courage and push on in the Lord’s work, saying: “Therefore, we should not flag in doing well; for we shall reap, at the proper season, if we do not relax. So then, as we have opportunity, we should do good
August 1, 1940
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
235
to all, but especially to the members of the family of the faith.'’—Gal. 6: 9, 10, Diaglott.
53	Jehovah's witnesses must keep in mind that they are the ambassadors of The Theocratic Government, which government is bitterly opposed by the entire world. Jehovah’s witnesses are doing a good work, engaged, by the grace of Jehovah, in his ‘‘strange work’’. They must keep in mind that the hand of Jehovah is over them and that his strength is manifested for them. They have the assurance from Jehovah that his supreme power shall be exercised in their behalf in due time. ‘The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose hearts are perfect toward him.’ (2 Chron. 16:9) In due season their
deliverance shall come, and that with great joy: “The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.” —Deut. 33: 27.
“ The faithful are in the light and walking in the day, and they know what the action of the enemy means. The enemy endeavors to prevail against the people of God who now joyfully support The Theocratic Government. The enemy shall fail. The faithful servants of Jehovah fully trust him and continue to say: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” They know that deliverance is certain to come at Armageddon. But when!
(To be continued)
WORLD-FAMINE RELIEF
FAMINE came upon the world when Joseph was prime minister for Pharaoh of ancient Egypt. But what has that famine thirty-five hundred years ago to do with world conditions today?
The record thereof preserved to this day reads: “And the famine was over all the face of the earth.” “But in all the land of Egypt there was bread.” That supply of bread was due to Joseph’s having made provision beforehand by buying and storing up the corn of Egypt for a period of seven plenteous years previous to the famine. The prophetic picture of the famine began to have fulfillment particularly following the world war of 1914-1918, when the religious institutions of “Christendom” abandoned the Lord God and his kingdom under Christ and openly took the side of Satan’s worldly organization. Hence there was no truth amongst them. This was foretold by Jehovah’s prophet in these words: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land; not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord ”—Amos 8: 11.
That famine for want of the understanding of God’s Word, due to the unfaithfulness of the religious organizations, has now spread over all the world. But within God’s organization (namely, his faithful organized people on the earth) there is an abundance of spiritual food, and the Lord continually supplies this “meat in due season”. This is absolute proof that the fulfillment of the prophecy concerning Joseph and his brethren is now taking place. The Lord Jesus Christ is the Greater Joseph, who feeds those persons in the world who seek him. His faithful servants carry the food to the spiritually hungry people who constitute the Lord’s “other sheep”. Now the people of good will toward God find no spiritual food whatsoever in the religious organizations, and they, being hungry and thirsty for righteousness, seek Christ Jesus, the Greater Joseph, and are fed by him. He sends them the truth from his Father’s table by the hand of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses in the earth today. People from all over the world came to Joseph to be fed, because that was the only place to find food. The impartiality of the Lord toward the great multitude of
people of good will is here shown, because out of all nations, kindreds, peoples and tongues these come and stand before the throne of the Lord and cry, “Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb [Christ Jesus].” Concerning those who diligently seek and serve the Lord it is further written: “They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; . . . For the Lamb [Christ Jesus], which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes." —Rev. 7: 9-17.
Joseph’s father Jacob was sojourning up in the land of Canaan. Because of the famine Jacob sent ten sons, the half brothers of Joseph, down into Egypt to buy food. (Genesis 42:1-5) They were brought before Joseph, but they did not recognize him, for the reason that over twenty years had elapsed since they had sold him to traders going down to Egypt and they believed that Joseph was dead. Joseph held his half brother Simeon as hostage until they should return for more food. Again they went to Egypt, at the instance of their father. On this occasion the nine half brothers brought Benjamin, the younger and full brother of Joseph, with them. When they arrived with Benjamin. Simeon was released and they stood before Joseph, but none of them discovered his identity. At Joseph’s command they were again laden with food and started away for Canaan Joseph’s silver cup had been concealed in the sack of one. Joseph sent his officer after them and intercepted them, charging them with stealing the cup. Upon search the cup was found in Benjamin’s sack. That was a test upon all of Joseph’s brethren. Here Benjamin pictured Jehovah’s witnesses on earth, a part of the remnant thereof who in recent years have been charged with crimes of which they were entirely innocent. God permitted such to come upon them as a test that they might prove their integrity to Him. The arrest of these witnesses of the Lord has also been a test upon “men of good will”, the Lord’s “other sheep”, who, seeing Jehovah’s witnesses wrongfully charged, willingly become the companions of Jehovah’s witnesses and suffer with them.—Heb. 10: 33.
236
5Ke WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
The placing of the cup in Benjamin’s sack, and his subsequent arrest, was part of the prophetic picture God purposed to have fulfilled in his due time. Joseph rendered decision in the case, holding that Benjamin should become his slave and therefore must remain with him in Egypt. This decision of Joseph brought great grief upon the ten half brothers, and Judah, acting as their spokesman, made an impassioned speech, pleading in behalf of his young brother Benjamin, and for his old father Jacob, who would greatly suffer in the absence of Benjamin. Here the ten half brothers showed they had a change of heart towards Joseph and their father, whom years ago they had so cruelly wronged. Judah had been the one who had proposed the selling of Joseph into Egypt, whose sale and deportation pictured the enmity of the religionists toward the Lord Jesus and his true followers.
Judah now asked for permission to speak, and here doubtless he acted as spokesman.for all. He told Joseph that a son had been taken away from their father and was supposed to be dead, and that the father had bestowed his love upon the younger son Benjamin, and that if Benjamin did not return his father would die of grief. He made an eloquent and touching plea that Benjamin should be returned and that he, Judah, might become a slave in Egypt in place of Benjamin. The fervor with which Judah presented the case before Joseph proved that those ten men were of good will towards Jacob and also towards Benjamin, and, not yet recognizing that they stood before Joseph, doubtless supposing he was dead, they had great sorrow for the wrong they had done him. This great test upon them disclosed a complete change of heart; and while they inwardly suffered great remorse for their treatment of Joseph years before, they were willing to make any possible amends. In this test they bravely met it and demonstrated their good will. (Gen. 44:14-34) And what did this test foretell? It foretold and plainly identified a class of persons today who at one time were antagonistic to the consecrated spiritual children of God, the brethren of Christ Jesus; but who, upon becoming acquainted with the conditions of their own situation, showed a deep contrition of heart and a sincere desire to do good toward all who love the Lord
Look now to the facts: The persecution came upon the spiritual brethren of Christ Jesus, particularly in 1918 during the World War, and this persecution was at the instance and instigation of the religionists of “Christendom”. That stirred the hearts of many to enmity against Jehovah’s people, that is, those of His original faithful remnant of witnesses. But later on, when the religiously misled ones came to more clearly understand their own situation and the purpose of God toward them, they had a change of heart and showed themselves in a proper heart condition to be gathered by the Lord as his “other sheep” into the fold of Jehovah to there find safety and preservation during the battle of Armageddon. Thus the Lord shows that all of the “other sheep” class must be of good will toward Jehovah (pictured by Jacob the father), toward Christ Jesus (pictured by Joseph the son), and toward God’s “remnant” (pictured by Joseph and Benjamin), before they can be gathered as the Lord’s “other sheep” into his organization.
The faithful remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses have suffered much persecution at the hands of religious leaders,
and continue thus to suffer, and God has permitted this suffering as a test upon his people. He also permits those “other sheep” to see Jehovah’s witnesses suffer and then to share with them therein in order that their good will toward God may be demonstrated. Such is necessary to test the faith and obedience of all who love Jehovah and Christ Jesus. As the severity of persecution upon Jehovah’s witnesses has increased in these days the Lord’s “other sheep’’ have shown their willingness to become companions of those who suffer for righteousness’ sake. By this means they have shown their faith in God and in Christ Jesus and a willingness to faithfully obey the Lord regardless of opposition.
The time had come for Joseph to make himself known to his brethren, and then he caused everyone to withdraw from his presence, except his brethren: “And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.” No doubt Joseph’s brethren exhibited great fear when they recognized the brother whom they had sold into Egypt; and Joseph, seeing this, said to them “Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you to preserve life.”—Genesis 45:1-5.
Joseph showed a loving consideration for their welfare, and he acknowledged God’s goodness and all-powerful hand for good in all that had come to pass. He acknowledged that he had suffered at the hands of Ins misguided brethren, but it was for their good. At the time Joseph disclosed his identity his young brother Benjamin stood with him, and Joseph revealed himself to all of them at the same time. Thus it is shown that all who are on the Lord’s side, whether spiritual Christians whose inheritance is in the kingdom of heaven or the “other sheep” who shall inhabit the earth for ever, all stand together.
Joseph then disclosed the fact that this entire prophetic drama was directed by Jehovah that people might in due time be enlightened concerning His provision made for them to obtain life everlasting. Joseph continued . “So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt. Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt; come down unto me tarry not.”—Gen. 45: 8, 9.
In fulfillment of this prophetic picture Jehovah sent Christ Jesus to the world to save the world. He sent him to the temple in A.D. 1918 “to preserve life”. He has made Christ Jesus “the Everlasting Father” in behalf of all subjects of the kingdom, and has made him Lord and Head over Jehovah’s royal house of sons, and Rightful Ruler of the world. His kingdom is the hope of the world, and in Christ Jesus’ name and in his kingdom shall the nations hope. (Isa. 9: 6, 7; Hatt. 12 : 21) There is no other hope, because such is God’s provision, and that provision is entirely adequate and complete. Since the Lord has revealed these truths to his remnant and those of the “other sheep” class, they all the more clearly discern the application now of Joseph’s prophetie words, which are fulfilled upon the Greater Joseph, Christ Jesus, to wit: “Tell ... of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste, and bring down my father hither.” To Jehovah’s witnesses now appears the glory of Christ Jesus in all the world Joseph’s
August 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
237
language shows that the obligation is laid upon God’s remnant, and upon the “other sheep” who hear, to “haste” and tell all, as opportunity presents, that they may learn of God’s gracious provision for salvation.
Joseph then told his brethren that there were yet five years of famine and that they should haste and tell their father, and that all of them, his father and his household, should come to Egypt and be near Joseph, the governor, “lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.” (Gen. 45: 8-13) This shows that at the time of the identification of the Greater Joseph to his brethren on earth there is still much more work to be done by the Lord Jesus through his earthly remnant in behalf of those “other sheep” who shall live on the earth for ever under The Theocracy.
It was in A.D. 1931 that the Lord disclosed to his faithful remnant an earthly class foretold at Ezekiel, chapter nine, and to which spiritual food must be ministered. But at that time the identity of the “great multitude” pictured at Revelation, chapter seven, was not discerned. Joseph’s sending for the entire household of Jacob, including the families of his own half brothers, showed that after 1931, when the earthly class pictured at Ezekiel 9 was disclosed to whom the remnant must now minister, they must continue to minister to that class, the famine-stricken ones. This is exactly what has come to pass and is now in progress. From and after 1931 the remnant have appreciated that they must go throughout the land of “Christendom” and give information to those who desire righteousness. (Ezek. 9:4) But it is interesting here to note that it was not until May 31, 1935, at the Washington (D.C.) convention of Jehovah’s witnesses, that the “great multitude”, as such, was identified as an earthly class who survive the battle of Armageddon and was thus made known to God’s anointed remnant. From that time onward a specially organized effort has been made by Jehovah’s witnesses and continues with increased zeal in behalf of the “great multitude”, to bring to their attention the truths of God’s Word. This they do while the Lord himself by his power gathers the “great multitude” into the fold, where they receive fullness of bread.
As the famine continued sore upon Egypt and the countries round about, so now the spiritual famine continues sore upon the world. “And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt, and all the land of Canaan, fainted by reason of the famine.” (Gen. 47:13) The famine had been upon Egypt for two years when Jacob and his household reached Egypt. Assuming that some of the Egyptians had given heed to Joseph’s instruction before the famine began and to his advice to conserve food, and that they had conserved food, such provided stock of grain would at the end of two years doubtless be used up and the Egyptians would then have to apply to the government for food. This they were compelled to do in order to live. Likewise now those of the “other sheep” that are in the world will have to come to Jehovah’s visible organization, represented by his remnant
of witnesses on earth, and learn the way to life by obtaining and feeding upon the food which the Lord has prepared and stored up for such. This they must do before Armageddon.
The Egyptians had many cattle, money and lands, and they enjoyed personal freedom. Joseph did not set up a starvation-dole system that would bring all to poverty, but he sold the life-sustaining corn to the Egyptians, first for their money; which money Joseph brought into Pharaoh's treasury. He did not permit private and greedy moneychangers to profit by the distress of the people. When their money was gone, then he sold corn to the Egyptians for their cattle and herds. Then Joseph bought all their lands and paid for them in corn or food. Then the people said to him • “Buy us and our land for bread.” This Joseph did. (Gen 47:14-20) Pharaoh the king thereby became the righttul owner of everything in Egypt, and the people became “servants unto Pharoah”. This was according to the wish of the people, “that we may live and not die.”
Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, and ti.e above picture does not mean that man can buy his life from God. It does mean that in order for the “great multitude" to survive Armageddon and get life from God throng.') Christ Jesus these must fully comply with God’s terms, which terms are that men shall fully, unreserved!} and completely consecrate themselves to God and his faithful service, and acknowledge and serve his King, Chnst Jesus, the Greater Joseph. There is nothing that they may will -hold. Nothing that they can give can compensate for Ilie free gift of life and all its attending blessings, because all that men have, to begin with, belongs to the Lord. “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.” (Ps 24 1) They must show their full willingness to become the sonants of God and Christ Jesus, and must serve "dav ami night”, that is, all the time. (Rev. 7: 15) Christ Jesus, as the great official Agent of the “King of Eternity”, has bought the entire human race, and life will be given to those only who comply with the terms Jehovah has provided, and to such ones life is a free gift through Christ Jesus — Rom. G: 23.
Joseph did not arrange for a dole from the government and that the people receive a dole and continue icPe On the contrary, the people must be diligent and work, and not become a public charge in idleness. They were commanded and must sow the seed given to them, and sow it upon t Inland and trust to God for the increase This arrangement the people of Egypt appreciated, even as in this day of the Lord the “great multitude” will recognize and be glad with, the arrangement which the Lord has made for them “And they said, Thou hast saved our lives; let us find grace m the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh’s servants ” (Gen. 47:25) Foreknowing from the beginning what would come to pass, Jehovah God made this prophetic picture to aid his “other sheep” today, who at this time of great world stress and famine are being gathered to the Good Shepherd. Christ Jesus, that they might survive the famine and lice for ever.
The works of Jehovah are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. His work is honor and majesty; and his righteousness endureth for ever. The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do his commandments.—Psalm 111: 2, 3,10, A.R.V.
"TIME NO LONGER”
THE great executive officer of Jehovah God has turned his attention to things pertaining to earth and to the one who has long misruled it. In this sense Christ Jesus has come down from heaven to earth, invisibly, he now being a mighty spirit divine, with all power in heaven and earth. He began the “war in heaven” and cast the enemy out and down to the earth, and then further proceeded to carry out his Father’s purposes.—See The Revelation, chapter twelve.
“And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire.” (Rev. 10:1) The “mighty angel” here mentioned is he who in heaven is called Michael (which name means “Who is like God?”), to wit, The Anointed One, God’s beloved Son. (Dan. 12:1; Rev. 12: 7) The coming of Jehovah’s Christ down from heaven to earth was much better understood after publication in The Watchtower of the articles “Jehovah’s Presence” and “Presence of Christ”, in the issues of February 1 and 15, 1928.
“Clothed with a cloud,” the mighty angel comes down from heaven. In symbolic language, in which The Revelation is written, this expression means four separate and distinct things, to wit: (1) Invisibility. The coming of the Lord is unseen by human eyes because he is spirit. Note that Numbers 11: 25 states that “the Lord [Jehovah] came down in a cloud and spake unto him”, but Moses did not see the Lord Jehovah. Numbers 12:5 records: “The Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle.” (2) The cloud denotes his presence, with favor to his faithful servants, as stated at Proverbs 16:15: “In the light of the king’s countenance is life; and his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain.” Isaiah 25: 5: “Thou shalt bring down . . . the heat in a dry place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud.” (3) The cloud denotes his presence, with woe to his enemies, as described at Ezekiel 1:4: “And I looked, and behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself.” And (4) the cloud denotes the glorious presence of Jehovah attending his executive officer, the Head of God’s temple; as pictured at Ezekiel 10:4: “Then the glory of the Lord [Jehovah] . . . stood over the threshold of the house [the temple] ; and the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of the Lord’s glory.” The same meaning of the word “cloud” would be applied to Jehovah’s Son, who is now ‘the express image of the Father’s person, and the brightness of his glory’.—Heb. 1: 3.
A “rainbow” was about the head of the “mighty angel”, and thus shows he is Jehovah’s representative, since the rainbow is shown as also encircling Jehovah’s throne. (See Revelation 4:3; Ezekiel 1:28.) At Genesis 9 the rainbow is associated with the “everlasting covenant” made with Noah concerning the sanctity of human life and creature life. Evidently then Christ Jesus has “the everlasting covenant” and must now take to account the rulers of the world who have unrighteously shed much human blood in violation of the covenant. Said Jehovah: “My bow in the cloud . . . shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.” (Gen. 9:13) The significance of the rainbow as a symbol of the everlasting covenant concerning the sacredness of
blood was better understood after publication of the article “One Reason for God’s Vengeance” in The Watchtower December 15,1927, and which called attention to the wanton shedding of blood of man and animals by the ruling powers, and responsibility for which bloodshed rested specially upon the religious clergy who failed to abide by Jehovah’s covenant and commandments.
Further describing the “mighty angel'’, Revelation 10: 1 says: “His face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire.” Thus Christ Jesus is identified as the Sun of righteousness, with healing in its beams for those who serve Jehovah God, according to Malachi 4:2. On an occasion he was transfigured on earth before his faithful disciples, and “his face did shine as the sun”, as reported at Matthew 17:2. After his resurrection and ascension to heaven and when he manifested his glory to Saul of Tarsus on the road to Damascus, Saul says that he “saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me”. (Acts 26:13) The sun rules when the day comes (Ps. 136:8; Jer. 31: 35) Christ Jesus, the great Sun and Light of the world, has come.
“And his feet as pillars of fire.” His fiery feet symbolically mean: ‘He must tread down and destroy the enemies and make them his footstool.’ (See Psalm 110: 1.) It is the feet of Jesus that bruise Satan. (Rom. 16: 20) Jehovah put all things under the feet of Christ Jesus. (Ps. 8:6, 1 Cor 15:25-27) All things are put under his feet, according to Hebrews 2: 7-9.
“And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth.” (Rev. 10:2) A ‘little book open and held in his hand’ symbolically speaks of the revelation of God’s purposes in the hand of his beloved Son, with power and authority to reveal them. (Deut. 31: 26; Ps. 40:7) This fact is further a conclusive proof that the truth is not the product of any man, and it is wrong to give any man credit for the revelation of the truth. The truth and the revelation thereof belongs to Jehovah, and he uses his High Priest, Christ Jesus, to open it and to make it known in due time. The fact that the book was open signifies that the time has come to make known to his people the purposes of God.
The “mighty angel”, Christ Jesus, sets one foot upon “the sea” and the other upon “the earth”; the "sea” meaning the people that support and bear up Satan’s organization that commercializes humankind ; and the “earth” meaning the ruling powers of Satan’s visible organization Therefore the time approaches for fiery judgment upon the “earth” and “sea” because of these “pillars of fire”. Thus, in symbolic language, Christ Jesus is shown taking charge of the affairs that had been committed to his hand by his Father. As Jehovah’s executive officer he stopped the then raging World War, in 1918, that the servants of Jehovah, who were then scattered and under restraint, might be gathered together and do the witness work before the final end of Satan’s world.
“And [he] cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roar-eth: and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices.” (Rev. 10:3) ‘Crying out with the voice like a lion’s’ symbolically says: ‘It is the time for justice and judgment, and judgment must begin at the house of God, his temple.’
238
August 1,1940
WATCHTOWER.
239
(1 Pet. 4:17) Having assumed his place as King in A.D. 1914, and having thereupon ousted Satan from heaven, Christ Jesus comes to his temple for judgment, in fulfillment of the prophecy of Malachi 3:1-4. (See also Amos 1:2; Joel 3:16.) The “thunders” that then uttered their voices represented the voice or message of Jehovah rebuking the enemies of the Theocratic Government of Jehovah and expressing his indignation. (Ps. 104:7) The thunders sound, for, as Revelation 11:19 deciares, the temple of God is open and his representative, Christ Jesus, is there present. “And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write [Jehovah’s rebukes and indignation] : and 1 heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not.” (Rev 10:4) The “seal” on the seven thunders seems to ha\e been lifted at the close of A.D. 1922, when God’s servant class, Jehovah’s witnesses, was sent forth to declare the day of his vengeance and specifically to advertise Jehovah’s King and his kingdom. This unloosening of the seal is clearly referred to when the apostle John writes down the Loid’s command: “Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book; for the time is at hand.” (Rev. 22- 10) The time had come for God’s people to begin to have a clearer vision of his purposes and to carry out the work he had committed to them. That work of witness they are now doing.
“And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven, and sware by him that livcth for ever and ever, . . . that there should be time no longer.” (Rev. 10: 5, 6) No longer should there be any waiting. This text is rendered by other translators as follows: “Time shall be no longer [delayed]” (Emphatic Diaglott) ; “delay no longer shall there be” (Rotherham'); "there shall be delay no longer.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) This meant a great turning point or transition period. Jehovah’s “mighty angel” could not have made that declaration prior to A.D. 1914, because it was there that his period of ‘waiting at the right hand of the Father’ ended and he then took his power and began to reign from heaven as King.— Ps. 110’ 1, 2; Heb 10:12,13.
So far as Jehovah’s remnant of witnesses on earth are concerned, the above declaration refers more particularly to A.D. 1918, when the Lord came to his temple. As the apostle Paul puts it, the “administration of the fulness of the appointed times” had now come. (Eph. 1: 10, Diaglott) The time had come for the world’s rightful Ruler, who had now cast Satan out of heaven, to come forth to make the enemy his footstool. There must be no tarrying now. “For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not he: though it tarry [seem to delay, prior to 1918], wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.” (Hab 2:3) In 1914 the Lord’s people expected many things, which, however, did not seem to come to pass, but some of which began to come to pass in 1918 and which they saw thereafter; but now we are seeing the “vision” most marvelously come to pass, leading on to Armageddon.
According to the Scriptures, in A.D. 1918 the time had now come for the Christians who died faithful prior to Christ’s coming, and who “slept” in death, ‘resting for a little season’ (Rev. 6:11), to be raised, being rewarded
with a spiritual resurrection. “It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory.” (1 Cor. 15: 44,43) Also the time had come for Jehovah to “finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness”. (Rom. 9:28) In righteousness he will stop Satan at Armageddon!
A.D. 1919 marked the time for the preparatory work among Jehovah’s witnesses immediately preceding the beginning of the great witness work. In 1922 there began a series of seven annual international conventions of Jehovah’s witnesses, accompanied by seven annual messages or proclamations concerning Jehovah’s purposes against “Christendom” and in behalf of the Lord’s “other sheep”, the people of good will toward God and his kingdom under Christ. The seventh of these annual messages began to be given in 1928, and was sounded throughout all “Christendom” by radio and over twenty million books and booklets.
Revelation 10: 7 shows now there would be no delay in finishing “the mystery of God”: “But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets.” There seems to be a clear distinction between what the Scriptures call “the mystery of Christ” and “the mystery of God”. The “mystery of Christ” pertains to the selection of the members of the “body of Christ”, over whom Jesus is Head, such being selected without regard to whether they be Jews or Gentiles (Eph 3 : 4-6 ; Gal. 3 : 27-29) That was once a “mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations”. (Col. 1 • 26-28) As to the “mystery of God”, which should be finished during the sounding of the seventh angel: There are a number of questions relating to Jehovah which were once a mystery to God’s people and which have been cleared up since the Lord’s coming to his temple, to wit: Who is God? What is the significance of the names by which he reveals himself? Is God responsible for all the sorrows and woes of earth, including the calamities? Has God an organization, and what is it? What is meant by his coming forth out of his place to punish all the inhabitants of the earth and to vindicate his name? What is the anti-theocratic organization that opposes him, and of what does it consist? Are Satan and his organization responsible for the sufferings and calamities of men and the alienation of men from God? All these things God had long ago foretold or announced by his prophets, but the time must come for them to be understood by his faithful witnesses on the earth, because it is for their benefit that such Scriptures were wntten.-Rom. 15:4; 1 Cor 10 11
By his prophet Jehovah had said: “Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret [mystery] unto his servants the prophets.” (Amos 3:7) Therefore the statement of Revelation 10:7 seems to say that following the sounding of the seven angels God would cause his witnesses to have an understanding of the prophecies which have heretofore been secret. Those who compose the “remnant” of Jehovah’s anointed witnesses have received a great enlightenment in the past few years, and now have an understanding of many prophecies that have heretofore not been understood. This is due to the fact that the Lord is in his temple and the flashes of light from his temple illuminate his people. Now a great multitude of people of good will on earth are receiving this enlightenment and are rejoicing.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
CATHOLIC ACTION IN THE RIOT ZONE, TEXAS
“The zone assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses went off as planned: magazine work, Saturday from 2 to 4 p.m., and door-to-door witnessing, Sunday from 9: 30 a.m. to 1 p.m. All of Brownwood (except one territory) was worked, and Comanche in addition. We were forced to have the Saturday night and Sunday meetings in the open on a witness’ farm outside of Brownwood. Saturday afternoon we had 80 publishers: 20 men and the others women and children. At 4: 30, when we had all returned to the hall, there were about 400 trying to drive us out of town. They grabbed the men and took us up to police headquarters. The chief would not arrest us. He asked and advised us that they were beyond his control and we should leave town at least for the present. Before leaving Kingdom Hall we took the territory maps and assigned the cars to their territory Saturday night and they went straight to work Sunday morning without meeting anywhere. This fooled the mob, because a good number were hanging around the Kingdom Hall expecting us to meet there. As the cars came to the courthouse (which was locked) we gave them territory and sent them to work. Not all the people here are against us, but the poor people are being regimented as Judge Rutherford said they would be. One man in the mob was heard to say: 'The damn fools don’t even look scared.’ One witness was attacked with a hammer, but was not hit. So far next week’s assembly at Odessa is arranged. We had the courthouse, but what will happen remains to be seen. A number of the friends here and in Abilene have lost their jobs because of the riot, but that does not seem to deter them.
“RESOLUTION
“We, Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions of Texas Zone 8 Region 5, assembled at Brownwood, Texas, May 25 and 26, 1940, do hereby resolve that we have been strengthened by the mob action taken against us by the enemies, namely, the religionists and the so-called American Legion, and we are determined to increase our hours in the field service from door to door and at the street corners; and be it further resolved that we are 100 percent in harmony with the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society and are determined by Jehovah’s grace to press the battle to the gate until he says it is finished. This resolution was read and unanimously adopted.”
A BRITISH TOMMY IN BURMA WRITES:
“I am taking my stand for Jehovah God that I may be brought forth into his organization and help to show others the true way of life under Jehovah Supreme. The brothers and sisters of the Watchtower organization have made me see things much more clearly, and the knowledge which I have received from them through the Bible literature and records I have been passing on to fellow soldiers in the regiment There is a good bit of opposition from the soldiers, especially Roman Catholics, but------and myself are bearing up O.K. One fellow in my room started running us down about our being anti-Romanist, but I left a copy of Salvation on my box and went out of the room for a bath. On returning I found the precious literature missing, and when I asked I was surprised to hear that he had it. Three days later this fellow came up to me and said: ‘------, I
don’t know, but I think these people have got the right idea , for how can the C of E padres or any one of the religions be right if they bless and consecrate 16-inch guns and put all their faith in them rather than in God T ... I told him to come with me to the study sometime; so I am taking him down this afternoon. I have found quite a few fellows are interested in this and I hope to help them to get out of the mess in which organized religion has placed them. Before I came to know the truth I used to play in a mission band in England and joined the army at 14 years of age, in 1935, went to India in the same year, and now am here 13 miles from the Watchtower brethren, and wouldn’t miss a meeting unless forced to by duty. I used to be a strong Methodist, but somehow the parsons couldn’t satisfy my want of knowledge, and so when this golden opportunity came along 1 snapped it up almost at once. Since learning of the truth I went up to the Methodist minister 'Reverend’ Frank E Manton and asked him his views of 24th chapter Matthew, and he shut up, telling me ‘not to take any notice of it, as those things happen every century or century and a quarter’. So what do you say to that?”
ZONE SERVANT REPORTS FROM NOVA SCOTIA
“At Weymouth I called on one of the back-calls you sent, and the lady and her daughter were home. She says the whole family have withdrawn from the Church of England and have been studying the publications all winter, rejoicing in the great truths therein. She was one of the chief and best workers in the church, her girls sang in the choir, and the little boy carried the cross for the minister Now they have foi’saken the parson. He called to see her He tried to persuade her to drop our literature and come to church; but nothing doing. Now she wants to go out m the service, and subscribed for The Watchtower She wants to be baptized and is studying that subject, and so are her girls. They are quite fearless and were overjoyed at our call. As an excuse as to why she was not coming to church the minister told the rest of the congregation she was sick So quite a few have called to see how she was, and this has given her a good chance to witness to them too Another family at North Range have been interested. The son subscribed for The Watchtower and Consolation and has been doing some witnessing this winter in the woods where he worked and now wants to get a phonograph and talks of going into pioneer work. A 93-year-old witness, at Doctor’s Cove, has lived alone the last two years, does her own reading, and would not be without The Watchtower and Consolation for anything. Neighbors drop in occasionally and say: ‘You must get lonesome.’ She says: ‘How could I, when I have The Watchtower’ She tells religionists who call on her that the clergy are blind leaders of the blind and will all fall into the ditch. It was a real inspiration to call on her. In the winter I met with the little company at Centreville, on Digby Niche. The territory is ail rural, quite scattered, and practically all sisters in the company I brought to their attention the magazine route work. The.v took hold of it with zeal and have to order an additional supply now to meet the demands. They also took hold of back-call and model study work, and it is going ahead grandly. The Lord has richly blessed them, and they are surely rejoicing.”
240
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S, A.
OFFICERS
J. P. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburch, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
“RELIGION’S DOOM" TESTIMONY PERIOD
This midsummer testimony period during the entire month of August follows closely the Theocratic contention The witness period being named “Religion’s Doom”, the testimony activities should receive particular stimulation from the convention’s nationwide public address on “Religion as a World Remedy” Appropriately, therefore, all Kingdom publishers will offer to the public, on a 25e contribution, the book Religion and a self-covered booklet, preferably the new booklet Refugees. Conventloners and people of good will everywhere are invited to share m this testimony. Arrange for this now through the local organized company of Jehovah’s witnesses. If not yet associated with such, write us for references. A complete report on each publisher’s field service for August should be submitted, to compile the total results.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock a.m., Tuesday, October 1,1940, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good xmIL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Brice
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150: Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittance* should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittance* should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ............... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7	Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African_________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of thia Journal appear in several languages.)
AU sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each j ear, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with tho journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y , under the Act of March J, ISIS.
“RELIGION”
With especial pleasure we announce the new book Religion, released by its author, Judge Rutherford, at the recent Theocratic convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. It offers the indisputable evidence, both Scriptural and factual, that religion is opposed to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and is therefore the mortal enemy of man, and that Christianity is the only way of escape for people of good will. The book contains 384 pages, including color-illustrations, and a valuable reference index, all bound within beautifully embossed covers in a refreshing green cloth and gold-stamped. You will prize the author’s edition, which contains an autograph of a letter in his own handwriting addressed to the Theocratic ambassadors. This special edition is limited and may be had on a contribution of 50c per copy. Those in organized companies may combine their individual orders and send them through the local company servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 22: “‘Times and Seasons’” (Part 2), fl 1-24 inclusive, The Watchtower August 15, 1940.
Week of September 29: “‘Times and Seasons’” (Part 2), fl 25-49 inclusive, The Watchtower August 15, 1940.
sfe yvxonuwER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	August 15, 1940	No. 16
'TIMES AND SEASONS’
PART 2
shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. But shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil."—Prov. 1:32,33.
"For the turning away of the simple whoso hearkeneth unto me
T EHOVAII has provided a place of security for I those only who give heed to his Word and joyfully J obey his commandments. This assurance from the Lord is of great comfort in these days of peril. All who have diligently sought to know the truth have learned during the past few months that the demons are besieging the minds of people and have taken possession of the mind of every person now on earth who does not turn himself to the Lord. The earnest student of God’s Word discerns that the climax is near and that soon Jehovah will express his wrath against all enemies of The Theocracy. The faithful are diligent now to seek righteousness and meekness that they may remain in the place of safety during Armageddon and receive complete deliverance in God’s due time.
2	But how about those who have once been enlightened in the truth as it was revealed at that time but who have failed to walk in the light, those who have turned away from the leading of the Lord and held to the teachings of men that they learned years ago? Surely the words of the foregoing text apply, to wit; ‘ For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.” The simple are those who look to worldly leaders and follow worldly wisdom, and who have failed to feed upon the Word of the Lord as the light from the Lord’s presence shines upon his Word. A fool says in his heart, “There is no God”; and therefore the one who takes the course of following men, or who holds to religion, by his course of action ignores Almighty God and in his heart says: “There is no God.” Safety now is guaranteed to only those who hearken unto the Lord’s Word, and who are diligent and alert to learn and to obey.
WHEN?
3	Armageddon is a certainty. All persons who are now in a covenant with Jehovah and fully devoted to The Theocratic Government are necessarily looking for evidence that Armageddon is near at hand. Such being children of light and walking circumspectly in the light, they are discerning the “signs of the times” and will thereby learn as to the time of Armageddon. The Lord did not reveal to Paul the day or hour, but he did direct Paul as to the signs that would be present indicating the time of the expression of his wrath against all workers of iniquity. Therefore the words of Paul, the inspired servant of the Lord, addressed to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus concerning the beginning of Armageddon, are these : “For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.”—1 Thess. 5: 3.
4	According to the rendering of this text by Rothe: -ham, the Revised Version, and the Diaglott, the word “For” is omitted and the text simply reads: “When they shall say.” The word “when” does not refer to the time immediately before the beginning of 1918, when the Lord Jesus first appeared at the temple, but manifestly refers to some point of time after 1918. The witness work to the name and kingdom of God was temporarily shut down at the beginning of 1918, but that work was renewed with greater activity after 1918 and that increased work occurs within “the day of the Lord”. The time approaching is in that day when the enemy will be completely destroyed. Immediately before that expression of God’s wrath is the time “when they shall say”, that is, when they shall speak the message, “Peace and safety.”
5	Who shall say? Certainly not the anointed witnesses of Jehovah, to whom the apostle is writing, because to them he says: “Ye have no need that I write unto you. For yourselves know perfectly.” Nor is it Jehovah who says to the remnant, his faithful servants, “Peace and safety.” It is written concerning the remnant that they say: “I will hear what Goel the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to folly.”—Ps. 85: 8.
u The faithful hear what God says to them, but those who are following worldly teachers of worldly wisdom turn to folly. The Lord does not cry to the 2-13
244
THE WATCHTOWER,
“remnant” or anyone else, “Peace and safety.” It is not, then, the Lord who speaks the words that the apostle above used. The faithful “feet” members of Christ publish peace; as it is written: “How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!”— Isa. 52:7.
7	But it is not the faithful ones who publish peace that speak the message above written by the apostle Paul, to wit, “Peace and safety.” The word “they"’ could hardly refer to the rank and file of the people, because they are asleep and give little heed to anything save their own selfish appetites. The word “they"', as used by the apostle Paul, manifestly means “the ambassadors of p^ace” who are due to “weep bitterly”, as stated in Isaiah 33: 7. Such are the ones who are the leaders amongst the people and who mold public opinion according to their own desires. They are makers of propaganda for all others who are willing to hear them and who follpw earthly leaders. The word “they”, therefore, clearly refers to the persons who have a selfish desire to rule this world for their own satisfaction ami who have no use for The Theocracy, and who are against the great Theocrat and his King.
•This is the day of the Lord Jesus Christ, when he sits in judgment and is dividing his “sheep” from the “goats”, as stated in Matthew 25; that is, he is separating the ones who are seeking righteousness and meekness and who are therefore in line to become members of his flock from those who are opposed to him and the kingdom of his Father. The word “they” used by the apostle Paul in Thessalonians must refer only to the leaders of the “goat” class, that is, the ones who would make the people believe that they stand for God and that they have influence with God, and that they are doing God’s work, and who claim to be in position to give reliable assurance to the other “goats” as to what is the meaning of the present-day conditions. They prognosticate concerning the future, basing their conclusions entirely upon worldly wisdom, governed by selfish desire. The masses of the people believe that the opinions expressed by such mighty and professed learned leaders are reliable and authoritative; and consequently, the people being in ignorance and blindness, the blind follow the blind.
’ Then, again, note that the word “they” refers to that class of persons whose “peace” has been disturbed by reason of the publication of the message of and concerning the fall of “Christendom”, the destruction of religion, and the establishment of the great Theocratic Government. “They” are the ones whose religious susceptibilities are shocked by
Brooklyn, N. Y.
reason of hearing the message concerning the end of the world and of the destruction of all who oppose The Theocracy. They are certainly not disturbed because of the physical force employed against them by Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions. They are frightened and disturbed, however, by reason of the message which Jehovah’s witnesses and companions declare in their presence and hearing. Being disturbed because of the proclamation of the truth concerning The Theocratic Government, “they” endeavor to unite all force that they may muster to fight against The Theocracy and the ones who proclaim it.
10	The faithful servants of Jehovah who proclaim the flame and kingdom of the Most High are oppressed by the combined enemies who wickedly fight against God’s servants, and concerning which the faithful servants of God pray, as the Lord directed them to pray: “Keep me as the apple of the eye; hide me under the shadow of thy wings, from the wicked that oppress me, my deadly enemies, that compass me about. They are inclosed in their own fat; with their mouth they speak proudly. They have now compassed usin our steps; they set their eyes to cast us down to the earth. He is like a lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young lion lurking in secret places. Arise, 0 Jehovah, confront him, cast him down; deliver my soul from the wicked by thy sword; from men by thy hand, 0 Jehovah, from men of the world, whose portion is in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy treasure; they are satisfied with children [their so-called successors of the apostles], and leave the rest of their substance to their babes [their religious pupils in the organization whom they teach to carry on their religious action]. As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with beholding thy form.”—Ps. 17: 8-15, A.R.V.
11	It is not difficult to locate and identify these mighty religious leaders now, for the reason that the facts show beyond all question that the Protestant “lion” died in 1918. It is therefore the big Roman Catholic leaders that do the talking now, and those who were once Protestants follow the lead.
12	“They," that is to say, the leaders of the big religious system, scoff at the published fact that the Lord Jesus has ‘descended from heaven with a shout [with the command from the Most High], with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump’, announcing the kingdom, and that the battle is about to follow and that victory for the great King is certain at Armageddon. Such great religious leaders, being under the influence and power of the demons, are in darkness, even as are the demons concerning the purpose of Jehovah God. They are the same ones as mentioned by the inspired servant and apostle of
August 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
245
Christ Jesus who wrote: “Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.” (2 Pet. 3:3,4) The physical facts now well known furnish an abundance of evidence that it is the religious leaders who thus scoff at the proclamation of the Theocratic message and who then utter their say.
SAY WHAT?
13	What they do say is prompted by their own selfish desires to make themselves believe that they have accomplished their purpose and' shall abide in their present position forever. Without a question of doubt Jehovah, by his Executive Officer, Christ Jesus, is now maneuvering the enemy into position for the battle of that great day and the enemy thinks he is about ready for the great conflict. The active agencies of Satan now operating in the various nations of the earth must come to a point where they think they have things exactly their own way as they desire them. The totalitarian rulers hate God and they hate The Theocracy and Christ the King thereof. Likewise the great religious leaders hate The Theocracy and have convinced themselves that they, together with other men. shall rule the world instead of Christ. These big religious leaders and the dictators are working together to put to silence everything or every organization that does not agree with them and their conclusions. The dictators are gaining strength every day, and the big religious leaders think that they are riding on top of that organization that is moving against righteousness, represented in The Theocratic Government. The religious leaders are all against The Theocracy, and necessarily they are opposing all who proclaim the name of Jehovah God and his government, and that his government is the only hope of humankind.
14	God’s people, made up of the remnant and the “other sheep” (John 10:16), will be the only ones who will continue boldly to advocate The Theocratic Government. They are doing so now under adverse conditions. It is the purpose of the religious leaders and the totalitarian rulers to silence all of those who proclaim the message of The Theocratic Government, and they are proceeding to do so upon the theory that the message of the Lord proclaimed by such witnesses is subversive. The message of God’s kingdom under Christ shocks the religious susceptibilities of these mighty leaders, and it is an easy matter for them to persecute those who proclaim The Theocratic Government. It should be manifest to all who think soberly that it is a conflict between Satan and the Lord Jehovah and his King, with Satan’s
visible agents doing whatsoever they can to silence the witnesses of Jehovah, and they are looking forward to the time when they can and will silence God's witnesses.
15	The time arrives when the opposers of The Theocratic Government think that they have accomplished their purpose and they “say, Peace and safety”. Just how long they will be saying that before the battle of Armageddon begins is not definitely indicated by the Scriptures. That they will be so saying shortly before the battle is quite certain and clear. It is not a matter of ‘Maybe they will say so’; but of a certainty they will be permitted by the Lord to come to the point where they feel that they have accomplished their purpose and when they will certainly say: “Peace and safety.”
14 To whom will they say “Peace and safety”? Certainly not to Jehovah’s witnesses and to others who are companions of Jehovah’s witnesses and who support The Theocratic Government. This is certain, because such faithful servants of Jehovah God would not listen and give heed to their saying. To whom, then, do these mighty religionists utter their saying? They will say it to one another, to all the religious leaders, and to those who follow religion, totalitarian allies and all the people who are still under the influence and control of religionists, all over whom the demons exercise influence and power; all therefore who are blind to the truth, having no understanding of Jehovah’s purposes. Their words, as spoken, to wit, “Peace and safety,” are not, in fact, for peace, so far as God’s servants are concerned: ‘For they speak not peace [to the advocates of The TurocRvnc Government], but devise deceitful words against them that have quiet in the land.’ (Ps. 35: 20) Only those who fully trust in Jehovah will be quiet in the land, looking to God for deliverance and trusting fully in him for salvation.
17	The religious leaders and totalitai inn rulers desire to be at peace so far as any message regarding The Theocracy is concerned, and tins they desire in order that they may carry on their own selfish desires to rule the world. By such outcry of announcement of “Peace and safety7’ they are bidding God and Christ to come to terms with them that they may not longer be disturbed by anyone. This is illustrated by the messengers which King Joram sent to meet Jehu, whom he saw approaching, but from whom he received no satisfaction. Then the king himself (representative of the Devil) went to meet Jehu, the latter being a representative and picture of Jehovah God’s Executive Officer of the present time. This picture is recorded for the benefit and hope of those faithful servants of God now on earth, to wit: “And the watchman told, saying, He came even unto them, and cometh not again: and the driving is like the
246
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi; for he driveth furiously. And Joram said, Make ready. And his chariot was made ready. And Joram king of Israel, and Ahaziah king of Judah, went out, each in his chariot, and they went out against Jehu, and met him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite. And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace, Jehu! And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?” (2 Ki. 9:20-22) “There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.”—Isa. 48: 22.
18	The crying out of “Peace and safety” by those who thus utter this message is really a false cry, because they are not in fact at peace. They cannot be at peace of mind as long as they see Jehovah's witnesses and companions in existence amongst the people. They want to rid the earth completely of such proclaimers of the kingdom message. Those who thus cry out “Peace and safety” were pictured by Haman, who thought everything was working out well for him but who still was troubled in his mind because of the existence of Mordecai. (Esther 5: 9-14) It disturbs their inwards to see anyone present who does not kowtow to totalitarian and religious rulers but who with boldness and fearlessness advocates The Theocratic Government. Although they may come to the point of putting every one of these messengers of the kingdom to silence, and say to each other, “We are at peace and safety,” yet they will be troubled in mind and heart as long as they see the witnesses of the Lord anywhere about them in the land.
SIGN
19	Without a question of doubt we are now well advanced within “the times and the seasons” of the Lord’s presence and of his judgment of the nations and we are approaching unto the time of Armageddon, but the “sign” immediately preceding Armageddon is not yet discernible. Many nations are now at war and the democracies are rapidly disappearing. The totalitarian rule is overriding the people who love a government by the people. It appears that the time is coming in the near future when these present wars and troubles will be patched up by some kind of peace and this peace announced to the world. But let this be kept clearly in mind, that it is not peace between the nations that is referred to by the crier, saying, “Peace and safety,” written by the apostle Paul. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy is the greatest religious organization on the earth, and it is quite probable that the head of that religious organization will have much to do with bringing the warring nations to a temporary peace. But such so-called “peace” clearly is not the peace to which the apostle Paul refers in his epistle to the Thessalonians.
90	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy do not look to the
League of Nations or treaties heretofore made to establish peace. Rather the followers of the Hierarchy look to the .pope, the head of their religious organization, which they call the “rock foundation”. They have been taught to believe and claim that against such the gates of hell shall never prevail; but when the rule of the land is such that they think to have put to silence all the advocates and proclaimers of the Messianic kingdom, the great Theocracy, then is the time for their saying: “Peace and safety.” That undoubtedly refers to the accomplishment of conditions on earth whereby such religious leaders will no longer be disturbed by the representatives of The Theocratic Government. Certainly Protestantism will never again disturb the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and the few individuals amongst the Protestant religious organization that stand high will doubtless join the Hierarchy in her cry of “Peace and safety”. The desire of all such is to carry on the control and rule of the world in their own selfish way. The message of The Theocratic Government now being boldly declared by Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions is that which disturbs the religious leaders.
81 The Supreme Court of the United States has positively decided that Jehovah’s witnesses have the full right under the Constitution to preach this gospel of the kingdom, both by word of mouth and by distributing the printed message and by the use of the phonograph. In the face of such decision the big religious leaders try to avoid the mandate of the highest court, and now they resort to the practice of charging Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions with disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct. The only “proof” offered is that Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions go about talking to the people about God’s kingdom. This disturbs the peace of mind of the religious leaders, and hence they induce their followers to testify that Jehovah’s witnesses are disturbers of the peace. This is further proof that it is the message of The Theocracy that so greatly disturbs the religionists and the totalitarian rulers. When the religious leaders hear the Theocratic message and know that the people are hearing that same message, they are greatly vexed and their peace of mind is very much disturbed, and therefore they devise means to prevent the message of God’s kingdom from being preached. They proceed then to ‘frame mischief by law’. These facts are here cited as corroborative proof that the religionists, who do constitute a part of the totalitarian rule, are the ones that are vexed and that will cry “Peace and safety”. This was foretold by Jehovah in these words, to wit: “From the time that it goeth forth it shall take you; for morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night; and it [the Theocratic message] shall be
August 15,1940
S^e WATCHTOWER.
247
a vexation [peace-disturbing] only to understand the report.”—Isa. 28:19.
22	This text, according to the marginal reading, is: “It shall be a vexation when he shall make you [scoffing opposers] to understand [the] doctrine.” Hence the preaching by Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions of the doctrine of The Theocratic Government disturbs the religious susceptibilities of the selfish, religious leaders, and the principal of their flock. The only thing that will remove that vexation to the Hierarchy and their allies is for them to come to see conditions which indicate a complete suppression of the Theocratic message and those who bear that message.
23	Let it be kept in mind that religion is the instrument of Satan and the demons, employed to turn men away from Jehovah God and his government. When Jesus rode into Jerusalem after the manner of Israel’s kings he was hailed by the great multitudes of people, who cried out: “Blessed is he that coineth in the name of Jehovah.” (Matt. 21:9; Ps. 118: 26, A.R.V.) That disturbed the peace of the religious leaders and moved them to wrath. “The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.”—John 12:19.
2< Exactly the same conditions exist today. The Pharisees and their associates were able to say “Peace” only after they had suppressed the Lord Jesus Christ. It is reasonable, therefore, to conclude that in this present time the mighty religious leaders and their allies will take a course similar to that taken by the Pharisees. In these days the “other sheep”, or “great multitude” (Rev. 7 : 9-17), are constantly increasing and their shouts are joined together with those of the remnant in proclaiming the presence of Christ the King and his kingdom; and the religious leaders, moved to anger against them, increase their endeavors in every possible way to suppress the messengers of The Theocratic Government. All this must be done before they can cry “Peace and safety”; and all the present evidence, therefore, shows that exactly these conditions exist, and hence we are approaching near unto Armageddon.
25 At the present time the religious leaders attempt to suppress the Theocratic message by crying out to their political allies that Jehovah’s witnesses are intolerant, while at the same time these religionists practice the worst kind of intolerance against the witnesses of Christ Jesus. The clergy cry “Intolerance” as a camouflage in their endeavor to hide their own intolerance. They are well illustrated by the robber who steals from another and then cries out “Thief” to attract the attention of the people to someone other than himself. These religionists even induce the political and judicial representatives to take
up their cry of intolerance. For instance, in the case before the Supreme Court of the United States, heard on April 25, 1940, counsel for the ones who were attempting to enforce flag saluting said, in substance: “These Jehovah’s witnesses do not grant the same tolerance to other religions that they ask for themselves.” That statement was entirely foreign to the record, had nothing whatsoever to do with the issue before the court, but manifestly was prompted and inspired by some religious leaders.
20 We know that the things that prevailed during the period of the Jewish nation were ensamples of what should come to pass at the present time, because the Scriptures so state. That which prevailed amongst the leaders of the Jews in the time that Christ was on earth, and when he was crucified, prevails today. In the time of Jeremiah, when the Lord through his prophet Jeremiah was warning the people of approaching disaster, the religious leaders amongst the Jews cried out: “Peace, peace”; ‘when there was no peace.’—Jer. 6:13-15.
2T The same religious leaders denied the message that God sent to the Jews by Jeremiah. They told the people that there was no impending danger, that Jerusalem would not fall. These false prophets said to the people: “Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine”; as it is written: ‘‘Then said I, Ah, Lord God! behold, the prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place Then the Lord said unto me, The prophets prophe" y lies in my name; I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spake unto them; they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart. Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land; By sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed.” (Jer. 14:13-15) It is well to remember in this connection the words of the apostle Paul, to wit: “Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.”—1 Cor. 10: 11.
28 The totalitarian state and the great religious leaders act together to suppress the message and messengers of The Theocratic Government because they see that, if The Theocratic Government succeeds, the totalitarian government cannot possibly continue to exist and hence the religious leadeis can no longer have anything to say about governments. God has emphatically declared that his kingdom shall not be left to men, that they shall have nothing to do with it: “And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and the kingdom shall not be left to other
248
^He WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.” (Dan. 2: 44) Necessarily it follows, then, that the rising of The Theocracy to complete power means the complete end of totalitarian and religious rule.
” All who are not for The Theocracy are against it. Satan and his associate demons are leading the fight against The Theocracy. They have blinded all religionists and control the religious leaders and the totalitarian dictators. As Satan induced the religionists to oppose and speak against Christ Jesus and in favor of Caesar (the dictator), so now the same thing is repeated. The radical multitude, led by the religionists, went before Pilate (the totalitarian dictator) : “And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a king.”—Luke 23: 2.
“When the religious leaders amongst the Jews were reminded that Christ Jesus was their King they cried out before Pilate: “We have no king but Caesar.” (John 19:15) Thus they voted for the totalitarian ruler as against Christ Jesus. Likewise today the big religious leaders, the counterpart of the Pharisees, declare themselves on the side of the totalitarian, dictator rulers. Jesus prophesied that exactly this condition would prevail, telling his followers that they would be opposed by the same religious element; and the facts prove the fulfillment of his prophetic words.—John 15:18-21.
31	Paul and his companions in the service of the Lord preached the Theocratic message, and the religionists haled Paul and his companions into court and said before the court: “These men ... do exceedingly trouble our city, and teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans.” “And the multitude rose up together against them: and the magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat them.” (Acts 16: 20-22) Again the religionists of the Jews brought Paul and his companions before the ruler, and said: “These . . . have turned the world upside down, . . . and ... do contrary to the decrees of Csesar.” —Acts 17: 6, 7.
31	All these things are recorded in the Scriptures for the information of the faithful servants of Jehovah God now on earth, and it is to be expected that the present-day opponents of The Theocratic Government will treat Jehovah’s witnesses and companions in a like manner as they treated Jesus and his apostles. The indisputable facts are that similar action on the part of religionists is now being taken against Jehovah’s witnesses and companions in almost every part of “Christendom”. The religious leaders have convinced themselves, they must put down all persons who now advocate and advertise
The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. That is the only reason why there is such violent opposition to the message of the kingdom of God under Christ. This of itself is conclusive evidence that the religionists are under the influence and power of the demons, chief amongst whom is Satan.
DELUSION
33	The “man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” is composed of the religionists, their leaders and allies, including the “evil servant”, that is, those who were once in the truth and who have turned aside therefrom. All of these religionists oppose The Theocratic Government. Satan has overreached them, and under his influence and that of his associate demons such religionists have convinced themselves that they must suppress Jehovah’s witnesses and companions. Their apparent success in doing so is to them a sign or evidence that God is on their side and that therefore they are at peace with God. Thus God ‘sends them a strong delusion, that they should believe a lie’, exactly as it was in Haman’s case. (2 Thess. 2:11) The big religious leaders today profess to serve God, but are wholly given over to spiritism or idolatry; and concerning them it is written by the apostle under inspiration that God sends them a strong delusion ‘because they received not the love of the truth’. (2 Thess. 2:10-12) They love self, and hence cannot love the truth.
34	Held under the'influence and power of the demons and being under a strong delusion, they conclude that God is on their side, and therefore have pushed on their campaign to suppress the Theocratic message and the messengers; and when they have, as they believe, accomplished that fact, then is the time they cry out “Peace and safety”. Thereby they mean that the religionists and totalitarian rulers are at peace with God and have suppressed the advocates of The Theocratic Government and that they, the religionists and allies, are enjoying peace and are safe from further hearing the sound concerning the doom of “Christendom”. They believe that they have put Jehovah’s witnesses and companions in a place where they can no longer do harm to the religionists and totalitarian rule. Their expression “Peace and safety” implies they have shut down completely on the freedom of action of Jehovah’s servants. Such was exactly the course of action taken against the apostles. There the religious leaders were against the apostles, and they induced the mob to act together with them against the apostles; and even the magistrates of the courts before whom they were being tried tore off their clothes in indignation, thus identifying themselves with the opponents of The Theocracy. Then they proceeded to put the apostles where they thought would be a place of safety. “They
August 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
249
cast them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely.”—Acts 16: 20-23.
85 The action of the religionists against Jesus was in like manner. They concluded that they must silence him. They were not willing even to rest after he was crucified, but further made request of the totalitarian ruler that he make the tomb safe by putting a guard over it to keep Jesus from getting out. (Matt. 27: 64-66) What came to pass concerning Jesus and his faithful apostles constitutes a sure guide as to what shall come to pass upon the faithful witnesses of the great Theocracy of the present time, and especially just preceding the battle of that great day of God Almighty. We are in ..“the times and the seasons”, and the faithful are earnestly and diligently watching for the “sign”.
88	When the faithful servants of Jehovah under the leadership of Christ Jesus see every avenue closed to them to actively and openly engage in advertising The Theocratic Government, and when the religious leaders and their totalitarian allies are saying “Peace and safety"', that will be the sign that Armageddon, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty,” is just about to begin. Such will constitute the ‘signs of the times and season’ for the battle. Until that sign is apparent in every part of “Christendom”, and until every avenue is closed to the giving of testimony openly and boldly, the remnant and the “other sheep” of the Lord must continue to sound out the message of the great Theocrat and his government under Christ Jesus the King. This must be done to the name of Jehovah God and that those who are of good will might find the way of escape.
present conditions
” It was in the year (A.D.) 1918 that Christ Jesus the King, having been enthroned by Jehovah God three and one-half years prior thereto, appeared at the temple and began judgment of the consecrated and of the nations. Of the consecrated, the approved ones were brought into the temple, anointed and commissioned, and formed into the Lord’s “faithful and wise servant”, to whom the Lord committed his kingdom interests and sent them forth to offer unto Jehovah an offering in righteousness. (Mal. 3:1-4; Matt. 24:45-47) The Lord gathered some more of his people and made them a part of the anointed class, and then afterwards began the gathering unto himself of his “other sheep”. (John 10:16) These latter ones have joined with the “remnant” to bear testimony concerning The Theocratic Government, and together they all say to the people of good will: ‘Come, partake of the water of life; flee unto Jehovah and his King.’ Before the Lord, the great Judge, the nations have been gathered, and the proclamation of the Theocratic message he has caused to be
declared, and thus the Lord has invited the people and gathered unto himself his “other sheep”, who have identified themselves as supporters of The Theocratic Government, and has also caused the goats to don their garments identifying themselves as opponents of The Theocratic Government. What is the result? and what are the present-day conditions in the earth?
58	The kingdom message has been declared throughout the land of “Christendom”. This has been done by the mouth of many witnesses and by the printed message in many languages widely distributed throughout the earth. More than 300 million books containing the Theocratic message, printed in upward of 78 languages, have been placed amongst the people for their information. The radio has been used to sound the Theocratic proclamation around the earth. Thousands of phonographs have reproduced the spoken message of the kingdom in the presence and hearing of millions of listeners; magazines and other papers numbering into many millions have been widely distributed amongst the people. Multitudes of the people have heard the message with gladness, even as the common people gladly heard the gracious words that fell from the lips of Christ Jesus. This message concerning Jehovah and his kingdom has magnified his name, proclaiming his majesty and his supremacy and the unchangeableness of his law, pointing out that he is the source of life and the only means of salvation. The faithful believers have declared themselves for Jehovah and his law, regardless of all opponents. They have delighted themselves in the Lord and have gladly identified themselves on the side of The Theocratic Government; and now with faith and full confidence in the Lord, and amidst great opposition and persecution, Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions together joyfully say: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” (Ps. 13: 5) They know that their deliverance will come by Jehovah’s “hand”, which power shall be exercised by Christ Jesus.
’’Jehovah has maneuvered the enemy and has made the goats identify themselves, and the great Judge has placed them on the side and in the place which Jehovah long ago provided for such. The religious leaders, always standing at the head of the “goat” class, are foremost in their opposition against The Theocracy. This is true because religion is Satan’s instrument used to deceive men and put them against Jehovah and his King. Christ Jesus, addressing himself to that class of religious goats that endeavor to draw human creatures into their snare, says: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.’’-Matt. 23: 15.
250
THE WATCHTOWER
40	These leaders have, by their practices carried on under the influence and power of the demons, succeeded in gathering many followers, and then, as Jesus says to those leaders of the “goat” class: “Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell?”—Matt. 23:32,33.
41	Since 1926 the message of warning from Jehovah's Word telling of his purpose to destroy all opponents of The Theocracy has been sounded throughout “Christendom”. The religionists have heard the warning, but instead of giving heed thereto they have hardened their hearts against the great King and have taken their stand at the head of the “goat” class. In this the Roman Catholic Hierarchy are in the front line, and the Protestant religionists have blindly followed the lead of those of the Hierarchy. The sincere Catholics and sincere Protestants who love righteousness and who hate iniquity have fled from these religious organizations, and others likewise continue to flee therefrom and to identify themselves as on the side of Christ, the King of the great Theocratic Government. All who have thus fled to Christ are now being bitterly opposed by the religious leaders. Thus the division is clearly made between the “sheep” and the “goats”.
42	Totalitarian rulers are all against Jehovah God, and have ever been against him. Nimrod, under the command of Satan, took the lead in religious organizations, and all other totalitarian rulers have followed that lead and have adopted and practiced, and continue to practice, some kind of Devil religion. The totalitarian rulers of Russia have excluded the followers of Christ Jesus and supporters of The Theocracy and closed that land to all persons who bear testimony to the name of Jehovah God. The totalitarian Nazi regime has killed many and imprisoned thousands of others of faithful servants and supporters of The Theocratic Government and has suppressed the proclamation of the message of God’s kingdom under Christ. The dictator of Germany has brought forth a religion which he has attempted to force upon the people, and which openly denies Jehovah God and Christ. In all of this wicked persecution and opposition to the Lord’s kingdom the totalitarian governments have the support, aid and comfort of the great religious organization in the earth. The “corporate state” or totalitarian rule of Italy has made it next to impossible for anyone to bear testimony there to the name of The Theocratic Government, and in this he has had the unstinted support and co-operation of the head of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy.
43	The great religious organization, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and the totalitarian, political rulers, have now succeeded in suppressing the proc
Brooklyn, N. Y.
lamation of the kingdom message throughout the lands of Spain, Portugal, France, Belgium, Rumania, Greece, Poland, Czechoslovakia, the Baltic states, Finland, Norway, Denmark, Sweden, in fact all of continental Europe. Added to these nations are many islands of the sea, Japan, Quebec, and other places. Only a few places now remain where the message of The Theocratic Government can be proclaimed. This is not because God is not all-powerful, but because he is permitting the enemy to carry out exactly what He foretold centuries ago.
44	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, operating what they call “Catholic Action”, and using their publications and others of the public press, without a single exception advocate the destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions and their work of bearing testimony to The Theocratic Government. Strenuous efforts are daily put into operation throughout the/United States to stop the proclamation of the Theocratic message. Magistrates, judges of trial courts, and appellate courts ignore the decisions of the highest court of the land and find some way to arrest and imprison the faithful followers of Christ Jesus who tell the people that Jehovah’s government is the only means of deliverance and salvation.
45	When the religionists and their totalitarian allies have fully succeeded in suppressing the theocratic message throughout the English-speaking part of the earth, then, it is to be expected, the religious leaders will cry out, “Peace and safety.”
WHO SAFE?
40 The religious, totalitarian alliance are trying to convince themselves even that they are safe and that no destruction shall come upon them. Knowing the end from the beginning, Jehovah God, through his prophet, long ago foretold what they would do and what they would say, to wit: “We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.” In answer thereto Jehovah says: “Your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.”—Isa. 28:15,18.
41 Only those persons who are wholly devoted to Jehovah and his government under Christ Jesus and who stand firm and steadfast in their support of The Theocratic Government will be safe. Concerning the faithful remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses it is written that such have been “caug’ht up together . . . with the Lord” in the temple and there they are made to dwell in safety in “the secret place of the Most
August 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
251
High”, where no harm or evil shall befall them. (1 Thess. 4:17) Note the precious promises which Jehovah God gives unto such faithful ones, and which promises are recorded in the following texts, to wit: “And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods. And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall the beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid.” (Ezek. 34; 25, 28) (See also Zechariah 14: 11; Jeremiah 23: 6; 32: 37; 33:16.)
48 The Lord's “other sheep” have fled to The Theocracy, and there they have the promise of being hid and kept in safety until the wrath of God is passed.
4S All the evidence tends to prove that Armageddon is very near. Let those who fully trust in Jehovah and his King remain calm, steadfast, and faithful. The “sign” is certain to be made manifest in the near future. The religionists and their political supporters will then be saying, “Peace and safety,” and will try to make themselves believe that they are in safety and at peace. Then what?
(To be continued)
HOW MESSIAH COMES
HAS he comet If so, where is he? Do not scoff at such questions! “Messiah” means “Anointed”. Three hundred years before Christ the Seventy who translated the Greek Septuagint Version of the Hebrew scriptures used the word “Christ” as equivalent for “Messiah”. (Leviticus 4: 5) Messiah was to be a ruler, a prince. The angel Gabriel said to the prophet Daniel: “From the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks and threescore and two weeks: . . . And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself.” (Daniel 9: 25, 26) Over five hundred years later a joyful Jew said to his brother Simon: “We have found the Messias”; “which is, being interpreted, the Christ.” (John 1:41) Shortly thereafter a despised Samaritan woman said to him: “I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.” The man whom she addressed said to her: “I that speak unto thee am he.” (John 4:25,26) Shortly thereafter that one called “Messiah” or “Christ” was cut off violently in death, but not for any crime of his own. As the Jewish high priest that same year said to his fellow priests: “It is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not.”—John 11: 49, 50.
Simon Peter was one of the disciples of Jesus who was called Messiah or Christ. He was a Jew who served the law of Moses. At the feast of weeks, or Pentecost, about fifty days after the Passover at which time Jesus was slain, Peter and the other disciples were waiting at Jerusalem; and at that time the prophecy of Joel 2: 28,29 was fulfilled in miniature by the outpouring of God’s holy spirit upon those disciples. Peter, as a competent witness, marks the fulfillment of the prophecy and then proceeds to testify; and his testimony definitely identifies the Redeemer and Messiah, to wit:
,rMen and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day. Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, He would raise up Christ [Messiah] to sit on his throne; he, seeing this before, spake of the resurrection of Christ [Messiah], that his soul was not left in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption. This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses. Therefore, being by the right hand of God
exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the holy [spirit], he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. For David is not ascended into the heavens: but he saith himself, The Lord [Jehovah] said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ [Messiah].”—Acts of the Apostles 2:29-36.
The book of the Bible known as The Revelation is the revelation of Jesus Christ which he gave to John after Ilia heavenly glorification. He concludes it by stating: “He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly ” To this John replies: “Even so, come, Lord Jesus ”—Rev. 22:20.
That Jehovah God is to have a Theocratic Government of righteousness, that Jesus Christ is to be the great King of that kingdom, and that he is coming a second time for the purpose of thus reigning, is so abundantly established by the inspired sacred Scriptures that all possible doubt is removed. An important question, therefore, for us to determine is how he comes.
Many have supposed and yet suppose that the Lord will come again in his body of humiliation, the very body in which he was crucified and which had the marks upon it, and that such is to be visible to human eyes. The words of Jesus himself disprove that conclusion When instructing his disciples just before his death, Jesus said • “Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also” (John 14:19) Thus he establishes the fact that his faithful disciples will see him as he is, but that the world of mankind will see him no more. And why is this true? Again the apostle Peter answers: “Because Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God ; being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit ” (1 Pet 3-18, Am. Rev. Ver.) Jesus was raised from the dead not a human, but a spirit, with a spirit organism, a divine person immortal. He now has a glorious body, which no man has seen or can look upon and live, because now Christ Jesus is the brightness of God’s glory and the “express image of his person”. (Heb. 1: 2, 3; 1 Tim. 6: 15,16) An examination of all the Scriptural evidence shows that no one of the different organisms or bodies in which Jesus
252
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
appeared to his disciples after his resurrection from the dead was his glorious body, but such bodies were created by him for the purpose of appearing to his still human disciples at the time.
Jesus was put to death a human; he was raised from the dead a spirit, “a life-giving spirit.” (1 Cor. 15: 45, A.R.V.; 1 Pet. 3: 18) The apostle John definitely shows that the body in which Jesus will appear is not his human body, because he says to his fellow Christians: “Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him : for we shall see him as he is.” (1 John 3: 2) Jesus is no longer human, but divine; therefore human eyes could not see him. He is now the express image of Jehovah God. Because he is no longer human and has not a body of flesh, but a spirit body, the apostle Paul under inspiration wrote: “Though we have .known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him [so] no more.”—2 Cor. 5:16.
After his resurrection Jesus was exalted and given a name above every name, and sat down at the right hand of the Father in glory and power, “angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him.” (Phil. 2: 9-11; Rev. 3; 21; 1 Pet. 3:22) Of him the apostle Paul writes: “Now the Lord is that Spirit.” (2 Cor. 3:17) At the time of his baptism in the Jordan river and the descent of the spirit under the outward form of a dove upon him Jesus was begotten of the spirit of Jehovah God his Father; “and, lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.” (Matt. 3:17) Thereafter Jesus explained to the Jewish ruler Nicodemus concerning a spirit, saying: “Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and. that which is born of the spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth ■ so is every one that is born of the spirit.” (John 3:5-8) “So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee.”— Heb 5:5.
Satan the Devil is a spirit. For many centuries he has been the “god of this world”, the invisible ruler of “this present evil world” (2 Cor. 4:4; Gal. 1:4); yet no human eyes have seen Satan, although men have felt his influence and still feel it. (Rev. 12:12) Not only is Satan the god of this world, but he is the chief one of his wicked organization of demons, which is invisible and which is called “the heavens . . . which are now” (2 Pet. 3:7), the same being composed of Satan and the other fallen angels or demons who exercise power over humans. The apostle Peter, speaking concerning Jehovah’s purpose, said: “We, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.” (2 Pet. 3:13) John, writing of “things which must shortly come to pass”, said: “And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away.” (Rev. 21:1) The Theocratic Government of Jehovah by Christ Jesus is the new heavenly kingdom. This new ruling power, the Messiah, is invisible, and will be invisible to human eyes, but will establish in the earth visible representatives of his government
of righteousness, to wit, the resurrected faithful prophets and witnesses who preceded Christ Jesus and whom he will “make princes in all the earth”. (Heb. 11: 35; Ps. 45:16; Isa. 32:1) None, therefore, should expect the Lord’s second coming to be in a body visible to human eyes, but should expect that he would be present, exercising his power in his own sovereign way.
Thus a spirit may be present with human creatures and yet be unobserved. Before his death Jesus said to his disciples : “Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live alsQ.” This is proof conclusive that only those who are “changed” from human to spirit in the resurrection will ever see the Lord Jesus in his glorious body. This does not mean, however, that the world will not discern his presence and observe the operation of his just and righteous power. As it is written: “Behold, he cometh with clouds [of the storm of Armageddon] ; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen.”—Rev. 1: 7.
No man has ever seen the Devil, but every man has had some experience with the Devil and felt the influence of his unrighteous power. No man has seen or can see God; yet God is the great Giver of every thing that is good, and exercises his power in behalf of his creatures. In God’s due time “every eye” will discern the presence of Christ Jesus, but only those who partake of the spirit resurrection will “see him as he is”. Such ones are “sown a natural body”, and “raised a spiritual body”. (1 John 3: 2 ; 1 Cor. 15 -44) All members of the spirit-begotten “new creation” will be with the Lord ultimately in heaven; therefore they will see him as he is, because they will be like him. (2 Pet. 1:4) To his apostles, who form a part of the new creation, Jesus said: “I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.”—John 14:3.
It is manifest from these scriptures, and in the light of reason, that the second coming of the Lord does not mean that he appears as a man and walks about amidst the people as he did when he was on earth as a man. His second coming or presence has to do with the affairs of men, which he takes charge of and will control for the good of mankind. As Satan the Devil has been the invisible overlord of the world for many centuries, even so Christ shall be the invisible Overlord of the-new world after ousting Satan; and although invisible to human eyes Christ Jesus shall control the affairs of the new world, which will be the organization of mankind under the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God.
In many places in the Authorized Version Bible referring to the second coming of the Lord the word in the original Greek text translated “coming” in English is properly translated “presence”. This Greek word parousia (pronounced par-oo-see'-ah) means presence and refers to the invisible presence of the Lord. It is used in the following Bible texts:
“Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming [parousia; presence], and of the end of the world.”—Matt. 24: 3.
“As the days of No'e were, so shall also the coming [presence] of the Son of man be.”—Matt. 24: 37, 39.
“Even so in Christ shall all be made alive But every
August 15,1940
WATCHTOWER.
253
man in his own order: Christ the firstfruits; afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming [presence].”—1 Cor, 15: 22, 23.
“Are not even ye, before our Lord Jesus at his coming [presence]?”—1 Thess. 2:19, American Revised Version.
“To the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming [presence] of our Lord Jesus Christ.”—1 Thess. 3:13.
“We which are alive, and remain unto the coming [presence] of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep. . . . The dead in Christ shall rise first.”—1 Thess. 4:15,16.
“I pray God your [the church’s] whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming [presence] of our Lord Jesus Christ.”—1 Thess. 5: 23.
“Now we beseech you, brethren, by, the coming [presence] of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him.”—2 Thess. 2:1.
“Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming [presence] of the Lord . . . for the coming [presence] of the Lord draweth nigh.”—Jas. 5: 7, 8.
“There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming [presence] 1”—2 Pet. 3:3,4.
Paul, exhorting the Christians to faithfulness, wrote: “Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence [parousia] only, but now much more in my absence [apoiwia], work out your own salvation with fear and1 trembling.” (Phil. 2:12) “For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful; but his bodily presence [parousiu] is weak, and his speech contemptible.”—2 Cor. 10:10.
When Jesus ascended on high forty days after his resurrection and his disciples stood gazing upward as he disappeared, the angel of the Lord standing by said to them: “This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner [not, in like body] as ye have seen him go into heaven.” (Acts 1:11) The emphasis here must be on the words “in like manner”. It was only a small number of people who saw the Lord ascend. It is only a small number who discern his presence for some time after his return until the battle of Armageddon. The manner of his going or being taken away was quiet, without observation, except by a few, and the testimony of these witnesses was preserved to prove that he did' ascend on high. His return is also quiet and unobserved by the eyes of the world. Those watching for his coming would necessarily be the first to observe his invisible presence. This is in exact harmony with what the apostle Paul wrote: “For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.” (1 Thess. 5r2; see also 2 Peter 3:10; Revelation 16:15; 3: 3; and Matthew 24: 43) A thief comes usually in the night-time when all are asleep, and none see him except those who are watching or those who may be awakened by his presence. Even so the Lord comes in the night-time of the end of Satan’s world, just before the dawn of the new day; and none discern his presence except those who watch and who have the eye of faith enlightened by God’s fulfilled Word.
Concerning his coming Jesus warned his followers that false teachers would arise and attempt to show that Christ
is in the desert or in the secret chambers, as spiritists claim they have come in contact with him; but that his followers should give no heed to such advice. “For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, so shall also the coming [parousia] of the Son of man be.”— Matt. 24:26, 27.
Jesus’ words cannot mean that zigzag lightning comes always out of the east and shines unto the west and that this represents his coming. What his words really mean is that the lightnings come or appear in one part of the heavens and are seen by persons at different points and that therefore the lightning is not confined to a local place. It is seen by those who are watching. The’statement recorded by Luke concerning the same thing supports this view: “For as the lightning, that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven, shineth unto the other part under heaven ; so shall also the Son of man be in his day.”—Luke ¥1: 24.
Lightning originates with Jehovah, says Jeremiah 10:13. Just so all light upon the divine purpose originates with Jehovah. When he reveals his light to his anointed church he does so through the Head of his organization, Christ Jesus. No human is able to make lightning. Likewise no human is able to point to the fact that Christ Jesus is at some local spot on earth. His presence is revealed to those of God’s anointed remnant and their earthly companions of good will, all of whom look for the manifestation of his presence. In Matthew 24:27, “coming” specifically refers to his coming to the temple and his presence there for judgment of the “house of God”, which house is composed of God’s anointed and faithful ones and is not a material house of brick, wood or stone. (Mal. 3:1-3; 1 Pet. 4:17) Then Christ Jesus judges and disposes of the professed house of God, “organized religion” of “Christendom”, which is in fact a part of the Devil’s organization. That judgment is now in progress, which proves that the Lord has come and is at the temple. The coming of the Lord to his temple is soon to be followed by a time of great distress upon earth, culminating in Armageddon, which will destroy Satan’s organization.—See Revelation 16: 15,16.
Will Jesus be bodily present at the earth at that battle of Armageddon? It would be presumptuous positively to say one way or another, because we do not know. That he could be bodily present and directing the fight at the earth is certain, and it is also certain that he could direct it from heaven. If a general can direct other soldiers and be within fifty yards of them, surely Christ Jesus with unlimited power could direct his faithful angelic host regardless of space. He can manifest his presence in all parts of the earth, whether his glorious body be in heaven or at the earth. Armageddon is God’s fight. Christ Jesus will be the chief One in that battle leading Jehovah’s hosts. It is hardly reasonable to conclude that Jehovah will leave his throne in heaven and come to earth during that great battle. The same argument must be true with reference to Jesus. Armageddon will bring knowledge to all creation that Jehovah is God and Jesus is King of kings. The people of earth will not see Christ Jesus with human eyes; yet they will discern his presence because there will be a great demonstration of power, causing many to mourn.
BITTERNESS AGAINST RELIGION
RELIGIONISTS of the Roman Empire caused the aged man John to be banished to that Devil’s Island of ancient times, Patmos. And why? The exile himself tells his brethren: “I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God [Jehovah], and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.” (Rev. 1:9) It was because John was an active witness of Jehovah. Therefore John pictured the remnant of Jehovah’s anointed witnesses on earth today. The apocalyptic vision of “things which must shortly come to pass” which was given in symbol to John is now being fulfilled, and the modern-day John class see the fulfillment of the vision and, like John of old, bear witness thereto. John’s exile on the prison isle did not put a finish to his witnessing; neither did the World War persecutions culminating in A.D. 1918 write the finis to the witnessing of Jehovah’s servants.
Christ Jesus, “The Faithful and True Witness,” is Jehovah’s chief angel or deputy who is sent in due time to Jehovah’s spiritual temple. Malachi 3:1 foretold this event: “Behold I send my angel, and he shall prepare the way before my face. And presently the Lord, whom you seek, and the angel of the testament, whom you desire, shall come to his temple. Behold he cometh, saitli the Lord of hosts.” (Catholic Douay Version) The apostle John describes the coming of this mighty Deputy of Jehovah God thus: “And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillais of fire: and he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth, and cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: . . . And tb.e angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever and ever [Jehovah], who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time [delay] no longer”—Rev 10:1-6.
The vision discloses Christ Jesus, the mighty angel, with the “little book open” in his hand, and John (picturing Jehovah’s servant class) heard a voice: “And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.” (Rev. 10:8) The “little book” manifestly is the revelation cf God’s will and purposes concerning his people. John the servant of the Lord responded: “And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.” (Verse 9) Thus the modern-day John or servant class are shown going to the Lord at his temple and asking for the book, which is delivered to them and they are told to “eat it”. The eating would signify the building up of their mind by acquiring a knowledge of Jehovah’s purpose concerning his Theocratic Government and against the enemies thereof, and by their performance of the privileges of service that would come to them by virtue of receiving that knowledge.
254
The Head of God’s servant class, Christ Jesus, now speaks for Jehovah, and therefore it was a voice from heaven, and he says to God’s people: “Gather yourselves unto me, ye my men of lovingkindness, who have solemnized my covenant over sacrifice.” (Ps. 50: 5, Rotherham) At the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple in A.D. 1918 the time had come for the remnant class to receive the official portfolio of service which is outlined in the volume of the “little book”. They must now take this book and eat it, and thereby learn God’s purposes concerning them. They must now organize for service, and this they began to do in A.D. 1919.
By his prophet Ezekiel God had said: “Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house [‘Christendom’] : open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee. . . . Eat that thou findest: eat this roll [volume or book], and go speak unto the house of Israel [all spiritual Israelites and those professing to be such]. So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll.” (Ezek. 2:8-10; 3: 1,2) This is undoubtedly addressed prophetically to God’s faithful people now on earth. As pictured at Revelation 3:20, the Lord Jesus knocked at the dcoc and those composing the servant class on earth opened and asked for service as witnesses of Jehovah and it was given to them. (Matt. 7 : 7) The “little book” which John saw held in the hand of the angel, being tb.e same as the “roll” described by the prophet Ezekiel, is or contains the purposes of Jehovah, which have long been a secret or mystery, which mystery is now finished and is being made known to his faithful people. (Rev. 10:7) Their eating of that little book or roll is the revelation of Jehovah’s hidden purpbses to them, making known to the faithful ones what God requires them to do.
John (the servant ciass) ate the little book as commanded, and of this he writes: “And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.” (Rev. 10:10,11) (See also Ezekiel 3:3-7.) The servant class were hungry for more spiritual food as a result of the World War experiences, and every bit of the food received was sweet, and is sweet, to them “To the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.” (Prov. 27.7) The bitterness has purgative properties.
Coming to his temple, the Lord enlightened the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses by feeding them upon the Word of truth, and this was sweet to tliem. But, as The Revelation foretold, it becomes bitter to the belly. It fills God’s servant class with bitter indignation against Satan’s organization, the visible part thereof on earth being composed of religion, commercialism and politics. The faithful servant class, by eating the “little book” or “roll”, receive heavenly wisdom, which is sweet to them. The heavenly Father’s admonition to his house of sons is: “My son, eat thou honey, because it is good; and the honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste: so shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul: when thou hast found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall not be cut off.” (Prov. 24:13,14) Thus it is thov.n that the eating of this book blings kno wedge and heavenly wisdom.
Properly received, this knowledge has a purgative or purify mg effect. The Lord Jesus, on coming to the temple,
August 15,1940
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
253
sits in judgment there to purge those in line for service at the temple, that is, to “purify the sons of Levi”, to the end that these approved might offer an acceptable sacrifice unto God. (Mal. 3:2,3) No longer would these faithful ones make “their belly” or selfishness their god. (See Philip-pians 3:19; Romans 16: 18.) Seeing their privileges, they become wholly and completely devoted to God and to his service, and the prophet has put in their mouths the words: “How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth1” (Ps 119:103) “Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, 0 Lord God [Jehovah] of hosts.”—Jer. 15:16.
The knowledge and heavenly wisdom received from feeding on God’s revealed purposes disclosed to the faithful ones that they were commissioned to go forth as God’s witnesses They came to know what Satan had been doing and is doing by and through his agencies, particularly the religionists under the lead of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and this caused them to be righteously indignant. Jeremiah 15: 17 foretold this: “I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone, because of thy hand; for thou hast filled me with indignation.”
The bitter indignation, however, did not at all take away the sweetness and the joy of serving the Lord. This knowledge and wisdom disclosed to the servant class their privilege of going forth as God’s witnesses. Doing so in obedience to the Lord’s commandments has brought bitter trials upon them; but in such tribulation they rejoice, because such is an evidence or proof of God’s approval. “And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience ; and patience, experience ; and experience, hope; and hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy [spirit], which is given unto us.” (Rom. 5:3-5) These witnesses rejoice to have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name under any and all conditions that the Lord is pleased to have come to pass.
To the “faithful servant” class the Lord Jehovah says: “I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.” (Isa. 51:16) The message of the Lord he puts in the mouth of his “servant” not merely to feed upon for his own benefit, but that it might be used in accordance with God’s commandments by proclaiming it to others. Jehovah made a prophetic example with the prophet Ezekiel, who says: “Moreover, he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel. So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll. And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat. and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.” (Ezek. 3:1-3) These words picture the Lord’s faithful people who were hungry for a further revelation of his Word, whom the Lord Jesus began to feed when he came to the temple of God. It took some time to fill them up and for them to digest the food before they were ready for the fight against religion or demonism, and when the time came they were made strong in the Lord and went
forth in obedience to his commandments. Thus is shown God’s provision for and his preparation of his people for a campaign that shortly thereafter began, and that is now in progress, the purpose of which is to proclaim Jehovah’s name, and his King and Theocratic Government, and to announce the day of God's vengeance against the enemy at the battle of Armageddon.
From A D. 1918 to the fall of 1919 Jehovah’s servant class was in exile, and therefore in silence as respects the bold and fearless public proclamation of Jehovah’s kingdom by Christ Jesus. This was symbolized by John on the isle of Patmos. The servant class must be released from such exile in order to carry out the commandments prophesied by Jesus concerning the preaching of “this gospel of the kingdom”. (Matt. 24:14) Such release came in 1919. Hence the servant class, pictured by John, is told: “Thou must prophesy again before [or, (lioth.) against| many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.” (Rev 10-11) The indisputable facts show that from and after A D. 1919 marks the beginning and carrying forward of the witness work which was foreshadowed by the fearless testimony work of the prophet Elisha. (1 Ki. 19:16-19 ; 2 Ki 6 : 12-22) Until the year 1922 the organization of the Theocratic ambassadors of Jehovah was progressing and the work was going forward.
In 1922 the Lord’s remnant of faithful witnesses were permitted to have an understanding of Isaiah’s prophecy, chapter six, wherein Jehovah, as represented by his mighty Angel, Christ Jesus, is discerned in his temple, and then it was clearly seen by the remnant that there must thereafter be a great witness work concerning God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus, The Theocracy. In that prophetic picture Isaiah represents the Lord’s remnant or servant class, and concerning the witness work that is to be done the servant asks the question: “How long?” And he is answered: “Until the cities [of the modern unfaithful Jerusalem, or ‘Christendom’] be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate ” (Isaiah 6: 11) The prophet Isaiah himself did not live to see the destruction of the city of Jerusalem back there, therefore these prophetic words of the Lord must apply to God’s servant class whom Isaiah pictured, and this proves that the servant class must continue and the witness to the name of Jehovah must go on until Armageddon, when the modern unfaithful Jerusalem, or “Christendom”, shall be destroyed and the name of Jehovah shall be complete!) \ indicated This should not only encourage, but thrill the servant class of Jehovah God to go faithfully on with the work until 11 is due time to finish it. Also, in these last days, Jehovah hies given the servant class a great multitude of “companions” in that work, to wit, the earthly people of good will, the Lord’s “other sheep”, whom Christ Jesus the Good Shepherd now gathers to the Lord’s fold ; and, together, all these have risen up in battle against the enemy organization of religion or demonism. When Jehovah’s people sec the hideousness and wickedness of Satan’s organization these go in the heat of the spirit and with bitterness against the enemy, because the enemy is God’s enemy. Such is not a malicious hatred, of course, but is a sincere and earnest desire to see the enemy and his organization destroyed that Jehovah’s name might be exalted.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
RELIGIOUS PRESSURE FAILS IN WASHINGTON ZONE 2
“This was the largest and best-organized zone assembly we have had to date in this zone. Witnesses from outside companies responded well to the street work with the magazines. There were 40 publishers on the streets of Yakima between 1 and 4:30 p.m. distributing magazines. Pressure was brought upon the police, and they did all they could in endeavor to have us cease our work on the streets. The sergeant of the police even came up to the hall where we met about 3:30 and asked us to call in the folks off the streets or they would arrest them. The police were told we were within our rights and if they wished to arrest us they would have to take the responsibility. The sergeant happened to be one of the ‘big shots’ in the Knights of Columbus of Yakima, so he did his best to bluff us. No arrests were made, and the Yakima company have promised to follow up in the street work with the magazines from now on.”
JONADAB PIONEERS IN WASHINGTON STATE
A company servant writes: “Send me 7 application blanks for pioneer service, as there are 5 or 6 more that will want to become pioneers and will be ready by the time we get the blanks. Sunday and Monday we made arrangements to start 14 Model Study meetings in two of the 172 islands of San Juan county, and from 2 to 8 attend each study. Some followed some of the workers a whole block with tears in their eyes, they were so glad we were going to start study where they could attend. We asked some if they would take their cars and pick up others and take them to study, and not one but said he would. This will make 14 pioneers from our little company [of 50 publishers] in two years. In one town the mayor came and told us we would have to stop our sound-car because it was disturbing the people. I asked for name and address of the one making complaint, so we could make a record of why we had to stop. A blank look came on his face. Then he shouted: ‘My wife, for one I’ My answer was: ‘Your wife cannot hear this; we are too far away.’ Then he shouted: ‘You stop this machine or I will get the police and have you arrested!’ and away he went. The witness helping me with sound-car, putting on records, said: ‘Shall I put this one on?’ ‘Sure!’ We kept right on, and we never saw mayor or policeman any more at all. . . . Who said, ‘Where are the great multitude’? Twelve of these 14 pioneers are Jonadabs.”
WATCHTOWER SLOGANS VS. RELIGIOUS ANNOUNCEMENTS
“Two publishers for The Theocracy on a street corner, magazines in hand. Near by a Salvation Army worker with the ‘War Cry’ magazine. He read the sign advertising The Watchtower and Consolation and in a dull voice said, ‘War fry' War Cry!’ Then a joyful voice by one of the publishers: ‘Read about The Theocracy, The Government of Peace!’ ‘War Cry! War Cry!’ with his face getting red. Then the next joyous voice: ‘Read The Watchtower; learn about the snare'of religion; uncensored news; 5 cents a copy!’ ‘I’ll take one,’ saith the Salvation Army man. Soundear goes down the street announcing the Watchtower magazine, to aid the publishers on the street. Two nuns on hearing turned to look at each other so quickly they almost bumped heads.”
BUSINESS MEN'S ROUTE
Minnesota: “In carrying on the street distribution of the magazines I have as I went up and down the street or around the block stopped in at those business places where there were no customers waiting and placed a Watchtower or Consolation with the head of the business, and this has resulted in a number of placements. So am passing this information on, thinking that some of the publishers may have overlooked this additional opportunity to distribute the magazines. It would seem to me that those publishers who are assigned business blocks or streets for work each Saturday could work up a business route in their individual blocks as well as take care of the street distribution.”
A pioneer (London, England) writes: “I was wearing my magazine bag and carrying my phonograph. I stopped outside a hairdressing salon to see if there was a private way to flats above the shop. A man came out of the salon, looked at the magazine bag, and came over to me. He asked if I had a Watchtower. I showed him the magazine and told him about the subscription. He took out 6/-, took the subscription offer, and away he went. I learned he had previously had a Watchtower copy off the pavement witnessing and that he had enjoyed it. A back-call has been arranged.”
SOFT ANSWER TURNS AWAY WRATH ON A BACK-CALL
“A man answered the door. After I had told him my mission, he became furious and started using slanderous language, stating we were Communists, traitors, Nazis, and worse than rats; further, we should be kicked out of the country. He then enumerated various newspapers from which he had read the Supreme Court’s decision and stated that any man that would not salute the American flag should be killed or kicked out. There was murder in his eyes, and he proceeded to kick me out I asked the man to be gracious and permit me to explain why our people will not salute a flag. He stated he was going to go into the house and bring a flag, and if I refused to salute, he would kill me. By Jehovah’s grace, I started to explain the reason why Jehovah’s witnesses would not salute was that they had covenanted to do Jehovah’s will and consecrated their life to the Most High, and if they would violate their covenant with Jehovah it would mean eternal death After spending almost an hour with the man, explaining to him how Daniel and the faithful Hebrews refused to bow down, before I was through with the man he subscribed for The Watchtower and he changed his attitude. I promised to call back.”
FROM A GOOD-WILL NAME FROM THE SOCIETY
“Several weeks ago I called and arranged for a Model Study, and had three. Then invited those attending to go into service with me. Eight went out that day. Then we took steps to start a company in that town The zone servant was called in and it resulted in a company of twelve publishers. That was some time ago. Several days ago I was back in the town and called on a publisher. She said she was considering the ‘Pioneers’ article in the Informant. Another publisher said his family of five were going to be immersed at our zone assembly, as they were all serving Jehovah and his King Christ Jesus. All this from an interested person and a ‘Good Will’ slip from the Society.”
25fi
SfEe WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
officers
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgii, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Loid Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun ; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, paities, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ............... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W„ Australia
South African .................Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal ‘blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T , under the Act of March 3, ISrt).
“CHALLENGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The above period embraces the entire month of October and also all the earth. Its name refers to Jehovah’s challenge to the opposing nations for a showdown fight. That challenge is expressed, without mmcing any words, in the feature publication which will be circulated during this period, to wit, the new book Religion, on a contribution of 25c. The testimony work now requires haste, and all who desire to have part in delivering the “challenge” during this period will promptly take it under consideration as to supplies, territory, procedure, etc Any Watchtower leaders desiring to get in touch with the nearest company organized for field service should at once write us or our branch office for references. Each one’s full report of activities is expected at the close of the month for the compilation of a world report.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock a m., Tuesday, October 1, 1940, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
“RELIGION”
With especial pleasure we announce the new book Religion, released by its author, Judge Rutherford, at the recent Theocratic convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. It offers the indisputable evidence, both Scriptural and factual, that religion is opposed to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and is therefore the mortal enemy of man, and that Christianity is the only way of escape for people of good will. The book contains 384 pages, including color-illustrations, and a valuable reference index, all bound within beautifully embossed covers in a refreshing green eloth and gold-stamped. You will prize the author’s edition, which contains an autograph of a letter in his own handwriting addressed to the Theocratic ambassadors. This special edition is limited and may be had on a contribution of 50c per copy Those in organized companies may combine their individual orders and send them through the local company servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 6: “‘Times and Seasons’” (Part 3), fl 1-24 inclusive, The Watchtower September 1, 1940.
Week of October 13: “‘Times and Seasons’” (Part 3), fl 25-54 inclusive, The Watchtower September 1, 1940.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	September 1, 1940	No. 17
'TIMES AND SEASONS’
PART 3
"Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel."—Ps. 2: 9.
JEHOVAH THE GREAT THEOCRAT has enthroned his King Christ Jesus. He has given to his King all the nations of the earth for a possession. He specifically has commissioned his King to take action against those who have conspired against his anointed witnesses, who have been diligent in giving testimony concerning Jehovah's name and his Theocratic Government. These truths are clearly and forcefully stated in the Second Psalm. These words express Jehovah’s purpose, which purpose is absolutely certain to be carried out, because, God having purposed it, he will certainly do it; and everyone who believes on Jehovah and believes his Word will rely upon it.
2 The religionists and totalitarians not only have conspired against The Theocracy but have at the present time committed many overt acts against Jehovah’s representatives. This they have done within “the times and the seasons”, that is, from the time of the enthronement of Christ Jesus in 1914 until the present hour. Thus they have openly demonstrated their opposition against Jehovah God and his King. The conspirators have repeatedly provoked Jehovah, and now there is rapidly approaching the climax, and their wickedness has become more apparent every day. They have suppressed the kingdom message in almost all the earth, and it appears that within a very short time they will have completely suppressed the witness work. That will mean that Jehovah’s “strange work” is completed according to his will. It will also show that the conspirators have deliberately, and with malice aforethought, performed their wicked part against Jehovah and his witnesses. The closing of the witness work will certainly be the occasion when the religionists and allies will boastfully say: “Peace and safety.” This text, according to other versions, is rendered, “All’s well and all is safe.” (Moffatt) That will be the “sign” or proof positive that Armageddon is about to break. The action of human creatures under the influence of demons follows a like course at all times. Judging the immediate future, therefore, by the past, the
proclamation by the religionists and allies that “all’s well” will be the occasion for them to begin to congratulate and felicitate one another. In the midst of their drunken revelry they will say amongst themselves and to one another: ‘Peace and safety; we are all right now.’ That will be an occasion for feasting amongst them as in the case of Samson, when he was made the object of sport in the temple of Dagon. —Judg. 16: 23-27.
s The apostle Paul, informing the faithful servants of God what to expect, leads up to this climax and tells them, when they see this sign, that is, when the proclamation of peace and safety is being made by the religionists and allies, “then sudden destruction cometh upon them.” This appears to mean that “the battle of that great day of God Almighty” will begin suddenly, like a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. The Greek word here rendered “sudden” is aiphnidios, and means “not apparent from the outward surface of things”. Under the influence and power of the demons, and therefore in darkness as to God’s purpose, the opponents of The Theocratic Government will be taken entirely unawares. The Lord Jesus, speaking to his hearers of that very battle of Armageddon, said: “And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares [suddenly (Diaglott, interlinear)]. For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.” (Luke 21:34-36) Also Jesus said: “Watch ye therefore; for ye know not when the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning; lest coming suddenly, he find you sleeping. And what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch.” —Mark 13:35-37.
* The “drunken” ones are asleep as to what is Jehovah’s purpose. The faithful ones who trust in God will be fully awake and know what is about to come.
259
2G0
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“ That “sudden destruction”, which proceeds from Jehovah God, by his Word is called “his act, his strange act”. (Isa. 28:21) Christ Jesus will execute Jehovah’s judgment because to him is given the authority. (John 5: 27) “And to you who are troubled, rest with us; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.” (2 Thess. 1: 7-10) Thus the Lord discloses to those who believe and obey him what will be the end of the opponents of The Theocratic Government. Jehovah’s enemies will suffer the same fate as that which came upon the firstborn of Egypt.— Heb. 11:28.
6	Armageddon, when once begun, will continue until every part of Satan’s organization is destroyed, and that beyond any hope of possible recovery. “For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.” (Matt. 24:21) That battle will mark the final end of the enemy. In the hour of proud, exulting self-security of the religionists and allies sudden destruction shall come upon them all because of their opposition to the great Theocrat. That “sudden destruction cometh” from Jehovah by Christ Jesus. “There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy.”—Jas. 4:12.
“THEY SHALL KNOW”
7	The Scriptures emphatically declare that “they shall know that 1 am Jehovah”. (Ezek. 35: 15; 3G. 38; 38:23; 39:7, Am. Bev. Ver.) Hence it must be concluded that, when destruction is upon the conspirators, they will know that it is the execution of the judgment of Almighty God against them. The religionists could not well proclaim “Peace and safety” unless they had the co-operation of the political, commercial, judicial and other elements of Satan’s visible organization. Then together they will take bold action against Jehovah’s witnesses and companions. It would seem, therefore, that, when the battle of Armageddon begins, there will be a quick turning of the secular element of Satan’s organization against the clergy, that is, the religious leaders; because it is written: “God hath put [it] in their hearts to fulfil his will.”—Rev. 17:16,17.
4	It is reasonable that Jehovah will cause some supernatural demonstration, striking terror into the minds of the politicians, and commercial and other elements of humankind, and cause them to realize
that they have been woefully deceived by the prognostications of the clergy, their religious leaders; therefore they will turn suddenly upon the religious leaders and destroy them, and thus unseat the old “whore” from their backs. (See Habakkuk 3:14.) A plain and unmistakable picture of such was made when Ammon, Moab and Mount Seir together marched to the assault of the covenant people of Jehovah God at Jerusalem and when the Mount Seir-ites, representing the religionists, were first destroyed, and the others destroyed each other. (See 2 Chronicles 20:20-23; and The Watchtower August 15, 1938.)
boasters
’ The Scriptures say that it is the religious leaders that first begin to brag and swagger about and say “Peace and safety”, and then “sudden destruction cometh upon them”; (according to the Moffatt rendering of the text) ‘destruction comes instant upon them’. The religionists, having reached the high point of their self-security, become reckless in their words and actions. They conclude that by their foul means they have accomplished their objective and that now they are free both from Jehovah’s witnesses and from the wrath of God himself. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, Protestant leaders, and Jewish rabbis, and all like religious chief ones, appear to be included in this class who say to each other: “All’s well now; we have things the way we wish them.’’ It was so in Jerusalem; which pictures what now is about to befall “Christendom”. Without a doubt Jerusalem was a type of “Christendom”, and what God through his prophet Jeremiah uttered concerning Jerusalem and her priests and prophets now applies with stronger force to the reality, that is, the priests and prophets of “Christendom”; as it is written : “For from the least of them even unto the great-est of them every one is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely. They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace ; when there is no peace. Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord.” —Jer. 6:13-15.
10	All fair-minded persons can here well understand that this publication is not for the purpose of holding up individuals to ridicule and scorn. The purpose is to call attention to what Jehovah God declared long ago and what he is certain to perform in completeness in the very near future. This publication of warning is for the benefit of those persons who are of good will toward God, and now published
September 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
261
that they may learn what is the will of God concerning them. When they see the picture or type and then discern the fulfillment at this time, such enables them to determine what is their only proper course. The clergy today wrongfully charge Jehovah’s witnesses with intolerance toward Catholics, Protestants, and Jews. The facts are that Jehovah’s witnesses are intolerant to no one. They hold that every one has the right to freely express himself, and also that the teachings or doctrines put forth by any person or system may be properly and freely criticized. In no other way can the people learn just now which is correct. Jehovah’s witnesses proclaim the truth as it is written in the Scriptures, and which God commands all of his covenant people to proclaim at the present time. Those who have a desire to learn and who therefore have an ear to hear will give heed to what is published. No others will give heed.
11	It is the Lord God who spoke the things below against the religionists that oppose The Theocratic Government. Jehovah’s true servants on earth merely proclaim the message which God himself gives. The nation of Israel fell under the influence and power of the demons. The religious leaders forgot their covenant and their obligation to God and turned to religion. In that they made a picture, and the reality is now being fulfilled by the religionists of “Christendom”. For this reason it is written in the Scriptures that the things that came to pass in connection with the religionists of Jerusalem constitute types or ensamples for the instruction of those now upon the earth. (1 Cor. 10:11; Rom. 15: 4) Let those persons of good will therefore mark well the following texts, which texts of Scripture apply at this time to all those who oppose The Theocratic Government. “Wherefore their way shall b§ unto them as slippery ways in the darkness; they shall be driven on, and fall therein; for I will bring evil upon them, even the • year of their visitation, saith the Lord. And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err. I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing; they commit adultery, and walk in lies; they strengthen also the hands of evil doers, that none doth return from his wickedness; they are all of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the prophets, Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall; for from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the land. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you; they make you vain; they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. They say still unto them that despise me, The Lord hath said, Ye shall
have peace; and they say unto every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.” (Jer. 23:12-17) “Destruction cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be none. Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour shall be upon rumour; then shall they seek a vision of the prophet; but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients. The king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled; I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.” (Ezek. 7 : 25-27) “And mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies; they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord God. Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace, and there was no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered morter; say unto them which daub it with untempered morter, that it shall fall; there shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, 0 great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it. Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it J Therefore thus saith the Lord God, I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones, in my fury, to consume it. So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered morter; and will say unto you, The wall is no more, neither they that daubed it; to wit, the prophets of Israel, which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which see visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith the Lord God.”-Ezek. 13:9-16.
" Jerusalem became idolatrous by adopting the traditions of men and yielding to religion, and in that Jerusalem pictured “Christendom”, which in like manner has become idolatrous at the present time. The leaders in religion of “Christendom”, being now under the influence and power of the demons, are in a condition exactly like that which existed in Jerusalem immediately before its destruction. God caused to be written concerning idolatrous Jerusalem what should suddenly come upon her, and this foretells what shall suddenly come upon “Christendom”. “Christendom” is a burden to all people that hold fast to her religious doctrines and practices.
262
3Te WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
TRAVAIL
” The World War brought great pains upon “Christendom” likened unto the beginning of birth pains, concerning which the Lord Jesus said: “All these are the beginning of sorrows.” (Matt. 24:8; Mark 13: 8, margin) For four years the World War raged; then the Lord cut short those pains in order that “this gospel of the kingdom” might be preached to the people before the final end. (Matt. 24:14, 21, 22) The period of time following 1918 until Armageddon is a period in which the Lord uses his witnesses to gather unto himself his “other sheep” that shall form the “great multitude”. (Rev. 7:9-17) When Armageddon begins, that trouble, declare the Scriptures, will be like “travail upon a woman with child”. That travail shall be far worse than spiritual Jacob’s trouble in 1917 and 1918. During 1917 and 1918 particularly God’s covenant people on earth, pictured by “Jacob”, endured great affliction. God’s covenant people were saved out of that trouble, and concerning that trouble it is written: “Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child! wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness! Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it [in the previous history of spiritual Israel]; it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he [Jehovah’s faithful servants, composing the ‘faithful and wise servant’ class] shall be saved out of it.” —Jer. 30: 6, 7.
14	In “Christendom’s” approaching great trouble, which is called travail as of a woman giving birth, “Christendom” will not be saved out of that, but shall die with no possible hope of ever being revived. By way of illustrating such trouble Jesus said: “A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.”—John 16: 21.
1S	When the battle of Armageddon begins the cries of those who have opposed The Theocracy will be like the travail of a woman in the death throes. (Isa. 42:14) The result will be, as stated at Genesis 35:16-18: “And they journeyed from Beth-el; and there was but a little way to come to Ephrath; and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour. And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also. And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died,) that she called his name Ben-oni; but his father called him Benjamin.” Another apt illustration is found at 1 Samuel 4:19, 20 concerning the daughter-in-law of Eli. She was with child and about to be delivered, and when she heard of the battle of Shiloh and the result she “travailed; for her pains came upon her”, and she died. That was
a picture of Jehovah’s “strange act”, which seemed strange to Israel in that Jehovah God would permit the Philistines to be victorious in a war with Israel. There Israel pictured unfaithful “Christendom” because Israel had been unfaithful, and the Philistines were God’s executioners. At Armageddon there wil_l be no “twilight sleep” to benumb the pains of “Christendom” giving birth to what she had hoped to be her own government. Her pain will end in her complete destruction. “Christendom’s” degeneracy will make her pains all the more intense. This is fully supported by the words of the text: “And they shall not escape.” (1 Thess. 5: 3) The word “not” here used translates the double negative in the Greek, and hence the Revised Version and Rotherham render it in this manner: “In no wise shall they escape.” According to the Diaglott: “They shall by no means escape.” When the religionists begin to sing, felicitate and hail each other as having accomplished their purpose, and when they say to each other, “Now we are all fixed, we are in peace and safety,” sudden destruction shall fall upon them from the hand of the Lord, and by no means can they possibly escape.
18	All totalitarian rulers and religious supporters are enemies of The Theocratic Government. None of the enemies of God shall escape, because he will get all of them. Armageddon will be a clean-up of everything that has opposed Jehovah in the establishment of his government of righteousness. The hand of the Lord will not miss any of the enemies, no matter where they seek to hide: “Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies; thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee.”—Ps. 21:8.
” The clergy of various religious organizations have assumed the position of shepherds of their respective flocks, and they have readily and gladly answered to the title of shepherd or pastor. They have made the political and commercial prominent men the principal ones of their respective flocks, and con cerning all of these, when Armageddon is on, the Lord through the prophet Jeremiah says: “And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.” (Jer. 25: 35) That means complete destruction of all opponents of The Theocracy.
11 The following scripture written long ago is clearly appropriately applied to the day of Armageddon : “I saw the Lord standing upon the altar [place of ‘Christendom’s’ false or demon worship]; and he said, Smite the lintel of the door [entrance into ‘Christendom’], that the posts [(Revised Version) thresholds; the way or path of the clergy] may shake; and cut them in the head, all of them [(Revised Version) and break them in pieces on the head of all of them]; and I will slay the last of them with the sword; he that fleeth of them shall not flee away [escape (R.J7.)], and he that escapeth of them shall
September 1,1940
WATCHTOWER
263
not be delivered. Though they dig into hell [Sheol; that is, dig holes in the earth to shield them from the bombs of airplanes and gas attacks], thence shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to heaven [take to the air in planes to escape from the trouble], thence will I bring them down; and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel [rocky caves in the mountains], I will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea [in submarine boats], thence will I command the serpent [the bringer of evil and calamity], and he shall bite them [destroy them]; and though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I command the sword [Christ, the Executioner of Jehovah's commands], and it shall slay them; and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.”—Amos 9:1-4.
10 Again God caused his same prophet to write concerning the opponents of The Theocracy : ‘‘Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver himself; neither shall he stand that handleth the bow; and he that is swift of foot shall not deliver himself; neither shall he that rideth the horse deliver himself. And he that is courageous among the mighty shall flee away naked [the shameful coward] in that day, saith the Lord.”—Amos 2: 14-16.
20	Neither Gog, nor Hitler, nor any other leaders of the opponents of The Theocracy will escape the wrath of Almighty God. Jehovah’s Executive Officer will strike down all the opponents. God’s wrath will be upon the prince of darkness and all the demons (Eph. 6 :12), and upon all human creation that holds to or remains under the influence and power of the demons. All such are in darkness as to the purpose of Jehovah, and all are openly opposed to The Theocratic Government ; all of such are enemies of Jehovah God, and all shall perish. That battle will mark the final end of wickedness. Not one of the wicked will find the way of escape.
LIGHT
21	“Light is sown for the righteous.” Righteousness is given only to those who are fully trusting Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, and who continue to devote themselves entirely to The Theocracy. All such love Jehovah God and joyfully serve him. For the comfort and hope of those faithful servants Jehovah has caused to be written these words: “Ye that love the Lord, hate evil; he preserveth the souls of his saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.” —Ps. 97 :10-12.
22	Now the entire world lies in the wicked one. (1 John 5: 19, A.R.I7.) The faithful servants of Jehovah are no part of this wicked world. (John 15: 19) Darkness covers the earth, the ruling elements, and gross darkness the people, who follow the worldly leaders. (Isa. 60:2) In contrast to those who are held in chains of darkness the apostle says to those who are the faithful anointed servants of the Lord Jesus words of consolation: “But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief.”—1 Thess. 5:4.
” These words of the apostle apply to the remnant now on the earth and who remain true and steadfast in their devotion to God. These are the ones mentioned in the preceding chapter by the apostle in these words: “We which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord . . . Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord.”—1 Thess. 4:15,17.
24	The ones here who are with the Lord are the ones who are in the temple and therefore in the light, and since the coming of the Lord to the temple the light of God shines upon Christ Jesus at the temple and that light upon Christ Jesus is reflected upon those of the temple company. (Rev. 11:19) All who remain in the temple are in the light and are duly informed of God’s purpose. All who flee to Jehovah’s organization under Christ receive light and protection if they continue faithful in their devotion to The Theocracy and in obedience to the rules thereof. Thus the Lord has given assurance to the remnant and to their companions of his protection and blessing upon them during the period of the expression of his wrath.
25	It was in 1926 that the Lord began the pouring out of the fifth vial upon the city of the wicked organizations that rule the world, and concerning which it is written: “And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.” (Rev. 16: 10,11) The earthly, religious leaders have been in darkness since, and they continue to blaspheme the name of Jehovah God by claiming that they will rule the earth instead of the great Theocrat through Christ Jesus.
26	Since 1918 Jehovah’s great ‘Elect Servant’, Christ Jesus, has brought the faithful out of darkness and into the full light and has used them to proclaim “this gospel of the kingdom” and to declare the name of the Most High. Those persons in the religious organizations who desire righteousness, and who have come in contact with this kingdom message and heard it and believed it, have fled to the Lord;
264
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and concerning them it is written: “To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.” (Isa. 42:7) The Lord has said to those thus held in prison by the religious institutions: “Go forth; and to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves.” (Isa. 49: 9) Until 1918 the fully consecrated were in a large degree held as prisoners by religionists and they were in a measure of darkness, but then when the Lord came to his temple he brought these faithful ones out of darkness into the marvelous light. (1 Pet. 2:9) “Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son.” (Col. 1:13) All such faithful ones who continue in the light must continue to show forth the praises of Jehovah God and his King. “God is light, and ... if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship,” partnership, with him and with one another; fellowship with God and Christ and with all the members of Zion. (1 John 1:5-7) This fellowship or partnership means that all of the remnant are walking obediently with their God.
27	All those who are of the light, and who continue in the light, will not be in doubt as to what is the purpose of Jehovah; hence the apostle adds: “Ye . . . are not in darkness that that day should overtake you as a thief.” At the beginning of the “day of the Lord” that day did come upon them as a thief, and it was not until 1922 that these faithful ones knew the Lord had come to his temple, but there is no need now for them to be in darkness in that part of “the day” when “the sign” is made manifest. When that sign does clearly appear to the faithful, and sudden destruction comes upon the enemy, no one who tells the truth will be in doubt. At the climax of the day of the Lord the faithful are not deceived by the religionists’ cry of “Peace and safety”, nor are they in darkness, and that time of “the day” does not come upon them as a thief. They see it clearly. According to Rotherham this is the meaning of the text: “That the day upon you as upon thieves should lay hold.”
28	The practice of thieves is to come in the night, when darkness envelopes everything. God’s law is that if the thief is caught breaking up or into the house in the nighttime he may be killed with impunity and without violating the everlasting covenant. (Ex. 22: 2) Mark how this law of God applies to the opposers of The Theocracy. The religious leaders and the principal ones of their flock, and including the “evil servant”, are enveloped in gross darkness, and in the darkness they attempt to steal the peoples’ devotion, faith, worship and service from the Lord God and cause the people to follow men as leaders, and to that end they cry out: “Peace
and safety!” That cry is false. Immediately then they are slain by the hand of the Lord. First there comes upon them the judgment or “curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth; for everyone that stealeth shall be cut off”; and “it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name”.—Zech. 5: 1-4.
28	This judgment, long ago entered, will be executed at Armageddon. The thieves thus breaking in the great Executioner, Christ Jesus, will destroy. Note that the scripture above quoted from Zechariah 5 uses these words: “Him that sweareth falsely by my name.” That could mean none other than the “evil servant”, that is, those who once made a covenant with God to do his will and who have since violated that covenant by turning to the world and against God and joining with other religionists to oppose The Theocratic Government and to aid the religionists in stealing the devotion of the people away from Jehovah. That is exactly what the “evil servant” is now engaged in and has been for a time, and, addressing them, Jehovah by his prophet says: “When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and hast been partaker with adulterers. Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue fram-eth deceit. Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother’s son.” —Ps. 50:18-20.
80	Those who were once enlightened but who became unfaithful and have since consorted with religionists have observed the religious leaders stealing the people away from The Theocratic Government and join such thieves in saying: “Where is there any evidence of The Theocracy?”
81	This they have done instead of giving the alarm against the thief. They have therefore become partakers with the thieves. All the thieves who attempt to steal the people away from The Theocratic Government willfully and deliberately violate God’s law, and, while in the act of stealing, Jehovah, by his Executioner Christ Jesus, slays them. Sudden destruction comes upon them, and no one shall find a way of escape.
82	Is there any reason or excuse for anyone of the faithful remnant to now be in doubt about the purpose of Jehovah? Not the slightest. The apostle emphasizes this fact by saying: “Ye are all the children of light [ (R.V.) For ye are all sons of light], and the children of the day; we are not of the night, nor of darkness.” (1 Thess. 5: 5) “God is light, and in him [there] is no darkness.” He is “the Father of lights”. (Jas. 1:17) By Zion, his “woman” (organization), God has brought forth and acknowledged as his sons the members of the temple company and these are ‘all taught of God’. (Isa. 54:13; John 6:46) Hence such are not in the darkness, but are the sons of God,
September 1,1940
SEe WATCHTOWER.
265
the sons of light. To such Jehovah reveals his light and makes known to them in this time of darkness his purpose and what is his immediate purpose concerning the wicked.
33	With the coming of the day of the Lord great darkness came upon the religionists and political leaders. They had looked upon the earth and said in substance: “This earth is ours, and we will take it and hold it for ourselves.”
54	Religionists mixed up with the political, dictatorial selfish leaders, and are therefore guilty, according to the Scriptures, of spiritual adultery. (Jas. 4: 4) Concerning spiritual thieves and drunkards the Lord says: “They are of those that rebel against the light; they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof. The murderer rising with the light killeth the poor and needy, and in the night is as a thief. The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me; and disguiseth his face. In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for themselvbs in the daytime; they know not the light. For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death; if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.” (Job 24:13-17) Such persons, being extremely selfish, hate The Theocratic Government, and they love darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil.—John 3:19.
“THE SIGN” NEAR
35	All those of the faithful remnant now clearly see that religion is the instrument by which Satan has blinded the leaders and the people and has caught them all in his snare. They see that all nations have fallen under the influence and power of demons, Satan being the chief thereof, and for that reason all such are against God and against his King and they are against everyone who announces The Theocratic Government. There cannot be the slightest doubt that the nations have suppressed the truth of and concerning The Theocracy and have restrained the witnesses of Jehovah, and they have done so at the command of Satan and his horde of demons. Almost all the countries of Europe have fallen under the power of the totalitarian rule. The spirit of arbitrary rule is rampant in every part of the earth. That arbitrary totalitarian rule is against The Theocratic Government and violently opposes all who proclaim Jehovah and his King. What does it mean? It is “the sign” that Satan with his horde of unclean spirits has gathered the nations for “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”, and now only do we await the “sign” when the battle shall begin.
36	The witness work for The Theocracy appears to be about done in most of the countries of “Christendom”. This does not disturb the faithful servants of Jehovah God, for the reason that they know that the
witness work is God’s work, “his strange work,” and that it must come to a close before God’s “strange act” begins. They also know that it could not come to a close until God’s due time. Jehovah, by his Servant and Vindicator, Christ Jesus, is carrying out Jehovah’s purpose. He makes no mistakes. Nothing can come to pass without the permission of God and his King. Therefore we know that all things are working together for-good to the faithful who love God and who are called according to his purpose. (Rom. 8: 28) The faithful followers of Christ Jesus, therefore, rest in peace of mind, anxiously and watchfully waiting for the appearance of the sign for the battle to begin.
3T Many of the nations of earth are now at war. But that war is not a part of the battle of Armageddon. When “the battle of that great day of God Almighty” begins the nations of the earth will be done. It is quite probably before that time that the nations will have patched up some kind of peace arrangement amongst themselves. Now the totalitarian rule has suppressed the Theocratic message, and it should be expected that when they quit fighting amongst themselves all the totalitarian rulers will turn their attention to the complete suppression of everything pertaining to The Theocratic Government.
38	What, then, does it mean that The Theocratic Government is now suppressed in many nations? It means that the hour is rapidly approaching when the “sign” of Armageddon will be clearly revealed and ail who are on the side of Jehovah will see and appreciate it. That “sign” will be the announcement “Peace and safety”; which sign cannot fully appear as long as this world-wide witness work of The Theocracy is carried on in the earth.
39	Shall any of God’s people now sigh and cry because they see that the witness work is coming to a close? Not at all. On the contrary, the faithful will rejoice. They know that it is God’s work. Their trust is entirely in Jehovah and in his King. Therefore, instead of being sad and in despair, the faithful will continue to say: “But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation. I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath dealt bountifully with me.”—Ps. 13: 5, 6.
‘“Jehovah stopped the time of trouble or World War in 1918 that the opportunity might be afforded for his servants to proclaim his kingdom and his name throughout the earth. Since then Jehovah’s witnesses have enjoyed a blessed season of activity in the service of proclaiming the kingdom. “This gospel of the kingdom” has been preached throughout “Christendom”. God’s warning has been sounded, and the faithful witnesses have observed that Christ Jesus the great Judge has been gathering unto himself his “other sheep”, the “multitude”. That multi
266
SEe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tude is one without definite number, and it embraces those of good will who shall seek the Lord prior to the breaking of the battle of Armageddon. When the great Theocrat and his King see fit to close the witness work completely, then all who love God and his King will rejoice, because they know that deliverance is very near. Every one of the faithful will now be watching for the “sign”. We know that we are now within “the times and the seasons” when the kingdom of God is being put into power. All the physical facts in the light of prophecy prove this is the correct conclusion. “The signs of the times” have been and are clear, and next we shall see the sign that Armageddon is about to begin and deliverance is very near.
ADMONITION
41	The apostle, under the direction of the Lord, writing to the church, then directs the faithful as to the proper course of action for them to take. The apostle who wrote those words is now in the spirit with the Lord. The remnant are in the earth with the Lord. The admonition to the faithful on earth is: “Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober.”—1 Thess. 5: 6.
42	Although the opportunity for world-wide witness work is closing, that will furnish no excuse for any of the consecrated to sleep or be indifferent. All the servants of God must now be alert as to their privileges of service and perforin that service as they have opportunity. Also they must be alert to the fact that the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name is directing and carrying forward God’s purpose, and that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the all-important thing, and each one of the faithful will greatly desire to have some part in that great event. They must be awake and alert as to the movement of the enemy and be able to quickly discern the sure “sign” that the battle is about to begin.
*3 Therefore the apostle continues his admonition: “Let us watch and be sober.” Such must abstain from sleepy dullness and be on the lookout for the kingdom interests and for the resistance of the enemy at all times. Drunkenness, resulting from the wine of Satan’s policy, brings on a stupor. Avoid such. Drink freely of the wine (that is, the joy of the Lord) now in the kingdom. Rejoice that we are privileged to be on the Lord’s side, fighting for The Theocratic Government. That wine does not produce a stupor, but rather sharpens the outlook of God’s people and thrills the heart. That wine enables us to appreciate the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Of course, the word “wine” here is symbolically used and means the joy of the Lord.
44 Since the faithful servants of Jehovah are “of the day”, they must deport themselves accordingly. Concerning this the Scriptural admonition is: “For
they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night. But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation.”—1 Thess. 5:7,8.
*’ The light of this day of the Lord is too bright to permit anyone of the faithful to do wrong particularly toward his fellow Christians and get away with it. The Lord looks upon the motive, that is, upon the heart. To be sober means to be calm, and keenly awake, serious-minded, steady, and very courageous, and fully trusting in the Lord. Thus the faithful will be strengthened for whatever comes to pass. Know this : that the will of God shall be done on earth as in heaven. Rely entirely on the Almighty, the Most High, and upon his Executive Officer, Christ Jesus.
46	To be properly equipped the apostle’s advice is: ‘Put on the breastplate of faith and love.’ That means the complete heart devotion to The Theocrat and his government, full confidence and reliance upon the Lord, and an unfailing devotion to God and Christ. The “breastplate” symbolizes the heart condition, which means an unqualified devotion to Jehovah. The great fight is about to take place, and the faithful must be equipped. “And for an helmet, the hope of salvation.” Be sure that the mind is fed upon the Word of God as he now reveals the meaning thereof to those who love him. “Study to show thyself approved unto God.” (2 Tim. 2: 15) Confidently rely upon the Lord God, with full expectation that he is certain to deliver those who love him; therefore let the heart rejoice in his salvation.
47	The vindication of the name of Jehovah is certain and sure. Salvation to all those who remain faithful to God is likewise sure. It appears that salvation may include the preservation of some of the remnant through the battle of Armageddon and their remaining for a time on the earth beyond Armageddon. Having a knowledge of Jehovah’s purpose, and walking in the light, is a safe guide for the head or mind and keeps one in the right way. The helmet fitting over the head illustrates this. Having on the helmet, which is also a symbol of war, means that those who have it on will be properly guided in the right way and have the mind at all times set upon the things pertaining to The Theocracy.
44 It is absolutely certain that quite soon God’s wrath against all enemies will be forcefully expressed, but that wrath is not against those who love him: “For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.” (1 Thess. 5:9,10) The willful opposers of The Theocracy are designated as “brute beasts, made to be . . . destroyed”. (2 Pet. 2:12) Jehovah has been long-suffering with
September 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
2G7
such “vessels of wrath”, fitted for destruction, and now the day of reckoning is near when he will clear out the enemy. But that wrath is not for his faithful servants. Instead, God has provided salvation for those who love and serve him.
48	It is now the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. He “died for us”, and all those who remain true and steadfast in their devotion and service to him have full assurance of salvation and deliverance. All those redeemed and who died faithful in Christ are now on the other side of the veil, while the remnant faithful are yet on the earth; and so within the meaning of the Scripture all such shall for ever be with the Lord. —1 Thess. 4:14-17.
COMFORT
50	Without a doubt the inspired words of the apostle were recorded long ago for the express benefit of the faithful servants of Jehovah now on the earth. These are “perilous times”; and this fact all thinking persons discern. Those who are against The Theocracy know nothing for their comfort. Like the mad flood of the swollen Jordan, they are rushing on to certain death. God’s faithful people now on the earth see the great sorrow and distress upon the people, and it is their privilege and duty to faithfully bear witness to those who will hear, telling them of The Theocracy, and that such is the only means of escape to safety and life. It is also their high duty and responsibility to comfort and edify one another by speaking together of the great truths which Jehovah through Christ Jesus now reveals to those of this day. All the servants of Jehovah who are yet in the organism of flesh are weak in themselves; but they are strong in the Lord, if they rely entirely upon him.
51	The mission of The Watchtower is to call attention to the gracious provisions which Jehovah has made for those who love him and to continue to sound the warning within the hearing of those who desire to learn the way of righteousness and life. In obedience to the Scriptural admonition by the Lord
study classes are maintained and well attended by those who love The Theocratic Government. All such will keep their mind and heart fixed upon the great Theocrat and the blessings his government will bring.
52	For many centuries the lovers of righteousness have centered their hearts and hopes upon The Theocratic Government. By their lifeblood they have borne testimony to their faith in and devotion to that blessed government. Now the great Theocracy under Christ the King is here, and his rule of righteousness shall endure forever and shall fill the earth with joy and with a people to the praise of the Almighty God.
” There are still opportunities of service, and none of the faithful will neglect to avail themselves of such. We may be sure that to his people who are sober and watchful the Lord will make clear the “sign” immediately preceding the beginning of the battle of that great day. Constant vigilance and watchfulness are very necessary now. Complete and entire trust and confidence in the Lord also are necessary. “Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusteth in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength.” (Isa. 2G:3, 4) When the “sign” of Armageddon does clearly appear may it not then be that the Lord’s promise applies to his people, to wit: “Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.”—Isa. 26: 20.
54	All who love Jehovah and his King and kingdom will be delighted to “comfort one another with these words”; which he has caused to be written aforetime for their admonition and hope: “Blessed are all [the people] that put their trust in him.” (Ps. 2:12) “Blessed be the Sovereign Lord! day by day he car-rieth a load for us; God himself is our salvation.” —Psalm 68: 19, Rotherham.
DESIRE OF ALL
66 HAKE all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come; and I will fill this house [temple] ^““^with glory, saith the Lord of hosts.” Although it is about 2,500 years since those words were delivered through the prophet Haggai (chapter 2 verse 7), the words have not failed. Today all nations are ashake. The shaking began in 1914. Likewise the “desire of all nations” has come. The coming is to the real temple, which is the “house of prayer for all nations”. The people of good will have a real desire for the coming of the true Messiah and Deliverer; but till now they have not been able to discern him, because of the blinding influence of the enemy Satan and his demons. Therefore Christ Jesus primarily must be “the de-
NATIONS COMES
light of all nations" when the people of good will know him, because he is God’s representative. He has come to the temple as the vicegerent of Jehovah God. He is the “Seed” of the promise: “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.”—Gen. 22:18.
It appears to be clearly settled that Jehovah God will not permit the nations to bring about their own peace and safety and mend their conditions. (1 Thess. 5: 3) The shaking financially and politically continues to increase each day, and all over the world the rulers are in perplexity and the distress of the people increases. The shaking of the nations constituting Satan’s organization on earth continues, and it will continue until the final destruction. All things
268
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
made by Satan and which come under the control of Satan must go down to destruction, as proved at Hebrews 12: 26, 27. Nothing shall be able to stand in this time of shaking except those who are in the “secret place of the Most High”, abiding under the shadow of his protection, and those who place themselves under the protection of his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. He is now at the temple for judgment of all nations.
During the final struggle between the Jews and the Romans, in A.D. 70, the temple built by Herod at Jerusalem was destroyed. This was the temple to which Jesus came a few days before his violent death and out of which he drove the religious thieves with a whip made of cords. “And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves; and said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.”—Matt. 21:12,13.
The first temple built at Jerusalem was by King Solomon and it foretold the building of the real temple or royal house of Jehovah God by a Greater-than-Solomon. The temple later built by Governor Zerubbabel, and that built by King Herod, took the place of Solomon’s demolished temple and served the same purpose. In the last temple Jesus taught the people. “And he taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the chief of the people sought to destroy him, and could not find what they might do: for all the people were very attentive to hear him.” (Luke 19:47,48) That this temple was prophetic of the real temple of God is shown by Jesus’ words at that time: “Take these things from hence; make not my Father’s house an house of merchandise. . . . Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things? Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days? But he spake of the temple of his body [the body of Christ, which is the church of which Jesus is Head]. When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them: and they believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.” —John 2 :15-22.
Jesus himself is the Chief Corner Stone or Head Stone of the royal temple of Jehovah God. He told the Jewish clergy as much: “Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes? Therefore say I unto you, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken ; but on whomsoever it shall fail, it will grind him to powder." (Matt. 21: 42-44) This is fully corroborated by the apostolic words addressed to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus who are made members of “his body”, the church. (See Ephesians 2:18-22.) Compare now certain things in connection with that ancient prophetic temple with what Jesus, the Head of the real temple, does.
Solomon the anointed king prepared the stones and other material for the temple builded by him, and brought them together and erected the building without a great noise “And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready before it was brought thither; so that there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron, heard in the house while it was in building.” (1 Ki. 6:7) The real or royal temple of God is made of “living stones”, that is to say, living creatures represented by stones, of which the Lord Christ Jesus is the Chief Stone. “If so be yc have tasted that the Lord is gracious. To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I [Jehovah] lay in Sion [Jehovah’s organization] a chief corner stone, elect, precious [Christ Jesus as anointed King] : and he that bc-lieveth on him shall not be confounded.”—1 Pet. 2 -. 3-6.
The temple made of these living stones constitutes the royal house or royal priesthood and holy nation of Jehovah God. (1 Pet. 2:9,10) These living stones were in course of selection and preparation from the day that Jesus selected his diseiplcs until the time of his coming to gather together unto himself those who constitute the temple class These living stones, which constitute the real temple, are brought together and erected into a building of God without noise or ostentation.
The holy temple is the building of Jehovah God. The coming of Christ Jesus to that temple is first marked by his appearing and gathering unto himself those who have been the faithful followers of Christ Jesus. Those who had died prior to his coming and who had been faithful unto death would be the first ones gathered to himself, being resurrected from the dead. Then the remnant, the faithful ones remaining alive on the earth, would be gathered, being brought into a unity of understanding and faith and action as witnesses of Jehovah and under the headship of Christ Jesus Concerning this the apostle writes: “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him.”—2 Thess 2:1.
Solomon was enthroned, and in the fourth year of reign he began work on the temple, in the spring of the \ ear In A.D. 29 Jesus was anointed with God’s spirit to be the King in Jehovah’s Theocracy. In the fourth year after he was anointed to be King and Head of Jehovah’s temple class, to wit, in the spring of the year 33 (A.D.), Christ Jesus, the Greater-than-Solomon, offered himself as King and as the Chief Corner Stone in the temple of God and was rejected by the Jews and shortly thereafter was killed It was three and one-half years, therefore in the fourth year, after his anointing, that he thus in a small way fulfilled the prophecy made by Solomon in connection with the beginning of the prophetic temple. The greater and complete fulfillment of this prophecy must be after the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.
During his last week before his death the disciples came out of the temple of Jerusalem with Jesus. They were talking to him about the temple. “And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not
September 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
2G9
be thrown down.” (Matt. 24:2) Evidently in this same conversation Jesus had told them something about raising up the temple of his body at his second coming. It was then that they propounded the question to him: “Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign [proof] of thy coming, and of the end of the world?” (Matt. 24: 3) The answer of Jesus then given is important in fixing the date of his coming. Jesus told his disciples what would be the sign of the “end of the world”, which event would mean the end of Satan’s rule without interference and would mean the beginning of the rule of Christ Jesus, earth’s rightful King. He said to them that the first sorrows that would come upon Satan’s organization would be the World War, followed by famine, pestilence and earthquake; that then there would follow distress of nations, with perplexity. The end of the world would necessarily mark the time when Jesus would be placed upon his throne and interference with Satan’s rule would begin from heaven. That which Jesus told his disciples concerning the end of the world began to have its fulfillment, as is well known from the facts, in the latter half of A.D. 1914, with the beginning of the World War.
No doubt the disciples were familiar with the text of the prophecy of Ezekiel, even though they did not understand its meaning. They knew of the text of Ezekiel 21 • 25-27 concerning the overthrow of King Zedekiah, especially that part which declared: “I will overturn, overturn, overturn it [the typical kingdom of the Jews] ; and it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.” Naturally they would be looking forward to the time when this prophecy would be fulfilled and when ‘He whose right it is would come’. They would know that in some future time this prophecy must be fulfilled. The decree of Jehovah pronounced against Zedekiah the last king of Jerusalem was enforced in the year 606 B.C., when the temple built by Solomon was destroyed. Then began the “times of the Gentiles”, the typical theocratic kingdom being suspended. (Luke 21:24) Other scriptures show that from 606 B.C. until the coming of the real Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus would be a period of seven symbolic “times”, each “time” being of three hundred and sixty literal years, or a total period of twenty-five hundred and twenty years; and therefore such period of time would necessarily end in A.D. 1914. (See Leviticus 26: 18; Daniel 4 • 16, 23, 32 ) Such is further proof that in the autumn season of 1914 is the correct date for Christ Jesus to take his power and to begin to exercise it over things pertaining to the earth.
The primary purpose of the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ is the vindication of Jehovah’s name, upon which name the Devil and all his organization have brought great reproach. When Jesus was raised from the dead by the power of Jehovah and exalted into the heaven no doubt he was then anxious to begin immediately the work of vindicating his Father’s name. He was then told by his Father he must wait until God’s due time in which to begin his work of vindication; as prophesied at Psalm 110:1: “The Lord [Jehovah] said unto my Lord [Jesus], Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.” Hebrews 10:12,13 comments on this prophecy concerning Jesus, saying- “But this man, after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.” The end of that period of time of waiting must of necessity be the same as the end of the time of waiting mentioned by the prophet Ezekiel (21-25-27). Both of these prophecies would mark the time when Jehovah would send forth his King whose right it is to rule, concerning whom Jehovah says: “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.”—Ps. 2: 6, 8.
The taking of power by Jehovah’s King Christ Jesus is the taking of power by Jehovah God over things pertaining to the earth. The Lord gave further evidence, at Revelation 11:17,18, as to the time when Jehovah, by his King, would exercise power over things pertaining to the earth. The faithful servants of Jehovah there speak: “We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come.” It was in A.D. 1914 that the nations became angry, which was further proof of the fact that Christ Jesus was then placed upon his throne. Revelation 11 then follows the above prophecy with the statement that “the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament”. (Verse 19) In 606 B C the ark of the covenant was removed from the Most Holy of the temple and was never recovered and put back there The ark of the testament or covenant symbolically ropresuits the presence of Jehovah God and is therefore proof that His chief representative Christ Jesus had come to the temple and hence Jehovah himself was representatively present. —Mal. 3:1-3.	'
As Solomon began the erection of the temple in the fourth year of his reign, and as Jesus at his first advent came and offered himself three and one-half years after his anointing as King, we should expect that the coming of the King Christ Jesus to the temple of Jehovah would be in the fourth year, to wit, three and one-half years after the beginning of his reign in 1914, and that therefore the time lor his coming to the temple of Jehovah would be in the spring of A.D. 1918. This date is further and strongly con eborated by the events that came to pass in 1918, and whnti faits exactly fit the prophecy, proving that then “the desire of all nations" came to the temple and was laid as the Chief Corner Stone in Zion.
It was God’s express will that Christ Jesus should do a preparatory work before coming to his temple, described as ‘preparing the way before the Lord’. Jehovah had used Elijah the prophet to do a work. His work foreshadowed a like work to be done by Jehovah’s people during the period of time designated as the time of ‘preparing the way before the Lord'. Elijah’s work was a vindication work and foreshadowed the restoring of truth to the people of God which had long been hidden by the practice of Satanic religion Jesus spoke of what may be called ‘the Elijah work’ to be done by his faithful followers, at Matthew 17: 11. Christ Jesus directed this work. The facts show that the magazine The Watchtower began to be published in July, 1879, and that for forty years prior to 1918 there was a work carried on by the people of God within the realms of “Christen
270
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
dom” which work restored to God's people those fundamental truths which had long been hidden from them by religion. During that period of time the members and true followers of Christ Jesus forsook Satan’s organization, particularly "organized religion”, and devoted themselves entirely to the Lord God. This was the work of Christ Jesus in preparing the way before the Lord, which work must be done before his coming to the temple of God, as prophesied, to wit: "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in; behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.” (Mal. 3:1) This shows he was the delight and desire of Jehovah God’s “holy nation'’.
The purpose of his coming to the temple of Jehovah is to execute judgment as the great Judge. This must take place before the coming battle of Armageddon; and since all the members of the true temple class must be judged by him, it must take place before the last “living stones” are taken from the earth. The Lord’s coming must be while some of the faithful temple class are yet in the flesh. During the time that Jehovah’s Messenger, Christ Jesus, was preparing the way before Jehovah the interests of God’s kingdom were committed to those who had made a covenant to do God’s will and who had been invited to a place in the kingdom. As to their faithfulness in giving attention to these kingdom interests the Lord must consider the facts before choosing and approving them. "Judgment must begin at the house of God.” (1 Pet. 4: 17) That judgment would determine the faithfulness of God’s people on earth up to that period of time. The judgment is a time of fiery tests, that is, tests that try one as though by fire. As foretold: “But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth ? for he is like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ sope: and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.”—Mal. 3:2, 3.
All the “sons of Levi”, or Levites, belonged to God and served at his temple in Jerusalem. The Levites picture all
who are begotten of God’s spirit and who are in line for the priesthood, the “royal priesthood” under the High Priest Christ Jesus the King. It is quite clear from the prophecy that the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple would be marked by severe trials resulting in separating the disapproved from the approved, in order that the approved ones might render a faithful service unto Jehovah God in righteousness.
Events that came to pass in the spring of 1918 exactly corroborate the other testimony that 1918, in the spring of the year, marks the time of the coming of the Lord Jesus to Jehovah’s temple. At that time there came upon the consecrated people of God a fiery trial. These had been for some time doing the work of proclaiming the truth In 1918 the work designated “the Elijah work” was killed due to action by the enemy religionists. Many of the Lord’s witnesses throughout the land were at that time imprisoned, and many others were restrained of their liberty of action as to giving testimony in the name of the Lord. Many false brethren arose who had professed to be followers of Christ Jesus but whose love then grew cold and they turned against others who were serving God and his kingdom. It was in that time that God’s people were hated of all nations because of their faithfulness to the Lord, as Jesus had foretold would come to pass after the end of Satan's w Id began. Matthew 24: 9,10, 12: “Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall li.de one another. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.”
These prophetic utterances, together with the events that have come to pass from and after 1918 and that fit the prophecy and show its fulfillment, prove that the Lord must come to the temple of Jehovah for judgment, and that “the desire of all nations’’ did come to the temple in the spring of 1918. Now the judgment of the nations is in progress, and the people of good will from all nations show that Jehovah’s King Christ Jesus is their “desire” by choosing him and taking their stand on the side of Him and his kingdom.—Matt. 25: 31-40.
SOON PEACE WITHOUT END
’’T MAKE peace, ... I the Lord.” (Isa. 45:7) Long I ago Jehovah God gave his word that he would set up a righteous government that would rule and bless all people of good will that live. The battle of Armageddon, now near, will clear the way for the uninterrupted operation of that glorious Theocratic Government. Soon all the selfish governments of this world shall perish. Monarchies, democracies, aristocracies, papism, Fascism, Communism and Nazism, and all suchlike efforts to rule, shall pass away at Armageddon and will soon be forgotten. Those abortive attempts at government will not be remembered by the survivors of Armageddon, because they will have other things to think about. God’s government of righteousness under the King Christ Jesus shall have full sway and shall be justly administered and bring boundless blessings to all who do right.
The anointed King or Messiah is the beloved Son of Jehovah God. Nineteen centuries ago Jehovah sent him to the earth to tell the truth concerning Jehovah’s name and government. The Messiah, Jesus, was put to death, and Jehovah caused his death to operate as the price of redemption for all men who believe on and serve him and who worship Jehovah God in spirit and in truth Now Christ Jesus, no longer human, but again spirit in heaven and with all power in heaven and earth, has come to vindicate his Father’s name, which religion has misrepresented, and to rule the world in righteousness and to administer blessings to the people. Concerning him Jehovah by the mouth of his prophet (Isa. 9: 6, 7) says: “The government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end.”
September 1, 1940
WATCHTOWER,
271
lie shall be called “Wonderful Counsellor” because his counsel will ahi ays be wise, perfect and infallible, and those who follow it shall never die, as stated at John 8:51. He is called “The mighty God” because into his hand is committed all power in heaven and in earth and all creation is commanded to serve and obey him. (Matt. 28:18; John 5: 22-27) He is called “The everlasting Father” because he is the Life-giver to man by commandment of Jehovah God and there is no other way to obtain life. (Rom. 6:23; Acts 4.12) He is called “The Prince of Peace" because under his righteous government there shall never be another war. (Matt. 24:21) Soon all the great multitude of persons of good will who survive Armageddon and live shall know that peace has come to stay for ever; concerning which it is written (Isa 2:4) : “They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more."
The peoples of earth desire peace, and not war, and for this reason the League of Nations has to many been like a straw held out to a drowning man. Jehovah has expressly declared that the League of Nations, and the combination of totalitarian powers, is a fraud and a snare and shall be completely destroyed. (Isa. 8:9,10) Selfish men ruling the nations in a selfish, imperfect manner can never bring peace to the people. Everlasting peace can come only by and through The Theocracy of Jehovah under Christ. Concerning that blessed peace, which shall proceed from the government of the Lord, Psalm 72: 4,7 reads: “He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor. In his days shall the righteous flourish ; and abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.” Every man who tries to do right, but who because of inherent weakness needs mercy, will have mercy extended to him by the Lord. Under his righteous government no one shall be permitted to deceive or mislead others, but, always, the truth shall be spoken. Then in the language of God’s prophet all the people that live shall sing (Ps 85: 10-12) : “Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from tieaven. Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good, and our land shall yield her increase."
Neither “New Deal” nor other man-made scheme can bring lasting prosperity to the people. Prosperity cannot be brought about by employment of unjust and unrighteous methods. God’s commandment is that every man shall love his neighbor, which means he must deal honestly and justly with his fellow man. Work is a blessing to man, because God has so declared. When all men work and receive the just fruits of their labor they shall all be prosperous Under the government of the Lord, the people “shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth [children] for trouble" (Isa. 65.23, Ruth ) Under the rule of the righteous Governor of the earth the land shall be free from pests that destroy the crops and shall produce abundantly and plentifully and for all, as it is written (Ps. 67:6) : “Then shall the earth yield her increase.” Says Jehovah’s Word: “When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice.” (Prov. 29:2) God’s government will be wholly righteous, and under his government “shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people
a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined”. —Isa. 25: 6.
All sane persons desire life everlasting in peace. With all the boasted power and strength of the present-day governments and the various other organizations on earth, with all the braggadocio and boast of the Devil and his agents, and with all the “organized religion”, none of them can give life to any creature. Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and there is no other way to get life. (Rom 6: 23 ; Acts 4:12) Said Jesus in prayer to God: “This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” (John 17 : 3) When the terrible battle of Armageddon is raging, then many who have been deceived and who have preferred to believe a lie will be made to know that Satan is the great liar and that Jehovah alone can give life. Those who survive Armageddon will be the ones who now hear the Kingdom message of truth and who give heed thereto and seek righteousness and meekness, and to such Jehovah promises that they may “be hid” in that time of distress and woe. (Zeph. 2 2, 3) Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, gave his life as the redemptive price for as many as believe and serve him. (Matt 20: 28 , John 10:10; Heb. 2:9) Under The Theocratic Government the people will be granted full opportunity to obey and live. Furthermore, those who have died and now sleep in the grave shall be brought forth unto the resurrect ion of judgment and be given an opportunity to obey and live. Jesus gave assurance thereof in these words 'All that are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth ’ —John 5: 25-30, Am. Rev. Ver.
“Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment. And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places.”—Isa. 32: 1,17,18.
It is concerning the destruction of the oppressive rule of Satan, and the gracious and righteous government of Christ Jesus and the blessings to the people thereunder, that Jehovah’s witnesses are now commanded to go and tell to “men of good will”. It is because they are telling these great and wonderful truths that Jehovah’s witnesses stand accused before the courts of the various governments It is for bringing this message of consolation to the people that many of Jehovah’s witnesses today languish behind prison bars. At Armageddon the Lord will remember the indignities now being cast upon his name and people
Though being the worst of times with respect to the nations of the Devil’s organization, this is the most blessed time yet when men have been on earth, because Jehovah’s Theocratic Government is now in operation , and it is now the blessed privilege of all persons of good will vho hear the message of God’s “government and peace" to take up that glad song and pass it on to others. All you who are of good will toward Jehovah and his kingdom, therefore, continue to grow in a knowledge of the truth and tell it to others, and, doing so, you shall receive the boundless blessings of Jehovah’s government; as written: “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good will." —Luke 2: 14, Douay.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
IN FRONT OF THE LONDON BRANCH
“Scene: A bright sunny morning at 34 Craven Terrace. Two of the boys loading 40 cartons of books onto the truck drawn up alongside the lift that conveys the cartons from the stockroom below Kingdom Hall to awaiting trucks, to be carted to various companies. Along Craven Terrace every morning comes a mixed stream of folk on their way to the near-by station on their way to business. On this particular morning a very well-dressed ‘someone in the city’ came along, watched the cartons being loaded for a bit, and then in a very polished Oxford accent declared: ‘If these were bombs instead of Bible tracts we might stand a chance of winning this war.’ The two witnesses continued their task without comment, being more or less used to varied comments by all sorts of nosies that pass. Our well-dressed friend, evidently anxious to bring this state of affairs to the attention of someone who would comment on his ‘words of wisdom’, went up to a near-by street sweeper, a little man that has the task of keeping Craven Terrace and surrounding territory in a clean and wholesome condition. Exactly what our ‘someone in the city’ said we cannot say, but we observed him speaking somewhat heatedly to the street sweeper and pointing significantly in our direction. From his attitude, whatever he was saying was not very complimentary. The Sweeper, however, quickly showed whose side he was on by saying to our Oxford hero: ‘No, not this lot, Guv’nor; they’re a good lot. II everyone saw things as they do and stood as firmly for what they believe, we wouldn’t have men like Hitler carrying on like the devil he is.’ Our ‘wise guy’ then, finding no sympathy at all for his ravings, stomped off down to the station, where we hoped he missed his train for his pains. The sweeper, however, came over to us as we continued loading, and said: ‘Did you hear that, boys? properly trying to line you all up ’e was. What ’e wants is five minutes with the judge, then he’d soon get put in ’is place. But still the likes of that lot won’t sec sense, will they?’ It appears this little sweeper had heard Judge Rutherford at Albert Hall on the last occasion he addressed us there. A ‘sheep’ and a ‘goat’, eh?”
PROPER PROCEDURE BY LAW-ABIDING AMERICANS
“During my appointment at Shelby, Idaho, Tuesday evening, June 11, at 10:30 p.m., a group of men came to our trailer looking for me, among them the American Legion, county sheriff, local police, state police, and a G-man from Idaho Falls. The commander of the Shelby Legion post inquired as to what kind of meetings I was holding in Shelby, and asked if it were all right if I would demonstrate at the Legion hall the next evening exactly the kind of meetings we hold at private homes, how Jehovah’s witnesses got in touch with the people, etc., and the Watchtower articles. The result was that a fine opportunity was made available for a good witness to all the authorities of Shelby. ‘Government and Peace’ was reproduced on the sound equipment and a model study demonstrated. All twelve officials attending marveled at the information given by Judge Rutherford; and the American Legion commander stated: ‘Everyone should obtain that kind of information, which is real American.’ All the officials expressed their appreciation to the Watchtower for the co-operation of its representatives, extending a welcome to witnesses who worked the territory.”
“A WORD IN SEASON," HOW GOOD IN CANADA!
“We were witnessing in the northern wilds of Saskatchewan, and were feeling quite discouraged with the bad roads and the opposers living by it, when my twihe-y ear-old daughter and I came to a house where a group of people were gathered. I explained who I was, and proceeded to play ‘Instruction’ for them on the phonograph. I noticed some took an instant dislike for it and started criticizing the judge and his opinions. I told them what I had to say, and then one man jumps up, clasps his fist against his palm and says: ‘By golly, I’m with you; you Jehovah’s witnesses ha\e done more good work in this community in three years than the ministers in thirty.’ Imagine my joy at this declaration of his. The others were dumfounded. Then I said to this person of good will: ‘It’s people like you that shall find God’s protection at Armageddon.’ I left some literature with him, and we went on our way rejoicing; all the discouragement fled.”
A FRIEND’S REPORT STIRS UP INQUIRY
“A friend, an actress in Brooklyn, introduced me over the telephone to a colleague in New York. The latter desired some information in professional matters and remarked she would also like to hear from my own mouth about those startling things made known by Jehovah’s witnesses and related to her by my friend. I saw the lady. She manifested remarkably good will, listened attentively to Scriptural and factual evidence and seemed to believe every statement without voicing a single contradiction or even an utterance of doubt or hesitancy to accept. Apparently my eyes could not conceal my wondeiment. Reading my thoughts, she remarked smilingly: ‘No, I’m not credulous, not at all Why should I not readily believe what you tell me? Didn’t you prove it to be true?’ Her reason for accepting only the book Salvation was again out of the ordinary: if she took ail the books, etc., at once she would become so absorbed m the reading that she would do nothing else and neglect her work, which she cannot afford to do at present; the safer procedure, therefore, would be to acquire one publication after the other and to give me a ring when ready for another. Yesterday she called up, informing me she has loaned the book to a gentleman and has just received word from him that in his esteem Salvation is a book of extraordinary interest. ‘He is very rich (how generous, I do not know;, and I hope he will support your work.’ I interjected ‘But we are not after the people’s money.’ ‘I know that,’ she replied, ‘but I am very much interested that he use some of hi-, wealth to further your work, as long as money has not lost all value. May I arrange a get-together of us three?’”
MODEL STUDIES BOOST COMPANY
“One publisher is conducting seven model studies each week in private homes besides attending three studies of the Nashville company, and earning his living too. This activity makes sixty hours a month easy for this publisher. The result is that the company he is associated with is growing fast, due mainly to the model studies of this one publisher These model studies have made this publisher very familiar with the Bible, and therefore make him more efficient in the door-to-door work of witnessing.”
272
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N .Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. P. Rutheuord, President____W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world ; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth’’ with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Gs. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bant Draft. Canadian. British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, 1V.2, England
Canadian................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian .......   7	Beresford Hoad, Strathfield, N. S VV„ Australia
South African __________-..... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.}
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each jear, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers; Acknowledgment ot a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank' (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent v ..u me journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, J375
“CHALLENGE” TESTIMONY PEIilOD
The above period embraces the entire month of October and applies to all countnes. Its name refers to Jehovah’s challenge to the opposing nations for a showdown fight That challenge is set forth, in no mincing words, in the feature publication which will be circulated during this Period, to wit, the new book Religion. At the same time there will be released for public distribution the new booklet Conspiracy Against Democracy. Both publications will be offered together on a contribution of 25c. No time to be lost now, and all desiring to do their proper part will promptly take this Period under consideration as to material, territory, procedure, etc. Any Watchtower readers wishing to get in touch with the nearest company organized for this service should write us or our branch office for references, now. Each one’s full report of activities is expected at the close of the month for inclusion in a world report.
"WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 20: “Ehud” (Part 1), fl 1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower September 15, 1940.
Week of October 27: “Ehud” (Part 1),
fl 23-41 inclusive, The Watchtower September 15, 1940.
“RELIGION”
With especial pleasure we announce the new book Rthgtun released by its author, Judge Rutherford, at the recent Theocratic convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. It offers the indisputable evidence, both Scriptural and factual, that religion is opposed to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and is therefore the mortal enemy of man, and that Christianity is the only way ol escape for people of good will The book contains 384 pages, including color-illustrations, and a valuable reference index, all bound within beautifully embossed covers in a refreshing green cloth and gold-stamped. You will prize the author’s edition, which contains an autograph of a letter in his own handwriting addressed to the Theocratic ambassadors. This special edition is limited and may be had on a contribution of 50c per copy. Those in organized companies may combine their individual orders and send them through the local company servant.
“CONSPIRACY AGAINST DEMOCRACY”
No brochure could be of more instant importance and aid to those residing in democratic countries than this new booklet, Conspiracy Against Democracy. Many millions of persons of good will are in the mood to get and read this book, especially as this (Continued on page 28?)
&VWCHTOWER-
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	September 15, 1940	No. 18
EHUD
PART 1
"Teach me thy way, 0 Jehovah; I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to fear thy name." —Ps. 86:11, A.R.V.
JEHOVAH the Almighty God and Christ Jesus are one. Said Jesus: “I and my Father are one.” (John 10: 30) Jehovah God is the Father; Jesus is the Son. Jehovah is without beginning and without end, therefore “from everlasting”. (Ps. 90:2) Christ Jesus is the beginning of Jehovah’s creation. (Rev. 3:14; John 1:1-3) Furthermore Jesus said: “My Father is greater than I.” (John 14:28) How, then, are the Father and the Son one! In this: that they are in full harmony and complete unity. They work together in exact harmony or unity. The Father and the Son are in complete unanimity, or oneness. Christ Jesus the Son always obeys the will of Jehovah God: “For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.” (John 6: 38) “I delight to do thy will, 0 my God; yea, thy law is within my heart.” (Ps. 40:8) Jehovah is the great Theocrat. Christ Jesus is the King acting for The Theocrat. The Theocracy is the government of Jehovah performed by and through Christ Jesus.
2 It therefore follows that in The Theocracy everything must be in exact harmony, unity or oneness with Jehovah and Christ Jesus. Jehovah God has given to the Son those who compose the members of his spiritual body. These consist of 144,000 and are made up of the faithful apostles and thereafter those who believe, obey and are brought into the “body of Christ” and prove themselves faithful, even unto death. (Rev. 2:10) All of these must be in full harmony and unity, as stated by Jesus: “That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.”—John 17: 21.
’This language of Jesus clearly settles the matter, that the oneness means full and complete unity in action. Such was the mind of the apostle who under inspiration said concerning the selection of the members of the body of Christ: “Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; . . . But, speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him
in all things, which is the head, even Christ.” (Eph. 4:13-15) Therefore Jehovah, Christ Jesus and all others who have to do with The Theocratic Government must be fully united, all working in God’s organization under the direction of the Head thereof.
4 Over a long period of time Jehovah made and recorded in the Bible many prophetic pictures for the purpose of enabling those on the earth at the present time who love and obey him to see and appreciate the development of The Theocratic Government. Among those prophetic pictures was one in which Ehud played a prominent part. That prophetic drama is here discussed for the edification of God’s people. Its fulfillment is now in progress, nearing a culmination, and is therefore of great interest to those who trust fully in the great Theocrat.
8 Jehovah is “the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort”. In the time of greatest stress he comforts those who fully trust in him and who serve him with zeal. Just now the anointed remnant and their companions are sorely oppressed by the enemy, yet not dismayed nor discouraged. Europe has been overrun by the instruments of Satan acting under the leadership of Gog the demon and other associated demons. On the continent of Europe the “strange work” of Jehovah immediately preceding his “strange act” appears to be about done. In Britain and America the way of the witness work grows more difficult. Everywhere the great religious organizations, working together with the political and commercial allies, act to carry out their conspiracy to destroy those who are faithfully serving Jehovah. All of these conspirators are against The Theocratic Government, and that is the reason why they persecute Jehovah’s witnesses.
8 Throughout the earth today the people of Jehovah who serve him and support his Theocracy with confidence look to Jehovah God and his King and unitedly pray “the Higher Powers” to confound God’s enemies. That prayer that they now breathe Jehovah caused to be recorded in his Word long centuries ago. He makes known to those who love him
276
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that the present is the tinje to send up that petition to the throne of heaven. The faithful are therefore shown by the Divine Record to be sending up to the heavenly throne these words: “Keep not thou silence, 0 God; hold not thy peace, and be not still, 0 God. For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult; and they that hate thee have lifted up the head. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have consulted together with one consent; they are confederate against thee. Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kison; which perished at En-dor; they became as dung for the earth. As the fire burn-eth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire, so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, 0 Lord. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish.”—Ps. 83:1-5,9, 10,14-17.
T Let it be strictly observed that the prayer recorded in the foregoing text and now put in the mouth of God’s anointed and. devoted people, and which these devoted servants of Jehovah God utter, links together Sisera and Jabin with the Midianites, the antitype of which letter ones are now operating. This time the prayer asked Jehovah that the devastation that he visited upon his ancient enemies be repeated upon those who are now in a conspiracy against the great Theocracy under Christ Jesus, and which Theocratic Organization includes God’s “hidden” people. The overthrow of the Midianites was prophetic. The drama here under consideration involved not only Ehud, but the Israelites, God’s covenant people, the Moabites and others. The drama concerning the overthrow of the Midianites and recorded for the hope of God’s people is to comfort those who are now on earth. (Judges chapters 6-8) (See also The Watchtower 1935, article entitled “Jehovah’s Battle”, pages 3-76.) The record concerning Sisera and Jabin appears at Judges chapters four and five; and by the prayer recorded in Psalm 83, above quoted, these are directly linked with the Midianites. Chapter four of Judges relates to Sisera and Jabin and tells of their defeat, which took place about 47 years before the destruction of the Midianites by Gideon. That chapter four begins with these words: “And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord, when Ehud was dead.” (Judg. 4:1) The text here quoted shows a relation to Ehud and what he performed prior thereto.
8 The Israelites were then in the land of Canaan, and God had left certain heathen nations there as
a test to the Israelites. All those heathen people practiced a Devil religion and were under the influence and power of the demons, of which demon host Satan is the chief. That was a real test upon the Israelites because they were commanded to hold themselves aloof from the Devil religion and worshipers, and to have nothing whatsoever to do with religion. All those heathen nations were against Jehovah and his great Theocratic Government, which his prophetic pictures would foreshadow. “Now these are the nations which the Lord left, to prove Israel by them; even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan; only that the generations of the children of Israel might know to teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof ; namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon unto the entering in of Hamath. And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the Lord, which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses. And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites.”—Judg. 3:1-5.
* The Israelites fell under the religious influence practiced by the heathen nations there: “And they took their [Canaanite] daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and served their [Canaanite] gods. And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgat the Lord their God, and served Baalim and the groves.” —Judg. 3: 6, 7.
10	The Israelites had been warned by Moses that religion would ensnare them, but they had failed to give heed to that warning. (Deut. 7: 1-16) Although millions of persons have professed to serve God and Christ almost all of these have disregarded the warning uttered by Moses at the direction of Jehovah and that religion is a snare.
11	Mark here whathas taken place in modern times, which corresponds exactly with what befell the Israelites. Prior to 1918 Jehovah’s consecrated people had agreed to put away all things pertaining to religion and to be obedient to God’s will, but there was no clear and open break made or taken away from religion. There was a measure of religion amongst them, and hence their garments of identification were soiled. When the Lord came to the temple in 1918 the consecrated were identified by many religious ceremonies and practices. Their garments were marked with filthy religious spots. They still indulged in the practice of giving honor and praise to men and submission to worldly rulers as though those worldly rulers constituted the “higher powers” mentioned at Romans 13:1. There was a certain
September 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
277
amount of creature worship, exalting and glorifying an earthly leader and thus committing the “sin of Samaria”. (Amos 8:14) There was no real war declared against religion as being of Satan, until the end of 1936. It seems that it has always been very difficult for even the consecrated to keep away from religion and religious practices.
12	Note then that Judges 4:1 says: “And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord, when Ehud was dead.” The back reference to Ehud is here made. Ehud had performed his part of a great drama and had died, and the fact that reference is made to his death makes it fitting in this day to examine the history of that drama and its typical meaning, as detailed in the third chapter of Judges, particularly from verses 12-30 inclusive. In that prophetic drama Ehud and his dagger performed an important part.
13	At the time mentioned in Judges 3:12, the children of Israel were practicing the Devil religion. At that time there was no judge in Israel. Othniel, wiio had been judge in Israel, had just died. Likewise from A.D. 1878 and onward to 1918 was a time of preparing the way before Jehovah before the coming of the great Judge sent by Jehovah. Then the Lord Jehovah straightway sent Christ Jesus, the Judge, to the temple to judge the professing Christians, and also the hypocritical practitioners of “Christendom”, who claim to be servants of God. The coming of Christ Jesus to the temple took place in A.D. 1918.—Mal. 3:1-4.
14	Referring now to the drama, note that it is written : “The Lord strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of [Jehovah].” Their evil consisted of practicing religion. Moab was a son of Lot, who was a nephew of Abraham, the great grandfather of Israel, for whom the nation was named. That made the Moabites distant cousins of the Israelites. The practice of religion by the Israelites had reduced that nation to great weakness. They did not have the favor of Jehovah. The Moabites occupied the country east of the Jordan and were strong and became more aggressive. Moab in that prophetic drama appears to foreshadow the religious leaders that practice for hire, that is, the religious, commercial, political class that adopt and practice religion for a selfish purpose. These compose the religionists that rule the land known as “Christendom”. Just before the Israelites crossed over the Jordan river into Canaan Balak, the king of Moab, hired Balaam the unfaithful prophet, a religionist (and who in modern times would be classed as those of the “fifth column”), to try to bring a curse upon the Israelites, but Balaam failed as to the entire nation.—Num. 22:1-41; 23:1-30.
16	In modern times many who claim to be fully consecrated to the Lord continue to hold on to religious practices and to recognize and submit to men as the “higher powers”. Such become victims of big business, or commercial financial powers, who, together with those who practice religion as a profession, all adopt religion for selfish reasons, acting under the influence and power of the demons. This combination was pictured by the Moabites.
” Concerning the strengthening of Moab, as stated in the Scriptural texts, the evident purpose of Jehovah was to not destroy his people who were sincere and who had been misled; but his purpose was to so deal with them as to open their eyes to their deplorable condition in order that they might see who were their enemies and who was their real friend, and that those of good will might find the way of escape and serve God in spirit and in truth. He had repeatedly told them that religion would be a snare to them; and now he would show them more fully how they had fallen into the snare of the Devil. Even so now in these modern times, those who have held on to religion have had some very trying experiences, which experiences have worked to the good of those who have really loved God and who have been diligent to seek to know and to do his holy will.
” Eglon, the king of Moab, prepared to make an assault upon the Israelites: “And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek; and went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.” (Judg. 3:13) When he gathered together his allies of Ammon and Amalek he invaded the Israelites. He followed the Devil’s tactics by gathering to his aid the political and commercial allies, all practitioners of religion. It has ever been the fixed practice for the commercial and political elements to call into action the religious element when a campaign of conquest is undertaken. In the prophetic picture the Ammonites are used to represent the political element in particular, that forms a part of Satan’s organization among men, and all of which practice a Devil religion. Such are the ones who put the State above God, and who regard the State as that which is to be worshiped as the higher power. In other words, obedience must first be rendered to the State.
11 The Amalekites appeared to have been the aboriginal inhabitants in the land southwest of Sodom and Gomorrah. (Gen. 14:7,8) The “duke Amalek” was the grandson of Esau. (Gen. 36:15,16) When the Israelites were journeying from Egypt to the land of Canaan the Amalekites were the first to attack the Israelites. For that inexcusable and unjustifiable assault upon the Israelites, the covenant people of God, the Almighty decreed that the Amalekites must be destroyed. (Ex. 17:8-16) Such ap
278
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
pears to be Jehovah’s fixed rule concerning all those who without just cause or excuse attack his chosen people. In the time of Queen Esther, by the hanging of Haman and his sons and the slaughter of their allies God’s purpose concerning the Amalekites was accomplished.—See Esther chapters 7, 9.
The Amalekites were used in the prophetic drama here under consideration at this point to represent the religious element. Religion was the first or aboriginal element of Satan’s visible organization, and commerce and politics were added later, all three elements following the Devil religion.
20	The record is that these allied invaders under King Eglon crossed over the Jordan river and attacked “the city of palm trees”. Jericho had been called by that name, “city of palm trees.” (Deut. 34: 3; Judg. 1:16; 2 Chron. 28:15) But at the time under consideration here Jericho had been thrown down to the ground by the power of the Lord when Joshua led the Israelites in a march around its walls. The city of palm trees must therefore have been set up in the vicinity of the site of Jericho amidst the palm trees, hence the name. Previously Jehovah had performed one of his greatest miracles in there destroying Jericho.
21	When Eglon went into the land of Canaan and set himself up at the city of palm trees Joshua had been dead approximately one hundred years. The Israelites had in that time degenerated by reason of embracing religion, contrary to Jehovah’s positive command and warning. They had been ensnared by the Devil, using religion as the means thereof. Now Jehovah permits the place of fame, the palm tree vicinity, to fall into the hands of heathen invaders. The Israelites had chosen to follow the Devil’s devices, and no longer was Jehovah fighting their battles for them. They must have some trimming that might result in their good. Jehovah had previously vindicated his name at the “city of palm trees”, that is, Jericho, but the Israelites had forgotten that. Palms symbolize those who grow straight and upright. (Ps. 92:12; Jer. 10:5) The people of Israel were not then of that class, because of their turning to religion. They had forgotten their covenant to be obedient to God; and hence their unhappy condition.
22	Note the condition that existed in “Christendom” about 1917 and 1918. The nations were at war. The religionists were advocating and fully supporting that war. There were those who were like unto the palm tree, trying to stand upright for the Lord and for the honor of his name. Most of them, however, showed fear and continued to hold on to some things religious like “Christendom”, which is entirely religious. Those who were desirous to and somewhat attempted to be straight with the Lord
were showing great honor and praise to the name of a man who had been their leader and who had recently died. They were also indulging in religious practices of giving honor and undue praise to other men known as “elders” in the church. They were advocating and indulging in creature worship under the name and style of “character development”, thereby attempting to prepare themselves to be fully qualified while in the flesh to go to heaven. They were neglecting to engage in the service of Jehovah by bearing witness to his holy name and to his kingdom. They were also recognizing the giving honor to human rulers as though they were the “higher powers”, thereby ignoring Jehovah and Christ Jesus, the real “Higher Powers”. That was the time for the beginning of the ingathering of the “great multitude”, foreshadowed by the waving of the palm branches at the feast of ingathering. (Rev. 7:9, 10) The combined enemy opposing The Theocracy was and is made up of religion, politics and commerce under the command of their father the Devil, and this conspiring enemy tried to head off the work of God’s people in bearing testimony to the name of the great Theocrat and in the carrying of his message to those of good will that will compose the “great multitude”. Because the consecrated ones had shown fear and had neglected their covenant with God and had held to religion and religious practices, Jehovah permitted them to be overrun for a time by the enemy. God had not cast his consecrated ones entirely aside, but they must now be disciplined and prove their integrity under the test: “Whom the Lord loves he disciplines, and scourges every son whom he receives.” (Heb. 12:6, Diaglott) By the discipline that came upon them in 1917 and 3 918 some of the consecrated learned to devote themselves entirely to Jehovah and his kingdom. Some time was required for even such devoted ones to fully appreciate their obligation by giving themselves wholly and completely unto the service of the Lord. The consecrated had the experiences, and these trying experiences or ordeals had to come upon them before they fully appreciated that religion is a snare to everyone who practices it. Today God’s consecrated people appreciate, as never any people on the earth before, that religion is a snare of the Devil and employed as a racket amongst the people.
22	Turning now to the prophetic drama, note the words recorded: “So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.” (Judg. 3:14) During that period of eighteen years of the reign of Eglon, the king of Moab, he manifested great arrogance. It is written of Moab: “He magnified himself against the Lord. . . . For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves? for since thou spakest of him, thou skip-
September 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
279
pedst for joy. . . . We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud,) his loftiness, and his arro-gancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart. I know his wrath, saith the Lord; but it shall not be so; his lies shall not so effect it.”— Jer. 48:26-30.
2< For eighteen years the Israelites were held in servitude to that arrogant king of Moab. Those eighteen years of servitude well foreshadowed the modern-day servitude, though not necessarily eighteen years in which the Lord’s people were in servitude. The consecrated children of Jehovah were in a measure of servitude to the religionists of “Christendom”, which servitude was from 1914, the beginning of the World War. Eighteen years thereafter, to wit, in 1932, there was a measure of deliverance from the servitude. The religious arrangement amongst God’s consecrated people of having “elective elders” over God’s people on the earth was exposed and done away with, and God’s sanctuary was cleansed of that anti-theocratic arrangement. —Dan. 8:14.
25 Within the war-mad, demon-controlled “Christendom” the servitude of God’s people became oppressive, particularly in the spring of 1918. In North America the malicious hatred of “Christendom” against Jehovah’s true servants became particularly manifested in that year of 1918. Just eighteen years thereafter, to wit, in the year 1936, further deliverance came. It was then that the Lord made it clearly to appear to his people that religion, including that of “Christendom”, is of Satan, and that God’s true and faithful servants must avoid religion and shun it, if they would receive complete deliverance and salvation. It was in that year that the Lord exposed the religionists as being the modern-day ones who fulfilled that which the Philistines foreshadowed when they were oppressing the Israelites. Also God’s “strange work” was first understood by his people in that same year. Also it is interesting to note that in that same year Pacelli, now the pope, visited the president of the United States, who was then making the race for his second term as president. The result of that presidential election is well known to all. It was in that same year that Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions presented a petition to the United States government demanding the free and uncensored use of the radio. Thus they were taking an independent stand and getting free from religion and religious influence.
2b The people of Israel, oppressed by the Moabites, cried unto the Lord for deliverance. The faithful spiritual Israelites likewise cried unto Jehovah for deliverance from the oppressive power of “Christendom” to the end that the faithful might serve God and go forward with the witness work without
interruption or hindrance. They continued thus to fight for the opportunity of proclaiming a Theocratic message.
2' In 1929 the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses by the religionists became even more severe. Many of the workers were assaulted, arrested, haled into courts, and severely dealt with, being fined and imprisoned and otherwise maltreated. This, however, did not stop the faithful, but, on the contrary, caused them to work with even a greater determination and more zeal in bearing testimony to the name of the Most High.
” Looking again to the prophetic drama, note: “But when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man lefthanded; and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon the Icing of Moab.”—Judg. 3:15.
” Likewise the spiritual Israelites, God’s devoted people, cried unto the Lord from 1918 onward. It was in that year 1918 that the work of publishing the kingdom message was practically stopped the world over, and God’s people continued in that inactive condition for some time. Then, in 1922, Jehovah’s witnesses, assembled in convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, understood from the Lord that Christ Jesus was at the temple, and, on learning that, a shout of joy went up, because it meant that God’s disfavor was turned away from them and that he had sent his deliverer. (Isa. 12:1,2) Then with one accord they prayed to God that he would ‘send prosperity’ upon the witness work, the words of which prayer God had previously caused to be recorded and now put in their mouths, as the record shows. —Ps. 118:25.
10 In answer to the prayer of God’s devoted people for deliverance and prosperity he sent his beloved Son, the King Christ Jesus, to the temple, and disclosed to his people the presence of Christ Jesus at the temple, where he had been from 1918 onward. Christ Jesus came to judge the faithful and to deliver them from the servitude of religion by breaking the power of religion over them and by showing his faithful people their privilege to engage in God’s “strange work”. He also made known to them God’s will to gather unto himself through Christ Jesus the “great multitude". (Rev. 7:9-17) Note how the deliverance of the “remnant” from religion and religious oppression, and also the deliverance of the Jonadabs, was foreshadowed in the drama here considered. “The Lord raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera.” Here Ehud pictured Christ Jesus at the time he came to the temple of Jehovah in 1918. The name Ehud means “union”, or “unity”. Note how the words of the prophet apply to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, as set forth in the Psalm:
280
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“Teach me thy way, 0 Lord; I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to fear thy name.” (Ps. 86:11) Note also that Ehud here pictures The Christ, showing that all members of “his body” must be in full union or unity with Christ Jesus and Jehovah in The Theocratic Organization. (1 Cor. 12:12-18, 27) The faithful, consecrated ones, gathered to the temple, there tried, tested, judged and approved, were anointed and gathered unto the Lord, and then he sent them forth to perform service in his name and the name of Jehovah God. The Greater Ehud, Christ Jesus, brought them unto himself, and they were made his representatives and representatives and servants of Jehovah. They were made “one in Christ Jesus”. They were fully and completely anointed as one man. They were sent forth with the “sword of the spirit” to press it against the gates of “Christendom”, which is the modern-day Jerusalem. The prophecy written by Ezekiel here seems not only appropriate but to fully apply to Jehovah’s witnesses who had been anointed and sent forth to participate in Jehovah’s “strange work”; which text reads, to wit: “I have set the threatening sword against all their gates, that their heart may melt, and their stumblings be multiplied; ah! it is made as lightning, it is pointed fox slaughter. Gather thee together [(marginal reading) Make thyself one], go to the right, set thyself in array, go to the left, whithersoever thy face is set.”—Ezek. 21:15,16, A.R.V.
31	The apostle Paul definitely fixed the time of the fulfillment and application of this scripture as at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to the temple: “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.” (2 Thess. 2:1, 2) Thus the apostle shows the complete unity and harmonious action of Jehovah’s anointed ones. Therefore it is observed that the raising up of Ehud, the deliverer of natural Israel, foreshadowed the sending of the Greater Ehud, Christ Jesus, the Deliverer of the faithful spiritual Israelites, to the temple to deliver these faithful ones from the cruel, political “Christendom”, which practices religion for gain.
32	That which the Lord has recorded about Ehud, his parentage and the tribe to which he belonged, is of importance. Ehud was the son of Gera. That name means “grain”, especially that which was used as a weight or measure of money. A gerah was the twentieth part of a shekel. (Ex. 30:13) It therefore denoted something very small and insignificant so far as its purchasing power was concerned; and this view is the one held by the enemies of God’s people who think themselves very rich. Ehud’s fa
ther was of little value or worth in the eyes of the religionists, and likewise Jehovah is of little worth in the eyes of the religionists.
33	Note also that the earthly parents of Jesus were lowly and of little value or worth in the eyes of the self-important ones. With those arrogant religionists the name of Almighty God was then and is now of little worth or value. They rely upon the traditions of men and on their own importance. As to the earthly parents of Jesus the religionists said of him: 'Can anything good come out of Nazareth!’ (John 1:46) They raised the question of his legitimate birth. As to the reputation of Jesus, contrasted with their own, Jesus said to those self-important religionists at that time: “Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication; we have one Father, even God.” (John 8:41) Likewise today Jehovah’s witnesses are also counted of little value or worth. The orthodox religionists regard them as very insignificant and speak of them as members of ‘the very smallest sect or cult’, which originated with a man, and which sect is of very recent organization as compared to the great religious system. (See Professor Elmer T. Clark’s religious comments in The Small Sects in America.) They ignore the fact that Jehovah’s witnesses have existed on the earth at all times for six thousand years, and that God himself gives them that name. It is cause for increased faith and joy to Jehovah’s witnesses in these days of religious demonism influence to note how Jehovah himself caused all these things to be foreshadowed many centuries ago. Thus Jehovah shows that he has at all times been mindful of those who love and serve him in spirit and in truth. Jehovah never forgets those of his organization who continue faithful and zealous for The Theocratic Government: “Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb! yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon-the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.”—Isa. 49: 15, 16.
34	Ehud was of the tribe of Benjamin, and therefore the prophecy uttered by Jacob applied to Ehud, to wit: “Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf; in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil." (Gen. 49: 27) Likewise the prophecy uttered by Moses applies to Ehud, to wit: “And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders.”—Deut. 33:12.
35	King Eglon had his chief headquarters in the territory of Ehud’s tribe, that is, in the vicinity of Jericho, which territory the Lord had previously assigned to Benjamin. (Josh. 18:21) Eglon was
September 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
281
therefore a foreigner, using his power to harass and oppress the people who were in a covenant with Jehovah.
34	Reuben, the firstborn of Jacob, had failed, and also Ephraim, the favorite son of Joseph, had failed, and therefore the tribe of Benjamin stood in line for the royal honors of the kingdom. (1 Chron. 5:1; Ps. 78:9-11,67,68) In the course of time Saul was made king, and he also failed because of his yielding to demonism or religion, and that spoiled things for the tribe of Benjamin. In like manner the remnant of God’s spiritual Israel are in line for the kingdom with Christ Jesus, the antitypical David, and then those who had in time proved unfaithful and yielded to religion or demonism also became a part of the rejected or “evil servant” and lose all opportunity for the kingdom. Thus is magnified the divine rule that complete faithfulness to The Theocracy is essential to deliverance and everlasting blessings. No one can receive such blessings unless he is in full harmony and unity with the great Theocrat and His King.
37	Ehud, as stated by the Scripture, was “a man lefthanded”; “who used the left hand as well as the right” (Douay). Being both righthanded and lefthanded appears to have been a favor especially given to the tribe of Benjamin: “Among all this people, there were seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not miss.” (Judg. 20:16) “They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a bow, even of Saul’s brethren of Benjamin.” (1 Chron. 12: 2) Those fellows were sure shots. Thus favored, Ehud was equipped to meet any attack from either side and also to surprise the enemy by his manner of attack. This must have been important, otherwise the Lord would not have caused it to be recorded.
38	It must be true that the Lord directed the faithful Israelites in selecting Ehud for this special service. They selected him as their representative to carry “a present unto Eglon the king of Moab”. That was done to appeal to the vanity of Eglon and thus to court favor with the dictator and to gain an audience with him. Ehud did not contribute the present, nor did the present represent any affection or love on the part of Ehud for the king. It was a message, and he was the messenger. The present afforded opportunity for Ehud to get close up to the king and to thereby carry out his well-laid plan of action. The purpose was the vindication of Jehovah’s name in behalf of his covenant people, that the Israelites might be relieved from the oppression of a foreign king who was a dictator and a Devil-religionist.
” Ehud played the part in the drama picturing Christ Jesus and also including the members of “the body of Christ” on the earth from and after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple and the gathering unto himself of the faithful anointed ones who become members of “his body”. In fulfillment of this part of the drama the remnant of God’s people in time woke up to the necessity for real aggressive action. It was in the year 1922 that the remnant began to swing into action in unity and in harmony. At that time the remnant, who composed the “faithful and wise servant” class, were in the temple. Others would be brought in, and these were pictured by Ruth and Esther, who in the antitype later became a part of the remnant. In 1922 the Ruth and Esther class were in bondage to the religious restraint and were oppressed and being held by Babylon, that is to say, “Christendom,” as prisoners. It was the express will of Jehovah that such ones represented by Ruth and Esther should be set free; and to that end The Christ, of whom the members of the remnant of the anointed were a part, received the commission from Jehovah God, which they must perform under the direction of Christ Jesus the Head: “To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them.that sit in darkness out of the prison house." (Isa. 42:7) The then anointed remnant must carry out their commission from the Lord, as written, to wit: “That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places.”—Isa. 49: 9.
40	In addition to those pictured by Ruth and Esther, there was then a “great multitude” of people, that is to say, a company without any definitely stated number, who have a proper heart toward God and who desire to know and to do his will, that must be gathered. They were held by the religionists as prisoners. They were crying unto the Lord, imploring him to help and deliver them from the oppies-sive measures employed in the religious organization. They were ‘strangers within the gates’. (Ex. 20: 10) They must have opportunity to escape. The Lord prepared the way.
41	It was a restrained and oppressed class of Israelites that chose Ehud to go to the king Eglon. Someone as God’s instrument must boldly and courageously undertake the job. Ehud willingly undertook the mission. Without a doubt Jehovah raised up Ehud and brought to pass the conditions there existing that it might be possible and necessary for Ehud to go. That would mean that Ehud, in the performance of that mission, would be guided by Jehovah and that, following instructions from the Lord, he would certainly succeed in his mission.
(To be continued)
ESCAPE FROM DEATH
UAZs SHALL not surely die.” Not the words of God, J these, but the words of the great deceiver, trying to induce mankind in Eden to do that which their Maker forbade. (Genesis 3:4) Disobedient man dies, which proves that the foregoing words to perfect humankind in Eden were a lie. Why do human creatures die? Because the first man, Adam, willfully sinned by joining the Devil in rebellion against the Creator Jehovah God. All the human race sprang from Adam; and because Adam became a sinner before he and Eve had children, it naturally follows that all men have been born imperfect and are therefore sinners by inheritance. King David, a man after God's own heart, wrote: “Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.” (Psalm 51:5) The inspired apostle Paul explains: “By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.” (Rom. 5:12) Unless provision is made by the Almighty God to save men from death, in time all men would perish. God alone could provide for man’s salvation, and therefore it is written: “Salvation belongeth unto Jehovah.”—Ps. 3:8, Am. Rev. Ver.
God is under no obligation to provide salvation for any man, because all men are by nature sinners. The salvation of sinful man could bring no profit to Jehovah God. He could well let all men die and then create a new race and by that new race prove the Devil a liar and prove Jehovah’s supremacy. It pleased Him to do otherwise. Acting entirely unselfishly, he has provided for the salvation of man from death. “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) That Scripture text is no authority whatsoever for the doctrine of “universal redemption” or “universal salvation” of all sinners, including the Devil himself. Such doctrine is a ruse of the deceiver who said, “Ye shall not surely die,” in order to prevent men from learning the only means of salvation to life. Salvation, according to John 3:16, above quoted, is only to those who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ: ‘He that believeth on him shall not perish.’ It follows, then, that those who do not believe on the Lord shall perish. "For the wages of sin is death ; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Rom. 6:23) Since life is a gift from God, then it can be received from no one else.
No man can receive a gift until he first has knowledge that the gift is offered to him, and then he must willingly accept that which is offered, in order for the gift to be completed. Anything that is forced upon another against his will is not a gift. When the gift is offered to man it becomes effective only when that gift is accepted upon the terms offered.—Rom. 5:18.
Concerning Jesus Christ it is written: “Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.” (Acts 4: 12) The name Jesus means “Jehovah is salvation”. That is to say, Jesus is the means by and through which Jehovah God has provided salvation for man to life, and such salvation is granted upon the terms which God unselfishly provides. At the birth of the child Jesus the angel of Jehovah announced to witnesses this message: “Unto
you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.” (Luke 2:11) How does Jesus Christ become the Savior?
Jesus Christ becomes the owner of the human creatures by right of purchase. The purchase price is the lifeblood of the man Jesus poured out unto death according to the will of Jehovah God his Father. (Isa. 53:10, 12) “For the life of the flesh is in the blood.” (Lev. 17: 11) Jesus willingly submitted to being put to death that he might purchase the human race, and concerning this Jesus said: “Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.”—John 10:17,18.
Angels are spirit creatures, and men are human and therefore lower than angels. It is written concerning Jesus “But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.” (Heb. 2:9) “And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.”—Phil. 2:8-11.
Jesus suffered for three and one-half years the contradiction of sinners and was continuously persecuted by the religious sinners, and under these adverse conditions he maintained his integrity toward God. “Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things winch he suffered, and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him ” (Heb 5: 8, 9) Concerning the purchase price by which the human race is bought it is written: “Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.” (1 Pet 1 18, 19) The lifeblood of the man Jesus provides the ransom price for man. By right of purchase Jesus is the owner of mankind, clothed with full power and authority to minister salvation from death to human creatures who comply with that which God’s law requires. Jehovah God is the great Savior, because ‘salvation belongeth to God’ and God has made Christ Jesus the “author of eternal salvation”, that is to say, God’s Executive Officer, who ministers the salvation of life to men according to the will of God.—Rom. 5:18; 6: 23.
Is salvation for all men, whether men desire to have salvation or not? No, it is not for those who do not desire it. Note carefully the words of Hebrews 5:9: Jesus is made “the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him”. Salvation is granted to man according to the specific terms and conditions which God has named in his Word, and one specific condition is, “That whosoever believeth in him [Christ Jesus] should not perish, but have everlasting
282
September 15,1940
Sfte WATCHTOWER.
283
life.” (John 3:16) There are specific conditions attached to such provision which must be met. God's provisions for man’s salvation could not mean compulsory salvation, but that salvation must be for those who believe, because the promise is to those who believe, that they shall not perish. To perish means to go completely out of existence. It is the love of God that provides for man’s salvation, and hence salvation to those who desire to be saved. Since salvation is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, it follows that no man could gain salvation to life for man. Life is a free gift from God, and those who comply with the terms of the gift freely receive it.
Salvation is not provided for everyone. The intelligent creature who willfully and deliberately is the adversary of Jehovah God certainly would not receive salvation to life as a free gift from God. Those humans classed as “goats” at the coming battle of Armageddon shall be everlastingly ‘cut off’ from life, sharing the fate of the Devil. (Matt. 25: 32, 41-46) Lucifer the Devil is a willful and deliberate enemy of God, and his end is destruction. (Isa. 14:19; Ezek. 28:19) Adam, when created, was a perfect man. All the creation of God is perfect, as stated at Deuteronomy 32:4. Adam, being perfect, was intelligent, and he was fully advised of God’s law and the penalty for violating it.
Satan the adversary of God deceived Eve and led her into sin, but “Adam was not deceived”. (1 Timothy 2:14) He voluntarily joined the Devil in rebellion, and hence he was an intelligent, willful and deliberate sinner. Adam had the privilege of obtaining life everlasting on earth upon condition of his obedience unto God. Adam, being duly informed that willful wrongdoing would mean death and the end of life, deliberately walked into death There is therefore no reason to conclude that he could ever thereafter find redemption and salvation to life. God sentenced Adam to death; and God does not change, declares Malachi 3: 6. That judgment is final and is not subject to being reversed; it must stand forever. God sentenced Adam to death while in Eden, but God deferred the complete execution of that judgment for a time, and that for his own wise purpose. In God’s due time Adam died; which proved the Devil a liar. (Gen. 5:5, 3:4) There is no promise found in the Scriptures that Adam’s redemption and resurrection and salvation will take place at any time. Adam had a fair trial for life and completely failed. If God should provide the second trial or second chance for Adam, that would be a demal of the justice of God’s own judgment against Adam. That is an impossibility with God; as it is written: “He cannot deny himself.” (2 Tim. 2:13) “God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that He should repent; hath He said, and shall he not do it? or hath He spoken, and shall he not make it good?”—Num. 23:19.
But with Adam’s offspring born outside of Eden the situation or condition is entirely different. Before Adam sinned he and his wife Eve had not exereised the power and function to bring forth children. It seems that God deferred the complete execution of the judgment of death against man in order that Adam and Eve might bring forth children; which they did. (Gen. 4:1,2,25; 5:3-8) At the time of God’s judgment entered against Adam his children, not having been born, were not on trial for life, and hence they were not sentenced to death. However, when born,
they were under condemnation because of inherited imperfection. The imperfect Adam and Eve under condemnation could not bring forth perfect children. Every one of Adam’s children was therefore conceived in sin and brought forth in iniquity, for the very reason that Adam and Eve were sinners under the judgment of death when their children were conceived. Those children had done nothing before or at the time of birth to make them sinners, as indeed they could not do anything to that end. Their conception and birth was without their knowledge or consent. They became sinners by inheritance; and that is true with reference to every child that has been bom on the earth, except Jesus alone. Upon this point of inherited sin Romans 5: 12, 14 is clear, positive and indisputable: “By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin ; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.” “Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of [after the manner like or similar to] Adam’s transgression.”
Moses was a type or figure prophetic of Christ Jesus, the great Prophet and Savior of man from death. The children of Adam being sentenced by inheritance and being therefore under condemnation, they must in the course of time suffer death and return to the dust, because God could not approve imperfect ones and permit such to live for ever. (Hab. 1:13) God could, however, consistently have mercy upon all who were not willful and deliberate sinners or opposers of Jehovah God. This fixed rule of Jehovah he emphasized in the declaration of his law through Moses to the Israelites, wherein it is written: “He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three witnesses.” (Heb. 10:28; Deut. 17:2-7) All of humankind, having been born as sinners and tinder condemnation, must die unless some provision is made for them to live; and God, the Giver of life, is under no obligation to provide salvation. On the other hand, “God is love” (1 John 4:16) ; and in the exercise of his unselfishness he could show and has consistently shown mercy to mankind by providing salvation through Christ. Mercy' is loving-kindness extended by Jehovah to those under condemnation (and justly so) and subject to destruction. God has shown mercy to mankind in what manner? By providing redemption and salvation through Jesus Christ.
In order to be just must God extend mercy to every creature? No. Those who are willing and deliberate opposers of God would not accept his mercy if extended to them; and certainly God would not extend mercy to such opposers, and he does not. Furthermore, mercy is not the result of the exercise of justice, but is the exercise of loving-kindness when such attribute may be exercised consistently with justice. “As it is written, Jacob have I loved; but Esau have I hated.” (Rom. 9:13) Jacob was faithful and obedient to God. His brother Esau spurned the goodness of God and died without mercy. (Heb. 12:16,17) Jehovah’s rule of action, or law, is unchangeable. (Mal. 3:6) His mercy is extended to all who comply with his fixed rules. The result to the wicked and unfaithful is stated at Psalm 145:20: “Jehovah preserveth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.”—Am. Rev. Ver.
Today all the nations are facing death, this death, however, not being due to inheritance from Adam. At the uni-
284
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
versal war of Armageddon, that is, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty,” all nations shall die. That “death” of the nations will not be at the hands of other nations, but death administered by the Almighty Power of heaven, Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, who constitute “the Higher Powers”. (Rom. 13:1) The battle of that great day of God Almighty will be fought by Jehovah and Christ Jesus, supported by all the holy angels of heaven, pitted against the Devil and other demons and their human supporters on earth who continue on the side of the wicked ones. All the nations suffer the same fate, because all are against The Theocratic Government, that is, the government or kingdom of Almighty God. At the battle of Armageddon all such nations shall cease for ever.
While the trouble in the earth is ever increasing and the suffering of the poor increases, some are manifesting a greater amount of sympathy and consideration for those who on earth represent The Theocratic Government, while others are becoming more unreasonable, harsh, goatish, toward the Lord’s “poor”, the “poor in spirit”. Jehovah indicates what class he will favor in this time of trouble which culminates in Armageddon, saying: “Blessed is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he shall be blessed upon the earth.” (Ps. 41:1, 2) The Scriptural evidence is that a “great multitude” will be brought alive through the battle of Armageddon, and these, the “other sheep” of the Lord, will on earth for ever inherit the blessings under the Kingdom or’Theocratic Government.— Rev. 7 : 9-17; John 10:16; Matt. 25: 31-46.
The first world ended with a great flood, in which a few persons, to wit, eight, were saved by being carried over in the ark from the old to the new organization which followed and which God established immediately after the Flood, under Noah. This was an example or picture representing the passing away of the “present evil world” and showing that the “great multitude” of the Lord’s “other sheep” will be carried over from the old to the new. When God had delivered Noah and his family from the perils of the deluge and Noah builded an altar before the Lord and offered a sacrifice, the Lord made promise to Noah, saying: “I will not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake; . . .
neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done. While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease.” (Gen. 8: 21, 22) As Ecclesiastes 1:4 declares that “the earth abideth for ever”, this statement to Noah is a positive promise that the earthly survivors of Armageddon, if continuing obedient to the Kingdom, may live happily on earth for ever. Seeing, then, that we are at the end of Satan’s world and the opening of the long-promised “world to come”, “world without end,” and further seeing that according to the Scriptures many will pass over to the new world, escaping death at Armageddon, it can be confidently announced that a “great multitude” now living will never die, because, these being offered Kingdom blessings, they will joyfully accept them and be obedient to The Theocracy.
It was Jesus who said: “Whosoever liveth and bclieveth in me shall never die.” (John 11:26) After Armageddon the living ones, the earthly survivors, who are not in a covenant with the Lord by sacrifice, but who believe on the Lord, shall not die. To believe means to act upon that belief, in accordance with it, and to be obedient to the Kingdom under Christ that the Lord Jehovah establishes over the earth. Furthermore Jesus the King said: “If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.” (John 8:51) Men cannot keep the sayings of Jesus until they hear them We have now entered the Lord’s due time to hear, and the message of the Kingdom is being declared by Jehovah’s witnesses, and the “great multitude” are hearing and acting in harmony with the message and are therefore in line for life. They joyfully hail the great Theocrat Jehovah and his anointed King, of whom it is written : “For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.” (1 Cor. 15: 25, 26) “And God himself shall be with them, and be their God And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.” (Rev. 21:3,4) Let all persons of good will yet in Satan’s world organization now be diligent to heed the Lord’s admonition to Lot: “Escape for thy life.”— Gen. 19. 17.
TRUMPET SEVEN
A TRUMPET would imply a public proclamation. In the seven years, 1922 to 1928, seven annual proclamations of highest public interest were sounded forth from seven successive annual conventions of Jehovah’s witnesses, the seventh being in Detroit, Michigan.
It seems certain that the seventh trumpet would proclaim events of the greatest importance coming to pass. The greatest doctrine of God’s Word is his kingdom, because the kingdom will vindicate the word and name of Jehovah. God’s great drama has moved forward orderly, and each event exactly on time in harmony with his schedule. “And the seventh angel sounded; and there followed great voices in heaven, and they said, The kingdom [right of rulership] of the world is become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his
Christ: and he shall reign for ever and ever.” (Rev 11:15, Am. Rev. Ver.) “The world” here means the new world beginning, which world did begin in A.D. 1914, because it is then that “the times of the Gentiles” ended and Christ Jesus, whose right it is to rule, came into power —Luke 21:24, Ezek. 21: 27.
Jehovah God sent his angel to carry out matters of great importance as pertaining to his people on earth He caused his representatives or deputies, who are invisible to men, to direct what should be done by his visible servants and witnesses on earth. This is further proof of the completeness with which Jehovah keeps in his hand all his work Everything is in His right hand ; and he directs his servants, and they act according to his sovereign will. No creature
September 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
285
can properly take credit for what is done, whether that creature be an invisible angel of heaven or some earthly servant Recall that when God sent his angels to deal with some of his earthly creatures the angels’ names were not disclosed. These angelic creatures, far greater than man, kept their names secret from man. The manifest purpose was that all glory and honor should be given to God. This must mean that the creature shall take no credit to himself for what he is privileged to do.—See Judges 13:17,18.
If it appears, then, that God’s people on earth have been used by the Lord to perform certain things in connection with fulfillment of his prophecy, let these facts cause them to humbly fall before Jehovah God and give him all glory and all honor. Let no flattering titles or honor be given to men, for such is not pleasing to the Lord. (Job32:22) God’s people can today see where they have made this great error many times in the past; but henceforth let them be warned and hereafter give all the glory and honor to God, and none whatsoever to men, and thus avoid religion.
From Julv 30 to August 6, inclusive, 1928, Jehovah’s witnesses held a convention at Detroit, Mich. In that convention were consecrated men and women from many countries of the earth, speaking many tongues and languages. The religious clergy and their allies used every power at their command to keep the people in ignorance of the fact of this convention and to deter persons from attending. They would have prevented the shouting of the multitudes uho did attend, if they could; but they could not. Satan and his agents have not power to prevent anything that God wills to have done. That was a service convention the general purpose of which was to make known the kingdom of God. The Watch Tower Society published its own newspaper for the occasion, called The Messenger, which gave a daily report of the events of the convention. From The Messenger the following is quoted:
‘The most important event that ever happened in Detroit, or in Michigan, or in the United States, or on the American continent, or in the world, takes place this morning at 9:30 when an address will be given on “Ruler for the People”, over the greatest network of radio stations ever linked together in human history. . . . The wire network of these stations covers 33,500 miles of telephone lines, and 91,400 miles of telegraph lines. More than 500 telephone experts will superintend the network.’ The New York Times said: ‘The most extensive and expensive radio hook-up in history has been arranged for the International Bible Students next Sunday at Detroit. The speaker is an uncompromising foe of organized Christianity.’ The Washington (D.C.) Post, on August 6, said: ‘The broadcast of Sunday morning’s session of the International Bible Students Association, assembled yesterday morning in Detroit, included more than 100 stations, and therefore was the largest in the history of radio. . . . For the convenience of listeners in the Capital loud-speakers were installed in the Pythian auditorium, and at several other points in the city. The visible audience in the Detroit auditorium numbered more than 12,000. In addition to that, loud-speakers were placed in Belle Isle Park, about ten miles away in Detroit, where it is said another crowd assembled.’
The most important period of the convention was the Sunday morning session, August 5. Assembled at the Coli
seum were upward of 12,000 earnest followers of Christ Jesus. The radio stations linked together numbered one hundred and seven, covering all parts of the United States and almost all of Canada, and with shortwave channels carrying the message to foreign lands. There were many consecrated people assembled in similar groups at various points with loud-speakers installed, that they might listen to the radio; and therefore these similar groups formed a part of the convention and had a part in its proceedings. At the appointed hour a resolution was read setting forth in substance that Jehovah, the only true God, is the true Friend and Benefactor of mankind; that Satan’s world or rule without interference by Jehovah has ended; and that Jehovah has placed his beloved Son Christ Jesus upon his throne to rule the world, though his enemies yet operate; and then the resolution called upon all nations and peoples to give their allegiance to God’s kingdom. Then followed the speech in support of the resolution, the title of which was “Ruler for the People”. At the conclusion thereof the resolution was enthusiastically adopted by a vote of the seen and the unseen radio audience.
“DECLARATION AGAINST SATAN AND FOR JEHOVAH
“The Bible Students in international convention assembled do declare themselves against Satan and wholly for Jehovah of hosts, and emphatically announce further these vital truths, to wit:
“First: That the peoples-of earth organized into forms of government and under the control of a superior and invisible ruler constitute the world;
“Second: That Jehovah is the .only true and Almighty God and £be source of all just authority; that he is the King Eternal, the God of justice, wisdom, love and power and the true Friend and Benefactor of all creation ;
“Third: That Jehovah delegated to his son Lucifer the authority to be the overseer of man; that Lucifer became disloyal, rebelled against God and caused man to fall away from righteousness, and since that rebellion Lucifer has been known by the titles Dragon, Serpent, Satan and Devil; that Satan the Devil has caused strife amongst the nations and is responsible for all the cruel wars, wicked murders, all heinous crimes and other corrupt acts that have been committed; that until now Jehovah has not restrained Satan from the exercise of power and influence over man, that for many centuries Satan has been the invisible ruler of the world, constantly defaming the name of Jehovah God and working great injury to men and nations;
“Fourth: That Jehovah promised that in his due time he would restrain Satan and establish a righteous government in the earth that men might have an opportunity for life everlasting in happiness; and to that end he anointed his beloved Son Jesus to be the Redeemer and invisible Ruler of the world;
“Fifth: That Jehovah’s due time has come to fulfill his promise and to clear his reputation in the minds of all creation; that Christ Jesus has taken his high office as the executive of Jehovah and the great issue now is, Who is God, and who shall rule the peoples and nations?
“Sixth: That because Satan will not surrender his wicked rule over the nations and peoples of the earth, Jeho
286
3Te WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
vah of hosts with his anointed executive officer Christ Jesus will press the conflict against Satan and all of his forces of evil, and henceforth our battle-cry shall be, THE SWORD OF JEHOVAH AND OF HIS ANOINTED; that the great battle of Armageddon soon to begin will result in the full restraint of Satan and the complete overthrow of his evil organization, and that Jehovah will establish righteousness in the earth by and through Christ, the new Ruler, and will emancipate mankind from evil and bring everlasting blessings to all the nations of the earth;
“Seventh: Therefore the due time has come for all who love righteousness to take their stand on the side of Jehovah and obey and serve him with a pure heart, that they may receive the boundless blessings which the Almighty God has in reservation for them.”
A full report of the resolution and the supporting address appeared in the Golden Age magazine of September 5, 1928. For further report of the proceedings of the radio hook-up broadcasting of the resolution and the supporting argument, see The Watchtower September 15, 1928.
As Revelation 11:15 pictures the “seventh angel” as sounding the trumpet, it seems quite convincing that Jehovah God through his angel directed the proceedings at that convention and afforded the opportunity for proclaiming it over the broadest area that any message ever delivered on earth up to that time had been broadcast. On Monday morning following, at four o'clock in the morning, the same resolution and supporting argument were broadcast by shortwave from Detroit, Michigan, by wire connection with the large station at Schenectady, New York, for the special benefit of Australia, New Zealand and other islands of the sea. Shortly thereafter cablegrams were received from Australia and New Zealand announcing that the reception was splendid and well received. Cablegrams from the islands of Jamaica, Trinidad, and other British West Indies points, likewise reported good reception.
This trumpet message was an announcement that Jehovah is the King eternal and that he has set his beloved Son, earth’s rightful Ruler, upon his throne. That the Lord directed it there can be no doubt, because no one connected with this convention had thought that its proceedings might be in fulfillment of Revelation 11 15. Nor did such a thought occur to anyone, so far as known, for more than a year thereafter. Psalm 97:1 had declared: “Jehovah hath become king.” (Rotherham) And Psalm 22:28: “For the kingdom is Jehovah’s, and he is the ruler over the nations.” (A.R.V.) ‘Jehovah has set his king upon his throne.’ (Ps. 2:6) Thus the Lord had long ago foretold what he would do; and which he did. The facts show that he set his King upon his throne in 1914, and here was the occasion for causing his people to make a proclamation of that fact to the nations and peoples of the earth. The convention resolution and the supporting address broadcast on that occasion were afterwards put in book form under the title “The Peoples Friend”, and millions of copies in various languages were placed in the hands of the people. At that same convention the book entitled Government was released for distribution, and has since been widely distributed throughout the earth.
As stated at Revelation 11:15, to wit, “the seventh angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven,” the foregoing messages, symbolized by the voices, are and were
from heaven because what is stated therein is the Word of God, and not the message of man. The issue is squarely raised, Who shall rule the world ? From that time forward such is the great issue, and God’s anointed witnesses are marching on together with their earthly companions of good will, all with songs of praise proclaiming, ‘Jehovah shall reign forever, by his Christ! Jehovah’s name shall now be vindicated.’ The book Government, released at that convention and distributed by the millions in many languages, especially emphasizes the fact that Jehovah is the Supreme One, and that his Theocratic government, by and through his anointed King, is the complete panacea for the ills of humankind, and is that which will set the people free, and that therefore God’s government is their great friend.
At the revelation that the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus has begun, united thanks are offered to the great Theocrat, Jehovah, by his anointed witnesses who are in line to sit with Christ Jesus in his heavenly throne. (Rev 3:21) Revelation 11:16,17 shows this under the symbol of the twenty-four elders that sat upon their seats or thrones and that, at the Kingdom announcement, fell upon their faces, worshiping God, and saying: “We give thee thanks, 0 Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned.” The “twenty-four elders”, being double the number of Christ’s apostles, symbolically represent the kingdom class, those in heaven and those yet alive on the earth, to whom Christ Jesus has said as a reward for their faithfulness: “Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord ” (Matt. 25:21,23) These worship not men, but worship the Supreme One and humble themselves under his mighty hand, as admonished at 1 Peter 2:17 and 5: 6. These say, not merely at prayer and at study meetings, but aloud by speech and by radio and by millions of printed books and by recorded speeches run on phonographs, proclaiming the fact, that God’s kingdom has come. They say that the Lord took his power and began his reign in A.D. 1914, as the Scriptures and modern facts show; and saying this they rejoice and give thanks to Jehovah and delight to become heralds of his kingdom.
Jehovah has always exercised supreme power over the universe aside from the earth; but now, by and through his beloved Son, He assumes authority over things pertaining to the earth. And with what effect upon the earth? This. “And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth ” (Rev. 11:18) The nations became angry in 1914, at the end of Satan’s world or end of his uninterrupted world rule, Jehovah not having interfered therewith up till then. Jehovah’s wrath came when his beloved One, Christ Jesus, came to His temple in 1918 for judgment work and the ruling factors of earth rejected him as the world’s rightful ruler and persecuted his witnesses. (Ps. 11 • 4-6) From the publication of the article “The First Resurrection” in the issue of June 1, 1927, of The Watchtower it is established that only after 1918 Jehovah’s people came to a realization of the fact that the faithful Christian saints that had died prior thereto, and had slept in the grave, had been resur
September 15, 1940
WATCHTOWER,
287
rected in such spirit or “first” resurrection about the time of the Lord's coming to his temple. Thus there had come “the time of the dead, that they should be judged”.
The record adds: “And that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets” This now applies to Jehovah’s witnesses that serve him and prophesy or preach “this gospel of the kingdom”. The prophets of old could not come into the fulfillment of this before God's faithful remnant of witnesses had been approved and anointed and brought into the temple condition, because concerning the prophets of old it is written: “They without us should not be made perfect.” (Heb. 11:39,40) The “saints" who are rewarded mean the purified ones who are wholly devoted to Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. “Them that fear thy name, small and great,” seems clearly to mean those who now hear the message of truth and turn to the Lord before Armageddon to become the Lord’s “other sheep”, the “trreat multitude”, that shall survive Armageddon and be forever on the earth.—Rev. 7: 9, 10.
The record further says as to Jehovah God : “And [thou] shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth.” By his prophet Isaiah (24:5) Jehovah tells of the ruling classes on earth, under Satan the invisible ruler, who have defiled the earth because they have transgressed God’s law, changed his ordinances, and broken his everlasting covenant concerning sacredness of human life. These wicked ruling factors have so corrupted the earth or organization of men on the earth that God will destroy the wicked organization, at Armageddon.
The vision, at Revelation 11: 19, then discloses the temple of God in heaven opened: “And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.” This indicates that the time had come for the awakening out of death of those saints who had died faithful; and also for those on the earth, found faithful to the Kingdom, to be brought into the temple class as approved of the Lord. This would mark the beginning of the fulfillment of the parable of the talents as set forth at Matthew 25:14-30. Tne opening of the temple would also disclose to those of the temple class what things are therein: “and there was been in his temple the ark of his covenant.”—Am. liev. Ver.
The ark of the covenant of Jehovah God is seen in the temple, in heaven; not in any earthly temple. In olden time, in the reign of King David at Jerusalem, the original literal ark of the covenant was transferred from the house of Obed-Edom to the tabernacle King David had erected for it on Mount Zion, and that transfer was the occasion for song and great rejoicing, and a song was composed and sung by David telling of the presence of Jehovah among His people for judgment. (See Psalm 132.) The Scriptures show that the ark of the covenant is a symbol of the presence of Jehovah, and his presence is therefore a time for his people to rejoice. As King David sang: “Arise, 0 Lord, into thy rest ■ thou, and the ark of thy strength. Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy saints shout for joy.”—Ps. 132:8,9; see also Hebrews 9:24.
The picture of the ark of the covenant, in Revelation 11 19, is that Jehovah, through his representative Messenger, Christ Jesus, has come to his temple, the spiritual
temple, and it is time for the approved ones of the temple class to greatly rejoice. “The Lord is in his holy temple let all the earth keep silence before him.” (Hab. 2: 20) The Lord now comes to build up Zion, as represented by his faithful remnant of witnesses on earth, and which building up is pictured by the transfer of the ark of the covenant to Mount Zion: “When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.” (Ps. 102:16) It is therefore the time for his people to say as did King David at the transfer of the ark to Mount Zion: “Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together, and deliver us from the heathen [the nations], that we may give thanks to thy holy name, and glory in thy praise.”—1 Chron. 16: 35.
Anciently the location of the ark of the covenant was the place where the twelve tribes of Israel went up and had a rally to give testimony to Jehovah’s theocratic rule According to the Psalm of King David: “Jerusalem is budded as a city that is compact together: whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.” (Ps. 122: 3-8) Now at this day Jehovah’s faithful anointed witnesses and their companions must rally to the performance of their covenant to keep his commandments, and in so doing give praise to Jehovah’s name and testimony to the vindication of his name by his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus.
The presence of the Lord as represented by the ark of the covenant in his temple is a time of great shaking and agitation and commotion, all which is symbolically dese: ibed at Revelation 11:19. This shaking, agitation, and commotion has been particularly true since 1918 with reference to Jehovah’s consecrated people on earth and those who claim to be followers of Christ but who practice religion instead of Christianity. This condition is enhanced by the “lightnings” from the Word of God, or flashes of revealed truth. The faithful witnesses of Jehovah see the light upon God’s Word and rejoice, and those not faithful but who are ensnared by religion become incensed at Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and are shaken out of God’s organization The flashes of lightning from the Lord are fol owed by “voices, and thunderings", proclamations of the message of truth; and these messages of truth, hard and cutting, like “great hail”, sweep away the covering of lies of organized religion (Isa. 28:17), and Jehovah’s anointed witnesses, together with the “great multitude” of their companions, joyfully proclaim the praises of his name and continue to sing the “new song” of the vindication of his name and of his Theocratic Government under Christ.
(Continued from page 271)
64-page publication contains the entire proceedings on the occasion of Judge Rutherford’s speech to the recent Theocratic Convention on “Religion as a World Remedy”, and also his other speech on “Times and Seasons”, and to which these many millions were personally invited. Conspiracy Against Democracy displays an appropriate and attractive front cover. It may be had for 5c a copy. Time of release for general distribution in the held is announced elsewhere.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
AFTER REBUFF, COURAGE AND SUCCESS
“Witnessing with Watchtower and Consolation to judges, lawyers, sheriff, etc., we three pioneers [ladies] came to the City Hall. I went to the police station, to the chief, and said: ‘This is the latest issue and deals with The Flag Case.’ Abruptly he asked: ‘What did you say?’ I began to speak, but he, in almost a rage, broke in, saying, ‘I have heard a lot about this, and the best thing you and your bunch can do is to fold up, quit this work, get off the streets with your magazines and stop your foolish work.’ One policeman was present in the office, but apparently gave no ear to what was going on. The chief nearly yelled: ‘What do you think the American people should do, one-half of them salute and one-half refuse to salute? I fought hard for my country, and then to have a young punk like you come in here and tell me I shouldn’t salute the flag! I ought to knock your head right off . . . [vile and abusive language].’ Said I: ‘I didn’t say you or anyone else should not salute, because everyone has or should have the right and ability to choose for himself.’ The chief threatened me with violence if I did not get out of his office with those magazines and stay off the streets with them and away from the homes, and that if he caught us again he would lock us up, take it up with the mayor, etc. I walked discreetly out. Instead of going from house to house as we had planned, we pioneers then took to working the street corners and business places. The same policeman who was present at the police station when I was there walked by me on the street, but paid no attention to what I was doing. In one hour and forty minutes we had placed, by Jehovah’s loving grace, thirty magazines. Then again in the evening twelve more.”
PETITIONING FOR FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
“A new publisher (colored) went out today with the Petition [addressed to the Governor of Ohio in behalf of the Theocratic Convention of Jehovah’s witnesses]. One well-known Catholic in the neighborhood (white) was giving a party at which were gathered about seventeen visitors, all Catholics but two. The man giving the party very recently called at the publisher’s home and said very unkind things about Jehovah’s witnesses. Typical of his religious training, the statements he made were untrue, of which the publisher was well aware. When he saw she could not be moved, he resorted to the usual threats of all the things that ‘eould happen to her’ if she continued to associate with Jehovah’s witnesses. To all this she stood firm for the Lord. Knowing about the gathering, she decided she would go there with the petition (this, much to the surprise of her husband), and, as she stated, ‘make them all take their stand.’ Many nasty remarks were passed: ‘You’re working for Hitler!’ ‘You’re ignorant, that’s why you follow them!’ etc. Finally one woman in the crowd said: ‘You folks don’t know what you’re saying. These people are not for Hitler. I know they are doing a good work. Give me that petition. I’ll sign it, and when you get in that kingdom, remember me.’ Whereupon all the rest signed the petition too. Not only did the man of the house sign it, but he said: ‘Don’t walk any further. You can use my car and ride anywhere you want and get as many names as you can.’ The publisher lost no time, thanked him, took his car, and went on, rejoicing.”
ENLIGHTENING THE OSTENTATIOUSLY “PATRIOTIC”
“My neighbor, who is very patriotic, allowed a flag to be fastened to the roof of her house on Flag Day, and she has never taken it down. I called on her with the Petition. She proceeded to let me know how against the government Jehovah’s witnesses are. I told her she was not a good American or she would not leave the flag all night, etc. I told her I had the flag code or flag circular from the War Department, the Adjutant General’s office, under date of June 14, 1923, when 68 patriotic organizations met in Washington, under the auspices of the National Americanism Commission of the American Legion and adopted a flag code, and I would loan it to her so she could learn how to respect the flag other than to salute it. I told her the president of the United States was not allowed to salute the flag. She asked why. ‘Because he was the head, and the head could not salute the head, if he did, it would be like the pope’s kissing his own toe.’ The result of this case was that she consented to listen to the lecorded lecture ‘Government and Peace’. I have been years trying to play a lecture, get her to read or do something to arouse her. The flag salute and Petition furnished the opportunity.”
POLICE ACTION RESULTS IN GOOD WITNESS
“On arrival at the poliee station I was brought before the desk officer, to whom I presented my identification card and Liberty to Preach. I told him I was one of Jehovah’s witnesses; at the time I was accosted I was preaching the gospel and am an ordained minister to do this work One of the fourteen officers present asked by what seminary was I ordained. I told him my commission for preaching the gospel came from God’s inspired Word, the Bible, and not from any man-made institution. Then they wanted to know what I had in my ‘brown suitcase’. So I opened my portable phonograph and put on ‘Instruction’. They began to complain, as it wasn’t loud enough for such a noisy place, so they took possession of it and played it themselves, playing ‘Snare and Racket’, ‘Flag Saluting,’ and ‘Warning’ All these records they played twice, looking for something for which to bring a charge against me Failing here, they began examining my books and booklets, but could find nothing. I then offered them some literature Some took booklets and promised to read them and everyone received an invitation to the zone assembly. One of the plain-clothes officers gave me a dollar and told me to take this to Jehovah. I thanked him for his generosity, but explained that Jehovah is the great provider and doesn’t need any money. With this I packed my books and records and bade them good day. When I asked if they would please return me to the place where I was picked up they said: ‘What do you think this is, a taxi cab station?’ So I walked out and returned to my work.”
“LOCUST” ON AN OKLAHOMA DOORSTEP
“One man was prejudiced, did not want me to come into the house. When I set up the phonograph on the steps he just barely cracked the door open. As the record so clearly explained the difference between religion and Christianity, the door opened a little wider, and when it was completed and the books were offered to him, he gladly took Salvation.”
288
^He WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And ail thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Latah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesns divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to ‘‘fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and Sooth Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn ollice, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian......... 1 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N' S. W„ Australia
South African ...........--....Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publlahcis, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the Journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered cs second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y , under the Act of March 3, isrs.
"CHALLENGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The above period embraces the entire month of October and applies to all countries. Its name refers to Jehovah’s challenge to the opposing nations for a showdown fight. That challenge is set forth, in no mincing words, in the feature publication which will be circulated during this Period, to wit, the new book Religion. At the same time there will be released for public distribution the new booklet Conspiracy Against Democracy Both publications will be offered together on a contribution of 25c. No time to be lost now, and all desiring to do their proper part will promptly take this Period under consideration as to material, territory, procedure, etc. Any Watchtower readers wishing to get in touch with the nearest company organized for this service should write us or our branch office for references, now. Each one’s full report of activities is expected at the close of the month for inclusion in a world report.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 3: “Ehud” (Part 2), fl 1-20 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1, 1940.
Week of November 10: “Ehud” (Part 2), fl 21-37 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1,1940.
OPPORTUNITIES OF SERVICE
Jonadabs between 20 and 30 years of age, both male and female, married and single, who desire to file an application foi assignment to service by the Society, please write the Society Address your letter
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society President’s Office
124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York
"THE MESSENGER”
The full history of the first Theocratic Convention of Jehovah’s witnesses is now published in the 1940 issue of The Messenger This eighteen-city, five-day convention, which culminated in the nation-wide address by Judge Rutherford on “Religion as a World Remedy”, was an event of no passing importance. The Messenger, with its sweep of information, and its emphasis on the vital features, brings out the significance thereof which fast-movmg future events will only verify. This issue contains 64 pages, is replete with action pictures, and also contains the stirring non-programmed speeches of Judge Rutherford not elsewhere published. It is now
(Continued on page 303)
^ewwiriuwm
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol.LXI	October 1, 1940	No. 19
EHUD
PART 2
"Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.”—Ps. 144:1.
T EHOVAH selected David to perform parts in I prophetic dramas picturing Christ Jesus, his J great Vindicator. Of David Jehovah said: ‘He is a man after my own heart.’ That meant that David’s faithful devotion to Jehovah in performance of duty had Jehovah’s approval. David was a warrior, always battling for righteousness, looking to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. While Christ Jesus is “the Prince of Peace”, he is also the great Warrior, leading the battle forces of Jehovah, to the vindication of His name. (Rev. 19:11-1G) Ehud also played a part in the prophetic drama here under consideration, representing Christ Jesus the great Warrior of righteousness. In this part of the prophetic drama he pictured also the faithful body members of Christ Jesus, acting under the leadership of their Head and Lord. Jehovah has made many prophetic pictures foretelling that his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, will make war upon the Devil’s organization and completely destroy that wicked organization and will fully and completely vindicate Jehovah’s name. Thus Christ engages in a real warfare.
2	In the text introducing this article, that is, Psalm 144 :1, the prayer of The Christ is put in the mouth of those who are of his body members, and they pray earnestly with the hope and expectation of its fulfillment. To them Jehovah is the blessed One, and so they of the royal organization say: “Blessed be [Jehovah] my strength.” He is the strength of his faithful ones. The everlasting arm of Jehovah bears up his servants. Jehovah gives strength to those who love and serve him; as he declares: “For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.”—2 Chron. 16: 9.
’ In full harmony with Jehovah’s purpose the “faithful servant” class, pictured in the foregoing, utter the prayer: “Which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.” Jehovah’s witnesses pray this prayer, and they do everything in harmony with God’s will that they can do to perform that which the prayer calls upon them to do. That does not mean that Jehovah’s witnesses engage in physical combat in
order to make known the kingdom. What, then, is the instrument of war which Jehovah’s witnesses use?
4	The apostle, under inspiration of the holy spirit, answers: “And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.” (Eph. 6:17) In full harmony with this instruction Jehovah’s witnesses have armed themselves with the “sword of the spirit”, that is to say, God’s Word, and an explanation thereof, which God has given. It is with God’s Word that they do the work that he has assigned to them, and their instruments of warfare are “mighty ... to the pulling down of strong holds”. The religious strongholds are Satan’s prison houses, in which many persons are held in ignorance of God’s Word. The religious leaders fight desperately to prevent the people from learning the truth, and by that means to prevent those of good will from escaping from their prison houses. It is clearly the express purpose of Jehovah God that the wicked religious institutions shall be uncovered and exposed to plain view in order to enable the people of good will to flee from them and find a place of safety in God’s organization.
5	There cannot be the slightest doubt in the mind of the true servant class of the Lord that Jehovah through Christ Jesus has equipped the “faithful and wise servant”, pictured in Ehud and his mission, to go right after the religious organizations and tell the truth about them and to show them up and to inform the people that religion is a tool and instrument of Satan to entrap the people. Thereby the Lord furnishes opportunity for the oppressed class of prisoners who are of good will to hear and to lay hold upon the Theocratic message and to find the way to complete freedom. The words of Christ Jesus are very appropriate : “And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” (John 8:32) Those of good will must hear and accept the truth and therefore believe in Jehovah God and Christ Jesus as Vindicator, and must turn to Jehovah's organization and devote themselves thereto, in order to gain their freedom.
201
292
THE WATCHTOWER
e To carry out his divinely given commission Ehud prepared himself. Of course, such preparation was according to the will and direction of Jehovah; as it is written: “But Ehud made him a dagger [sword (2?.P.)] which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh." —Judg. 3:16.
’ That was not a short dagger, but one long enough to reach through the fat of Eglon’s belly; for he was a very fat man. His belly was his god, and he kept it well supplied, regardless of what others might need for their sustenance. Ehud made his sword a long knife therefore, on both sides. There would be no halfway results to his effort, but he would accomplish the mission for which he was sent, and do it completely. When his left hand wielded that sword Eglon was done for.
8 Now in fulfillment of this part of the prophetic drama, note Ephesians 6:17: “And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God." That sword with which the remnant is armed, by the grace of the Lord, is the message from Almighty God through Christ Jesus of and concerning The Theocratic Government. The oppressed people must learn that the “Higher Powers” are Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and that religion is of Satan, which the Devil uses to entrap and enslave the people and turn them away from God. And how did the Ehud class, the “remnant”, the “feet” of Christ on the earth, fashion the “sword” for their work! They ceased entirely from bestowing honor and praise upon men. They no longer sought the approval of men. They obeyed the commandments of Jehovah God, to wit: “Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.”— 2 Tim. 2:15.
* Thereafter the remnant no longer have used religious methods. They soon learned that by the use of God's appointed way and by using the sword with which they have been armed by the Lord’s grace they put themselves in danger of great criticism and opposition by the religious leaders. That neither frightened nor deterred them in their work. The faithful seized hold upon the two-edged sword, that is to say, the pure word of Almighty God, which cuts both ways: “For the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.”—Heb. 4:12.
10	That instrument of warfare punctures and cuts in all directions. The message of the truth penetrates the very vitals of the religious organizations and their leaders, who hold to and teach traditions. The sword, being the war weapon furnished by the Lord,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
is not too short, but of ample length to cut clear through the fat of the religious organizations that have joined up together and that have fed themselves and grown exceedingly fat, while they have let the common people starve, exactly as the Lord foretold through his prophet. (Ezek. 34: 7-15) As Ehud fearlessly went forward to carry out his commission, so the antitypical Ehudites at this point have gone forward fearlessly, so far as man is concerned. They have made Jehovah God their fear and have been diligent to perform his will.—Isa. 8:12,13.
11	Eglon, the king of Moab, would not expect an armed foe to carry his knife strapped on his right thigh, nor would he expect him to draw it with his left hand. That was contrary to the practice amongst the fighters. Likewise the religious oppressors and their allies have regarded Jehovah’s witnesses as a religious sect and they have expected them to fight according to the religious manner, according to the traditions of men, and not according to the Word of God. Ehud took his sharp sword, and “he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh”. His raiment identified him as a servant, and the knife on his right thigh pictured him as a warrior; and thus he represented or pictured Christ Jesus, the servant of Almighty God and the great Warrior, to whom Jehovah said: “Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, 0 most Mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty. And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and meekness and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.”—Ps. 45 : 3, 4.
12	Ehud’s sword was therefore concealed from Eglon; likewise the message of truth is concealed from the religionists, for the reason that they are blind to the purposes of Jehovah, being under the influence and power of the demons. (Matt. 23: 19-28) The men who stood as guards of King Eglon would look at the left thigh for weapons on Ebud, because that is where such weapons are usually carried. The religionists likewise have looked on the wrong side for the truth. They follow the traditions of men, and hence do not discern the “sword of the spirit”, the meaning of the Word of God.
13	Girding himself with his sword meant that Ehud was prepared for war. So likewise when the Lord Jesus sends forth his anointed from the temple he directs them to put on the war equipment and to go to the battle. (Eph. 6:10-18) The enemy cannot see the equipment of Jehovah’s witnesses, for the reason that religionists are blind to the truth. Religionists do not fight according to divine rules, but fight with blindness as to the proper course.
1‘	Ehud appeared as a peaceful messenger to the king: “And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab; and Eglon was a very fat man.” (Judg. 3:17) A present being brought to the king, he would
October 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
293
not suspect anything but peace. So likewise Jehovah’s witnesses are a peaceful people, yet warriors for the cause of righteousness. They go with a message of peace, but that message from the Lord is one of war against unrighteousness. Eglon was a glutton, feeding himself like the unfaithful shepherds in the great religious organizations. “Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God unto the shepherds, Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves I should not the shepherds feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed; but ye feed not the flock.” (Ezek. 34: 2, 3) Note how well the psalmist describes the great religious leaders, pictured by fat Eglon: “For I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. For there are no bands in their death; but their strength is firm. They are not in trouble as other men; neither are they plagued like other men. Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain; violence covereth them as a garment. Their eyes stand out with fatness; they have more than heart could wish. They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression; they speak loftily. They set their mouth against the heavens; and their tongue walketh through the earth. Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they increase in riches.”—Ps. 73: 3-9, 12.
15 “And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away the people that bare the present.” (Judg. 3:18) In 1931 Jehovah’s witnesses began serving upon the religious leaders and their allies the booklet The Kingdom, The Hope of the World. That was a message of the Lord, delivered by his servants, particularly to those who insist, and then insisted, on religion as being the hope of mankind. So that message raised the question: “Religion or the kingdom message: which is the people’s hope?”
18	Ehud himself withdrew from the king’s presence, but within a very short season returned to the king: “But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, 0 king; who said, Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from him. And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour, which he had for himself alone: and Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And he arose out of his seat.”—Judg. 3:19, 20.
” He desiring to be entirely private with the king and requesting a private audience, the king sent away all his attendants. Then, hearing from Ehud that he had a message for the king from the Lord, Eglon arose out of his seat. Without a doubt Jehovah was directing the drama in every minute detail, even as he directs his own people now on the earth. It was in 1933 that the message of the Lord began to be
directed specifically to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the chief religious organization on the earth, which rules other religious organizations. From that time onward the Watchtower publications emphasized the fact that the Scriptures show that the Philistines opposing Samson pictured the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Also The Watchtower, on June 15,1936, contained a message as made clear by the Lord that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy was foreshadowed by the Edomites; then that the “totalitarian state”, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allies, are in a league to rule the earth in opposition to The Theocracy. Since then Jehovah’s witnesses have continued to tell God’s message, not against the Catholic people, but to all who would hear, thereby showing that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is in fact the chief instrument in the hand of Satan to rob the people of the hope of everlasting life. As the purpose of Ehud was to deliver the Israelites, so the purpose of Jehovah’s witnesses, acting under the command of the Lord Jesus, has been and is to show the people of good will, Catholics, Protestants and others, that The Theocracy is the only hope of escape and deliverance to life.
18	“And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly. And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt caine out.”—Judg. 3: 21, 22.
” Ehud stood before King Eglon and quickly drew his sword and used it. That sword was a symbol of the divine message which carries the announcement of the judgment of death rendered by Jehovah against the oppressive and defamatory religious organization. The published message from 1936 onward particularly sets forth Jehovah’s death judgment against that great religious institution, which has for a long time blinded the people and held them prisoners and kept them away from the truth. The totalitarian monster, of which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is the religious top-rider, received the proclamation of Jehovah’s judgment of death. God’s people told them that their end is destruction. As Ehud’s sword drove home, so likewise the antitypical sword struck the Satanic institution in the middle of the “very fat man”. God has sent forth his message showing plainly to the people that religion in general, and the so-called “Christian religion” in particular, is a snare into which the Devil and his associated demons have caught the people; that it is a racket, in this: that the religious institutions have, in their selfish practices and oppressions, grown exceedingly fat; that they have deprived the people of their honest possessions, and that such religious institutions have appropriated to their own selfish use the pos
294
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
sessions of the people and therefore grown exceedingly rich. Such religious organizations and leaders the apostle describes in these words: “Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.” (Phil. 3:19) That great religious institution has coveted and still covets the rulership of the world contrary to Jehovah’s purpose. “Covetousness . . . is idolatry.” (Col. 3: 5, 6) Says Jehovah’s Word concerning those who persecute his faithful servants: “They are inclosed in their own fat; with their mouth they speak proudly.” (Ps. 17:10) Men of God feed upon the Word of God; as it is written: “Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart unto my knowledge. For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they shall withal be fitted in thy lips.” (Prov. 22:17,18) But as for religionists, the Word of God is deadly, striking such institutions in the vitals and cutting them in every direction.
20	The prophetic drama of Ehud and Eglon shows God’s purpose from the beginning to destroy religion, and particularly all such institutions and instruments as fraudulently use the name of Jehovah to deceive and rob the people and to thereby grow great and fat in themselves. It also shows that the delivery of the message of truth by Jehovah’s witnesses is not of their making or choice, but that the deadly message is “the sword of the spirit”, which exposes to the view of all the wickedness of the religious institutions, and this in order that the people may say that their only means of escape and salvation is to flee to Jehovah God and Christ. Now The Theocratic message that has been delivered during the past few years by Jehovah’s witnesses and companions appears to be drawing near a close. What will be the final effect of that message upon the peoples and nations? Does the prophetic drama here under consideration disclose the final effect upon the religious, totalitarian combine that now dominates the earth and oppresses the people ? Seeing that Eglon pictured the religious, commercial institutions operating for selfish gain, and that Ehud pictured the King of The Theocratic Government and the faithful members who compose “the feet of him”, the remainder of the drama will be pursued with keen interest by all those who love righteousness and who are on the side of The Theocracy.
21	Eglon, the king of Moab, who played a part in this prophetic drama, had moved into and taken possession of a part of the earth where he had no right to be. That land so occupied by him was holy land, that is to say, entirely dedicated and set aside for use by the people whom God had chosen and led out of Egypt into Canaan for his own name’s sake. Because of the unfaithfulness of the Israelites in turn
ing to religion, God had not interfered with Eglon taking possession of that part of the land assigned to the tribe of Benjamin, but had permitted Eglon to prosper and be strengthened for a time. There God severely disciplined the Israelites; but, of even greater importance, he made a prophetic drama foretelling what would come to pass upon “Christendom” because of the unfaithfulness of those who profess to be followers of Christ Jesus and who have persecuted God’s faithful servants. Religious organizations were formed shortly after the end of the earthly career of the apostles of Jesus Christ, and such religious organizations took the name of God and Christ. They became practitioners of what is called “the Christian religion”. The Roman Catholic religious organization took the lead in this religio-political movement, and within a short time after the organization thereof it began to be operated by selfish men for material gain. Then came into existence another religious organization called “Protestant”, the sincere men of whom protested against the wrongful course taken by the Roman Catholic system. Later that Protestant organization followed in the lead of the Catholic organization, fell under the control of selfish men, entered into the political affairs of the world, and operated for selfish gain. At the time of the coming of the Lord Jesus as King in 1914 all the religious organizations called “Christendom” rejected Christ as King and insisted on the world’s being ruled by selfish men. Their course became a stumbling stone to all the professed ones of “Christendom”. Catholic and Protestant and other religious organizations began to operate along these same lines and together, and at the present time it is difficult to find the line of demarcation between Catholics and so-called “Protestants”. What is called amongst the Protestants “The Ministerial Alliance” has fallen completely into the same error with the Roman Catholic organization. All of these organizations are against The Theocratic Government, and thus it is seen that they fulfill the prophecy which Jehovah caused to be written long ago pertaining to these organizations, to wit: That Christ Jesus, the enthroned King, has become a “stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offence, to both the houses of Israel [so-called ‘spiritual Israel’]; for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem [‘Christendom’]”. (Isa. 8: 14) By religion they have been caught with the gin and with the snare of the Devil. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and the “Ministerial Alliance” of the Protestant organization appear to have adopted the same course of resorting to lying propaganda, to bolster up their own organization in the eyes of the people. To this end they persecuted those who served Jehovah in spirit and in truth. The prophecy which applies primarily to the Roman
October 1,1940
WATCHTOWER.
293
Catholic Hierarchy applies also to the so-called “Ministerial Alliance” that operate in conjunction with the Hierarchy. Jehovah God, through his prophet, says to these scornful and oppressive men, who wish to rule for selfish gain, these words: “Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem: because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation; he that believeth shall not make haste. Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place. And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.”— Isa. 28:14-18.
22	Not a single one of the religious organizations now on earth favors and supports the Kingdom of God under Christ, which is the great Theocracy. Not one of them recognizes the fact that God has enthroned Christ Jesus and that all who do not support his kingdom are against him.
23	At the present time, when the nations of earth are ruled by cruel dictators, the great religious organizations, composed of religious, commercial and political elements, co-operate with and support such selfish rulers as against God’s kingdom. All of these organizations insist on a rule of the world by men. These organizations therefore stand in the place where they ought not to stand.
24	Eglon, the king of Moab, had moved into and taken possession of the holy ground, and for years had oppressed the Israelites. In 1914 Jehovah enthroned his King, Christ Jesus, and then gave him possession of all the earth. Religious, political and commercial elements, joining together, insist on holding possession of the earth and ignoring God’s enthroned King; and thus they stand on holy ground, where they have no right to stand. This combined organization, foreshadowed by Eglon, claims the right to hold possession and rule the earth, even claiming to do so in the name of the Lord. This combination, acting under the influence and control of the demons, of which the Devil is the chief, constitutes “the abomination of desolation”, concerning which Daniel the prophet prophesied and to which prophecy Jesus referred, when he said: “But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let
him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the mountains.”—Mark 13:14.
25	That means that Jehovah’s time is at hand for a final reckoning with the enemy. This fact Jehovah now reveals for the benefit of his “elect” and “companions”. (Mark 13:20) In the words spoken by Jesus last above quoted the meaning is clear, that they that read and understand will be only those who are earnest, faithful supporters of The Theocracy and who therefore understand and appreciate Jehovah and his government. These are “in Judaea”, that is to say, in the class that praise and serve Jehovah God. The “mountains” refer to God’s kingdom under Jehovah, the King Eternal, and Christ Jesus, his King anointed to rule the earth. Therefore these faithful ones, the Judeans, are told that when they see the then existing conditions, which are not apparent to all in the earth, they, for safety, must flee to the great Theocratic Government of Jehovah by Christ Jesus the King. There is no other place of safety and no other means of deliverance.
23	Eglon, the king of Moab, was “a very fat man”, and thus he pictured “Christendom”, made up of the aforementioned three elements that claim the right to rule the earth by men, and which combined organization has grown exceedingly fat, arrogant and blasphemous. As Eglon oppressed the Israelites, even so “Christendom’s” rulers manifest great opposition to the covenant people of God now on the earth. The persecution of God’s people continues to increase each year, growing worse since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple in 1918. In many of the ruling nations of the earth the work of proclaiming the kingdom message has been suppressed, and in all this oppressive action against God and against his elect servants the Roman Catholic religious organization takes the lead. The result is that many who once claimed to be the servants of God have grown weak and turned away. Their faith has failed. Only faithful dev.oted ones have stood and continue to stand firm on the side of The Theocracy, and this they do in the strength of the Lord. The oppressive persecution of the Lord’s servants at the present time has been a great test to the faith of the saints. This is exactly as the Lord foretold it would be.
27 Satan’s visible organization operating under the direction of the invisible force blasphemes the name of Jehovah God by claiming that it alone belongs to Jehovah; and they persecute and oppress those who are devoted to The Theocracy, and thus the earthly rulers exercise control over the people of earth and keep them in subjection. The present day is a time of great testing of the faith of those who have wholly devoted themselves to The Theocratic Government. Only the faithful understand this statement of the Lord Jesus, to wit: “Here is the patience and the
296
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
faith of the saints/’ (Rev. 13:10) These faithful ones know that these trying times are a great test to them and that they must stand in the strength of the Lord. In this hour of gross darkness and distress upon the nations and peoples of the earth, the question is, Will there be some persons who will have and maintain full and complete confidence in God and in Christ Jesus? Will these know and rely upon the divine promises, disregard everything that is contrary to God’s Word, and go straight forward in full obedience to Jehovah’s commandments, regardless of what the opposition may be? Will there be some who will maintain their integrity toward God under the most trying conditions? Such is the very point raised by the words of the Lord Jesus Christ. He says: “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?” (Luke 18: 7, 8) According to the Diaglott rendering the words of Jesus are: “But when the Son of man comes, will he find this belief on the land?”
88 Who on the earth today has this strong and abiding faith? Who understands the meaning of these trying times, particularly the great persecution of those who serve God and Christ? Do you believe that Jehovah God, by Christ Jesus, will within a very short time avenge his elect and thus vindicate his own great and holy name? “According to your faith be it unto you.” Remember that the things written in the Bible aforetime, including this prophetic drama and other prophetic dramas, were recorded there for the very purpose of giving comfort and hope to those faithful ones now on the earth who trust in God and in Christ Jesus. If you have faith in these prophetic utterances of the Lord, then you will understand why these terrible conditions now exist and you will read with real joy what God declares shall shortly come to pass. You will be assured that all things shall work together for your good because you love God and have been called according to his purpose, and that, come what may, the final result will be glorious to those who stand firm on the side of the great Theocracy. Unto such faithful ones the assurance is given that God will avenge his people, and that shortly.
28 The name Eglon means “calf-like” or “like a heifer”. Fat Eglon, like an overstuffed heifer, rested his fat in his summer parlor and took his ease. Eglon there pictured the religious organizations operating such institutions for selfish gain, carrying forward a racket, and by means of which they have grown fat, absorbing that which rightfully belongs to others. That description is of the chief religious organization, operating on the earth. Without a question of
doubt the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is the fattest organization on earth, having extracted from the people their substance for many centuries and having thus grown exceedingly rich in material things. This organization well corresponds with that described by Jesus when he spoke of the religious leaders in Jerusalem, telling them that they had made God’s house a den of commercial thieves. (Matt. 21:12,13; John 2:13-17) Being fat and taking his ease and rest, Eglon felt himself absolutely secure. Likewise the great religious organizations have grown very fat, particularly the leading one, the Boman Catholic Hierarchy, and the time is near for them to say: “We are at peace and are safe.” Just as the Lord foretold through the prophet Isaiah, they will say, ‘When the overflowing scourge comes, it won’t reach us.’ (Isa. 28:15) These are the ones described by the apostle as saying: “Peace and safety.” (1 Thess. 5: 3) When their dictator allies have overrun the earth and suppressed all opposition, the antitypical fat Eglon will say: “Peace and safety”; while the people suffer under the iron rule.
80 God raised up Ehud for the purpose of making this prophetic picture. All the saints on earth today are fully united with Christ Jesus, the Head and leader thereof; hence the name “Ehud”, which means “united”, embraces Christ Jesus and all the faithful members of “his body”. The part played by Ehud therefore not only includes Christ Jesus, the enthroned King at the temple, but takes in his representatives on earth, which are God’s elect. Ehud gained an audience and stood in the presence of Eglon the king. The hour for Eglon’s judgment and execution had arrived. Christ Jesus, the Greater Ehud, has been at the temple since 1918, judging the nations. Since 1922 in particular Christ Jesus has been driving the “sword of the spirit” right into the vitals of the religious, commercial and political combine that blasphemes and defames Jehovah’s holy name. That “sword of the spirit” is double-edged and cuts deep. (Heb. 4:12) And as Ehud stood before Eglon ready for action, so the time is at hand when the Greater Ehud is about to take action performing Jehovah’s “strange act”.
81 Fat Eglon stood up because he was expecting to receive something more. Then Ehud deftly drew from his right thigh his sword and thrust it right into Eglon’s fat belly: “And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.”—Judg. 3: 22.
88 Ehud struck with such force that the sword went clear in and stayed in. He did not make a halfway job of it. He did his work with a zeal for Jehovah, that zeal which is peculiar only to God's royal house. Eglon’s fat belly provided ample room for the entire
October 1,1940
WATCHTOWER.
297
length of the sword, handle and all. That sword was a cubit long, which meant that it was at least eighteen inches in length, and probably twenty-five inches. Originally a cubit was in length the measurement of the human arm from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow. That long dagger or sword hit Eglon’s belly with such force that it went in out of sight, so that he could not draw it out.
” In this part of the picture or prophetic drama it is made clearly to appear that the Greater Ehud, Christ Jesus, will do a full and complete job on the combine that stands “where it ought not” to stand. Religionists have made their belly their god. The same is true of the commercial, political allies that have embraced religion for selfish purposes; and concerning such selfish, fat ones it is written: “Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.” (Phil. 3:19) “Such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly.” (Rom. 16:18) Specifically this description applies to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and the principal of their flock, allies and supporters; which organization is now greatly swollen and very fat, and concerning which the Lord says: “How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously!” (Rev. 18:5-7) Antitypically that fat belly affords sufficient room to receive the full length of the “sword”, which the Greater Ehud wields.
S4 Concerning the sword of Ehud, according to the Revised Version, the record is: “He drew not the sword out of his [Eglon’s] body.” Likewise the great religious organization and allies will be entirely incapacitated and unable to draw out the sword which the Greater Ehud, Christ Jesus, thrust into their vitals. As well try to pull out the twelve stones deposited by Joshua in the bottom of the river Jordan. (Josh. 4: 9) Both the sword and the pile of stones picture the message that is delivered against the fat, selfish, religio-political, commercial organization. The message concerning God’s kingdom, which has been piled up during the past twenty years, is so vast that the religious systems and allies aforementioned cannot get rid of the same. The Theocratic message, which the Lord has put out on the earth and pushed clear into “Christendom’s” vitals, is there to stay, foretelling the violent destruction of “Christendom” at Armageddon.
” According to the Douay (Catholic) version of the Bible, this part of the text concerning the dagger is rather emphatic. It reads (Judg. 3: 22): “With such force that the haft went in after the blade into the wound, and was closed up with the abundance of fat, so that he did not draw out the dagger, but left it in his body as he had struck it in, and forthwith by the secret parts of nature the excrements of the belly came out.” (Douay Version) The sword thrust in by
Ehud disclosed all the excrement or dirt of fat Eglon. Likewise the thrust of the message of God’s kingdom into the belly of “Christendom” discloses the dirty record of that institution. (Eph. 6:17) The thrust that the “sword of the spirit”, or message from Jehovah God, pushed into the vitals of the wicked organization discloses the dirty wickedness of that institution. The so-called “reformation movements”, such as of Protestants and others, have made a few scratches on the Hierarchy, which have been quickly healed up; but when the time arrived for the Lord Jesus to expose that hypocritical organization he by his message has cut so deep that the filthy organization has not been able to further hide its dirt, thus disclosing the spirit which animates and controls that blasphemous organization. The religionists have fought desperately to keep the message of truth from exposing their filthy record, but it will be fully disclosed by the Lord Jesus in his due time, which time seems near. When that dirt of the institution is fully disclosed, it will be found that the Hierarchy has been working hand in glove with the Nazis that have overrun the harmless people of the earth in the lands that are called “Catholic countries”; that the Hierarchy has secretly and fully connived with and supported the ruthless and wicked assaults upon these nations, while at the same time uttering empty words to make the gullible people believe that the head of the Hierarchy disapproves of the dictators’ rash action. The Hierarchy is playing a two-handed game, claiming to be supporting and looking after all Catholics, yet conniving at destroying and destroying all those who love freedom of speech and freedom of action, in order that the “corporate state” or dictatorial rulers may gain complete control of the earth, with the Hierarchy riding as the spiritual adviser on the back of “the beast”. In due time the Lord will expose that dirt, or dirty conduct, because the Lord has declared he will do it. Regardless of what men may do, the Lord will perform his purpose. Probably the exposing of that “dirt”, or filthy record and action of the religionists, will furnish the excuse for the radical element to inflict punishment upon the Hierarchy, as stated at Revelation 17:16,17. Armageddon will begin with completely stripping off everything that hides the Hierarchy behind their “refuge of lies”, and when they are thus stripped the dirt thereof will be fully disclosed. Poor old Eglon, with the sword sticking in his belly, pictured that condition.
” Eglon had provided a back door for his own convenience; and so Ehud, being now pressed for time, took advantage of that postern gate or door. “Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the parlour upon him, and locked them.” (Judg. 3: 23) Ehud thus took advantage of the provision which Eglon had made for his own well-being.
298
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Ehud did not make the back door himself, but, no doubt, someone else made it for him, and he availed himself of it. In the United States particularly the fundamental law provides for the protection of the people. The Constitution of the United States was made for the convenience of the people. The Hierarchy has taken full advantage of the provisions of the United States Constitution to carry on without interruption her religious racket, claiming to be immune from the law of the nation when those laws interfered with her action. The Constitution provides that no law shall be enacted by Congress establishing any form of religion. The constitutions of many of the states provide that no law shall be made that shall interfere with or control the conscientious belief and exercise of men concerning religion. The Hierarchy has taken advantage of these liberal provisions, while at the same time the Hierarchy vigorously attempts to prevent others from taking advantage of the said fundamental laws of the nation and the states. This the Hierarchy does to prevent the message of God’s kingdom from being carried to the people. The fundamental law of the land, thus guaranteeing the people the right of freedom of worship and freedom of speech and pictured by the back door, has been a provision that has prevented the ultrareligionists from stopping the work of the Lord’s servants; and, until God’s due time for his ■‘strange work” to be stopped, the efforts of the Hierarchy to prevent the work from being carried on will avail nothing. Ehud went out the back door and locked it so that Eglon’s aides could not come to Eglon’s relief. Similarly Jehovah’s faithful servants carried on their witness work and figuratively locked the door on the Hierarchy by availing themselves of
the fundamental law of the nation. Up to the present time in America God has not permitted the Hierarchy to stop the onward march of the kingdom message, and will not permit it to be stopped until his “strange work” is done. It seems quite certain that God permitted these just and fundamental laws long ago to be made for the very purpose of affording his people a means of protecting themselves against the assaults of religionists at the present time. For this reason the Supreme Court of the United States, up to the present time, has furnished the chief bulwark or barrier to the rabid action of the ultrareligious organizations that have persecuted Jehovah’s witnesses.
57 Jehovah has sent forth his swarm of “locusts”, figuratively representing his faithful servants, and these carry the message of The Theocratic Government to the people, and the Hierarchy and allies will not be permitted to stop that army of “locusts” until the work assigned to them is done. (Joel 1:4; 2: 11, 25) Now as the day of Armageddon approaches, at which time the “strange work” of Jehovah will be finished and his “strange act” will begin, the Hierarchy is acting in a desperate manner and in the same line as that employed by the Nazis. The “fifth column” is employed, and this by planting throughout the country radical and violent opposers of Jehovah's witnesses who act at the instance of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and who attempt to make it appear that Jehovah’s witnesses are opponents of the government; and this they do in order to get Jehovah’s witnesses stopped and punished. In this they will fail, because God will have his work carried on until his due time to have it finished.
(To be continued)
THE PROPHET OF TODAY
UPON ••Christendom”, which was foreshadowed by ancient commercial, military Egypt, is now being fulfilled Jehovah’s prophecy: “And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof; and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards.” (Isa. 19:3) They want a prophet of coming business prosperity, of better times, of stabilized commercial conditions between the nations, removing causes for war.
More than three thousand years ago, in Egypt, when the patriarch Jacob, whose name was changed to Israel, was on his deathbed he prophesied that there should come from the tribe of his son Judah a mighty One who would be the great Deliverer of the people, and that unto him should be the gathering of the people. (Gen. 49:10) The invisible ruler of Egypt, Satan the Devil, knew about this prophecy, of course. He set about to devise schemes for the destruction of this promised One. The twelve tribes of
Israel continued to reside in Egypt after their father Jacob’s death, and their offspring multiplied at a greater rate than the Egyptians’. Therefore the king Pharaoh gave instructions that the midwives should take notice at the time the Hebrew women gave birth to children and that if a son was born it should be killed, but if the child was a daughter it should be permitted to live. Clearly this was a scheme of the Devil; he would have all the males killed in order that he might be certain to get the One that was promised to come through the tribe of Judah The Devil was taking no chance of this mighty One’s being born and being permitted to live. But, of course, he had not the power to thwart God’s purposes, even though he egotistically thought he had.
God helped the Israelitish women, and the birth of Hebrew males continued. Finally Moses was born, and by a miracle of God he was saved from being destroyed, even as later the young child Jesus was saved from murderous power of King Herod. Moses was taken into the home of the royal family, or rather into the royal house, and there re
October 1,1940
STe WATCHTOWER
299
ceived all its privileges. (Ex. 2:1-10) Jehovah God saw to it that Moses was preserved, because through and of Moses he would now make a type of the mighty Deliverer who was to come.
Grown to manhood, Moses had faith in God. (Heb. 11:24,25) Moses would rather take his chances with his own people in their slavery in Egypt and serve the true and living God than to have all the comforts, ease and honor that the Devil and his world power Egypt could confer upon Moses. One day Moses “went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens”. He saw an Egyptian smiting his Hebrew brother, and Moses, to protect his brother from such assault, slew the Egyptian. (Ex. 2:11,12) Moses fled from Egypt that the Egyptians might not kill him. For what he had done Moses did not receive any punishment or even a rebuke from Jehovah God. Afterwards God specifically used Moses to do and perform service particularly picturing thereby Christ Jesus the coming mighty One and His work. God also made Moses his prophet and used him to write the first five books of the Bible. Since then every nation has invoked the law of self-defense, extending that right of self-defense to the protection of those near of kin.
Moses fled to the land of Midian. There he became the keeper of the flock of his father-in-law Jethro. Forty years passed. Meantime oppressive measures employed by Pharaoh the king of Egypt against Israel grew worse and worse. Their cries came up to Almighty God. While herding the flock at the base of Mount Horeb Moses saw a miracle performed. A flame of fire enveloped a bush, and yet the bush was not burned. It was then that the Most High revealed his name Jehovah to Moses. There Jehovah began to disclose his purpose to vindicate his holy name He ordered Moses to return to Egypt, there to serve notice on Pharaoh and then to lead the Israelites out of Egypt and bring them to Mount Horeb to worship. The Scriptures do not disclose that the Israelites in Egypt were crying unto Jehovah, but that they were crying against their oppressors and Jehovah heard them. He said to Moses: “Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them. Come now, therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt.”—Ex. 3: 9,10.
Moses went at the direction of Jehovah to act for the people of Israel, and Aaron his brother was sent by the Lord to assist Moses. Obedient to the command of the Lord Moses and Aaron appeared before Pharaoh and said: “Thus saith the Lord [Jehovah] God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.” A mighty world power now was Egypt, and the Devil was its invisible ruler. Egotistical and wicked beyond description of human words Satan caused his visible representative, the king of Egypt, to manifest the greatest degree of arrogance and defiance to the Almighty God. To the request made by Moses to the ruler of Egypt, the Devil’s representative said: “Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.”—Ex. 5: 1, 2.
The oppressive burdens of the Israelites were then greatly increased. God said to Moses in substance: T will show Pharaoh who I am. Now you shall see what I will do to Pharaoh.’ (Ex. 6:1) The oppression and injustice heaped
upon the people of Israel in the land of Egypt furnished Jehovah an opportunity to make a demonstration of his power, and to testify again to man that the Lord is the almighty and eternal God and that he is the God of justice, wisdom, love and power. The people had forgotten God, and now the time had come for God to go down into Egypt and through his visible representatives to make for himself a name. Then God said to Moses: “And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah, when I stretch forth my hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them.” (Ex. 7:5, A.ff.V.) Afterwards Jehovah's prophet, referring to this event in Egypt, wrote: “And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even lilce Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you [Israelites] great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou [Jehovah] redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the nations and their gods ?”—2 Sam. 7 : 23.
Forty years later the Israelites were in the land of Moab on the borders of the Promised Land, and there Moses delivered his final speech to them. It embraces practically the entire book known as Deuteronomy. Moses recounted the events that had come to pass and Jehovah’s dealings with the Israelites from the time of giving the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai in Arabia up to the time of Ins speech During this address Moses said: “The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken ” (Deut 18:15) Jehovah had given Moses this knowledge nearly forty years previously, and in all of that time Moses had kept it to himself. At Mount Sinai the Israelites were greatly frightened at the manifestation of Jehovah’s power, and they had there requested that God would not speak to them directly lest they die. Jehovah gave respect to their request, as disclosed by these words of Moses, to wit:
“And the Lord said unto me, They have well spoken that which they have spoken. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my woids which lie shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.” (Deut 18 17-19) This proves that it was at Sinai where Jehovah told Moses of his purpose to raise up the great Prophet. Jehovah also said to Moses at Sinai: “But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give them to possess it.” (Deut. 5.31) Moses’ words concerning the coming of the great Prophet were spoken to the Israelites shortly before their entrance into the land of Canaan
When John the Baptist came, in A.D. 29, the Israelites were still looking for the coming of the Prophet greater than Moses, and hence they propounded to John the question, “Art thou that prophet?” and he answered, “No” (John 1:21) After the feast day of Pentecost, and hence more than fifty days after Jesus’ resurrection from the dead, the apostle Peter declared to the Israelites that Jesus Christ is that great Prophet whom Moses had foretold (Acts 3:20-26) But did Peter mean that Jesus during the three and one-half years of his ministry on earth had fulfilled the prophetic words of Moses? Peter could not have meant that,
300
iffie WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
because what Moses had done under the direction of Jehovah the Greater Prophet of Jehovah must do on a far greater scale when the time for fulfillment should come. The work of Jesus during the three and one-half years of his ministry was great, to be sure, but could not have been more than a miniature fulfillment of Moses’ prophecy concerning the Greater Prophet.
The Israelites were domiciled in Egypt, and because they were there suffering cruel oppression they were crying out in pain; and God heard their cries, and he selected Moses to go and bear testimony of Jehovah before the ruler and the Israelites and later, as the deliverer, to lead the Israelites out of Egypt. The world power Egypt with its ruler Pharaoh pictured the world under Satan, particularly with commercialism and its ally militarism to the fore. When Jesus was on earth as a man he confined his testimony to the Jews alone, except when he was brought before the Roman rulers and required to testify. He magnified the law of Jehovah God and spoke the words, which his Father had sent him to speak; but he made no attempt to deliver the people from Satan’s world organization to correspond with Moses’ delivering the Israelites from Egypt. Jesus made no claim to have come to the Israelites as a law-giver and to place all of that people under it. He did not even act as a judge amongst the people. “And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me. And he said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you!” (Luke 12:13, 14) The work of Jesus as a man was of great importance, but it was a fulfillment only in part of Jehovah’s purpose. The work that Christ, exalted to heaven as the divine executive officer of Jehovah, does is far greater than what he did as a man. The most, therefore, that can be said of the ministry of the man Jesus is that it was a miniature fulfillment of the prophecy uttered by Moses at the dictation of Jehovah, and that the greater fulfillment by Christ Jesus must come later.
When Jehovah sent the shepherd Moses to Egypt he carried his rod in his hand; which symbolically corresponded with the fulfillment of the words of Psalm 110: 2, to wit: “Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion [God’s organization] : Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” (A.R.7.) This, in the light of the fulfillment of other prophecies concerning the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule, fixes the time of the coming of the great Prophet foreshadowed by Moses, in fulfillment of the prophecy on a grander scale, as beginning with the year 1914.
Moses was sent to Egypt to deliver the testimony of Jehovah. The Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, is sent to the world at his second coming to deliver the testimony of Jehovah the great Theocrat. Moses’ brother Aaron accompanied him and took part in the work of delivering the testimony, and in this Aaron pictured or foreshadowed the remnant of Christ’s spiritual brethren yet on earth who are made the witnesses of Jehovah at the present time. Jehovah committed his testimony to Christ Jesus and clothed him with all power and authority; hence it is written that it is “the testimony of Jesus Christ”. He did not receive that testimony from man, but from his Father. (John 5:34; Rev. 1:1, 9) Christ Jesus is the elect servant of Jehovah ; and the faithful remnant on earth, being members of “the body of Christ”, are symbolized as “the feet
of him”, to whom the testimony of Jesus Christ is committed. (See Revelation 12:17; Isaiah 52:7 and 42:1-6.) As members of the body of Christ the remnant are under the direct command of Christ Jesus, the Head, and must render to him complete obedience. “And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet shall be destroyed from among the people.” (Acts 3:23) Christ Jesus, the great Prophet, acts as judge and executioner, and all who will not render full obedience unto him shall be destroyed. Necessarily that means that all of the members of the body of Christ must be fully obedient unto him if they are finally approved and given immortality at their resurrection from the dead and a place with him in his heavenly throne as King of kings. The coming of Christ Jesus to the spiritual temple of God, in A.D. 1918, is for judgment, which judgment he conducts as the duly appointed and anointed One of Jehovah. “For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son , and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.” (John 5: 22, 27) The judgment at the temple begins with the house of God, that is to say, with God’s covenant people, the “brethren” of the Greater Moses “For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?” (1 Pet. 4.17) Now that judgment has extended to all nations, and the people are being divided into two classes, the “goats” for destruction at the battle of Armageddon, and the "sheep” for preservation and to inherit everlasting blessings on earth under the Theocratic kingdom.—Matt. 25:31-46.
When Moses reached Egypt he first instructed the Israelites, and then served notice upon Pharaoh and his official family, who foreshadowed Satan and his agents both visible and invisible, both men and demons. When Christ Jesus came to the temple for judgment in 1918 he first gathered together unto himself those who had proved faithful up to that time and enlightened them concerning Jehovah. Until Moses got to Egypt the Israelites did not know the Most High by the name Jehovah. Likewise, until the Greater Moses came to the temple in 1918 the consecrated followers of Christ Jesus did not know the meaning and significance of the name Jehovah; but now they do know Now they understand that the greatest doctrine of the Scriptures is that concerning the Kingdom, because the kingdom vindicates Jehovah’s name. The great question for determination is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. In this day Jehovah places his King upon his throne, which event marks the end of Satan’s rule without interruption, and therefore it is the end of Satan’s world. This good news thrills the heart of every one who loves righteousness Therefore the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, gives this specific and ringing commandment to them: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole world for a testimony unto all the nations; and then shall the end come.”—Matt 24: 14, A.R.7.
This does not mean the “gospel” merely of “Jesus Christ, and him crucified”; but it says “this gospel”, meaning the good news that the kingdom is here and that now Jehovah will make a name for himself. This is the very purpose of the Greater Moses in setting up the kingdom. All the faithful will delight to take up the glad news and herald it to the world as a testimony, declaring it to the people of good
aTHE WATCHTOWER.
301
October 1,1940
will and serving notice upon Satan’s organization. It is the command of the Greater Moses, and notice must be served upon Satan’s organization before its final destruction, just as Moses and Aaron served notice upon Pharaoh and his official family.
Moses organized the Israelites into a military host and marched them out of Egypt. Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, has assembled the host of Jehovah at Mount Zion (symbolic of The Kingdom). (Rev. 14:1-4; 19:11-21) The fight to the finish is about to take place. It is a fight that will vindicate Jehovah’s name, even as did the destruction of the Egyptians in the Red sea. The Greater Moses now commands the visible division of his army on the earth to sing aloud the praises of Jehovah while serving notice upon Satan’s organization, that the fight is near and that in that
fight Satan’s organization will be destroyed and Jehovah’s name vindicated. The giving of such testimony and notice must continue until the enemy goes down. Every one of the faithful remnant and their companions, the “other sheep” of the Lord, will be obedient to the commandment of Christ the Greater Moses. Regardless of the depression now being suffered by the peoples of the world the testimony of Jehovah must go on in whatsoever manner he provides. The faithful Theocratic ambassadors of Jehovah may find it necessary to dwell in tents or house-cars and to move from place to place as members of the army, while proclaiming the name and praises of the Most High and his kingdom. It is this happy army that is now proclaiming the day of deliverance by the Theocratic Government of the Most High.
THEOCRATIC NATION BORN
CCX'V 7110 hath heard such a thing! who hath seen \X/ such things? Shall the earth be made to bring ’ * forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children. Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child.”
More than two thousand six hundred years elapsed before the fulfillment of the above prophetic words of Isaiah (chapter 66, verses 7 and 8) permitted them to be understood, first in A.D. 1925, by the grace of Jehovah God.— See The Watchtower, March 1, 1925, the article “Birth of The Nation”.
“Birth” refers to the act of bringing forth to life. Everything that receives life must have a birth. Jehovah alone can give life everlasting, because he is “the fountain of life”. Psalm 36:9 reads: “For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.” There is no exception to this divine rule. It includes Jehovah’s beloved Son, Christ Jesus, the King of glory, concerning whom Psalm 21:4 says. “He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of days for ever and ever.” (See also Psalm 16:11; Romans 6:23; John 17:3) “In his favour is life.” (Ps. 30.5) All creatures that will live forever must know these truths and conform themselves thereto. There is but one true God. Jehovah is his name. There is a false mighty one, or “god”, who may well be called “the mimic god”, because he has attempted to counterfeit and mimic what the true God has done and does, but he does so to ridicule and bring reproach upon Jehovah. He is Satan the Devil, who in due time shall suffer everlasting destruction.—Heb. 2:14.
In order to give birth to a creature or thing there must be a husband and wife, that is to say, a father and a mother. Concerning the kingdom of heaven, which shall rule over and bless all obedient humankind, Jehovah God is the “husband” and Father, and his organization called “Zion” is the mother. Concerning the wicked kingdoms which have misruled the peoples of earth for many centuries, Satan is the husband and father, and his wicked organization called “Babylon” is the mother. The kingdom of Satan is darkness and death, and the end thereof shall be everlasting destruction. The kingdom of God is light and life, and blessed are they that flee into it.—Zech. 14: 4-11.
Jehovah’s kingdom or Theocratic government is established by and through his beloved Son Christ Jesus and for the benefit of men of good will. Above all, that kingdom will vindicate Jehovah’s word and his name. Jehovah God fixed a definite time when that kingdom should be born and begin to function, and that time began when he fulfilled Psalm 2: 6 by setting his King upon his heavenly throne, in A.D. 1914, when the seven times of Gentile rule under Satan ended. The apostle John, the servant of God. was given a vision of the birth of the kingdom of God and he wrote it down to be understood by God’s anointed servant class on the earth after the birth of that kingdom had taken place, and after the opening of the temple as symbolically pictured in Revelation 11:19. For some time now the servant class has seen this and rejoiced, and now the “great multitude” of the Lord’s “other sheep” and who love God may see it for their good.
Chapter twelve of The Revelation opens with the statement : ‘LYnd there appeared a great wonder in heaven.” The Revised Version of the Bible says: “A great sign was seen in heaven.” Truly this is a “great” sign, because of its importance. Fulfilled prophecy shows that the kingdom or nation was born with the end of the Gentile times, in A.D. 1914, but this fact was not intelligently discerned by the people of God until sometime after 1918. That great wonder or sign appearing in heaven is symbolized, as stated at Revelation 12:1, by “a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars”. That woman symbolically represents God’s organization, otherwise named “Zion”. Jehovah God is her “husband”, and he accepts her as his wife because he has made her fruitful and he acknowledges her child by ‘catching it up to him in heaven’ at its birth. To her are addressed the words of Isaiah 54:5: “For thy Maker is thine husband ■ The Lord of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called.” The ancient nation or organization of natural Israel, to whom Isaiah prophesied, was typical Zion, and God used it to foreshadow the greater light that He would bring to the attention of his people concerning his capital organization.
302
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
God's universal organization which brings forth the kingdom or nation is symbolized by the pure woman and is partially visible to man, but the greater part thereof is invisible to man. It includes his beloved Son and all the host of heavenly creatures in harmony with God, and it includes those on earth who are faithful and true to God. The latter are the only part that is visible to human eyes, but these are the ones who are in real danger, by reason of the enmity of Satan against God and against His organization and the children thereof.
Note that the woman is clothed and shod with God’s light. The sun was her clothing, and the moon her shoes, and the stars are about her head. The sun and the moon and the stars give light to men on the earth. So the light of God shines upon and about them that love and serve him. Those of God’s organization on earth are sure of God’s light and favor both day and night, which fact is here symbolized. The ‘twelve stars upon the head of the woman’ symbolically says • ‘She is a heavenly queen and therefore fit to bring forth the offspring of Jehovah. Her husband is the King of Eternity.’ (See Jeremiah 10:10, marginal reading.)
“And she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.” (Rev. 12:2) The woman’s cries were those of pain directed to Jehovah God, the only One who could help her. Her cries are prayers for God’s kingdom to begin. Clearly the point taught by this is that the kingdom is not produced except at great cost of pain and suffering on the part of those who are members of God’s organization. To such the apostle Paul said: “We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.” (Acts 14:22)—Gal. 4:19.
At the same time, so Revelation 12:3 states, “there appeared another wonder [or sign] in heaven.” After Christ Jesus came to the temple in A.D. 1918 and the spiritual temple of God was opened, those who were brought into the temple had an understanding of these “signs” or “wonders” ; but they could not have an understanding prior thereto. Through the columns of The Watchtower, as of March 1, 1925, the Lord revealed these truths concerning the great wonders to his people. This latter “wonder” or "sign” is described thus: “And behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And Ins tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born.”-Rev. 12: 3, 4.
“Dragon” is one of the names that God gave to Satan the enemy, and it properly applies to Satan’s organization. It is derived from the Greek word drakoon, and means a serpent, and this also is one of the names that apply to Satan the Devil. (See Revelation 12:15 ; 20:1-4) Thus the Devil is identified, and his organization with him.
The diadems or crowns were upon his seven heads, and he had “ten horns”, this symbolically representing complete invisible and visible power and authority over his organization ; whereas the “seven heads” symbolically represented his complete invisible organization, “seven” standing for spiritual completeness. According to Isaiah 9:15, his “tail” is his prophet, and therefore “the false prophet” or mouthpiece of Satan’s organization and that does most of the talking for that wicked organization and utters many loud and
boastful claims as to what the visible rulers of the earth will soon accomplish for man.
Satan’s organization, particularly by and through this false prophet, knows how to lure and draw and entice; and therefore it is written that “his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth”. Evidently this does not mean exactly one third in number, but rather a class of persons amongst three general classes of persons that claim to stand for God’s heavenly kingdom This particular class claim to be faithful, yet are unfaithful to God. Those who will compose the spiritual “body of Christ” (1 Cor. 12:27) and those who will compose the “great multitude” of the Lord’s “other sheep” must prove faithful. But there is a “third part” that will not be faithful, but will go after the Devil, and these are called “wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever”. (Jude 13) By his prophet Daniel (chapter 8. verse 10) God foretold that Satan, through his instruments or agents, would “cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground”. The “false prophet” has accomplished this.
The dragon is shown standing before the woman of God and ready and waiting to devour her child as soon as it is born. Thus is pictured the “enmity” between the serpent and the woman, as God had long previously declared in Eden. (Gen. 3:15) This was the exact condition that obtained at the close of the “times of the Gentiles” in A.D 1914.— Luke 21:24.
For centuries God’s people have looked forward to the setting up of the kingdom, or Theocratic Government, with great expectation. When on earth Jesus spoke of the coming of the kingdom more than of any other one thing, evidently because of its greatest importance. It is the most stupendous of all things. Its birth was and is of the greatest importance As Satan recognized Jesus as the heir of God and of the kingdom, and tried to kill him when he was in the flesh, even so Satan recognized the kingdom as his greatest enemy. He stood ready to destroy the kingdom at its beginning Jehovah challenges him when He says, at Isaiah GG. 9 (Am Rev. Ver.): “Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith Jehovah: shall I that cause to bring forth shut the womb? saith thy God.” God’s due time had arrived at the end of the period that Jesus sat at Jehovah's right hand waiting for his enemies to be made his footstool (Ps. 110:1; Heb. 10:12, 13) Now nothing could prevent the birth of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, the “nation” of which the King Christ Jesus is the Head.
Revelation 12:5 continues: “And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne.” The man child here mentioned is God’s kingdom, new nation or government under Christ that must rule all the nations of the earth. Concerning these nations it is written “Thou [Christ] shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel ” (Ps. 2:9) Christ’s period of waiting at Jehovah’s right hand, and the end thereof in 1914, was foretold by another prophet of God, who wrote: “Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she [God’s woman Zion] which travaileth hath brought forth [the kingdom] ; then the remnant of his brethren [Jehovah’s witnesses on earth] shall return unto
October 1,1940
WATCHTOWER.
303
the children of [spiritual] Israel. And he [Christ Jesus] shall stand and feed [(marginal reading) and rule] in the strength of the Lord [Jehovah].”—Mie. 5 : 3, 4.
‘The heavenly queen,’ which is God’s organization, could not bring forth the child except ‘God give the increase’. By his wisdom and power his organization labored not in vain. (1 Cor. 3:6; 15: 58) It is only Jehovah who could create the kingdom and from whom proceeds all power and authority, as stated at Romans 13: 1, 2. It was his will that Jesus, his beloved Son, should remain inactive against Satan until the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule in 1914 and that then Christ Jesus should take his power and begin his reign.—Ps. 110:1.
Inasmuch as Jehovah willed the righteous government, and the manner in which it should be born, his great organization served as the mother and furnished the material for such government to be born and to rule all the nations. It is God’s entire or universal organization that gives birth to the new government, but it is his “elect” “servant”, or great “high priest” “after the order of Melchizedek”, that rules. (See Isaiah 42:1-7; Psalm 110:4.) The woman of God’s organization therefore gave birth to the kingdom and also gave birth to those who shall compose the kingdom, to wit, Christ Jesus at his resurrection from the dead, and the members of “the body of Christ” later; and she gave birth to the office which The Christ fills.
Another prophetic picture likens this birth of the Theocratic nation or kingdom to the cutting of the Stone out of a great mountain without human hands and that smites the monstrous image of the Devil’s organization and grinds it to powder. (Read Daniel 2:44,45.) The birth of the “man child” is therefore the birth or bringing forth and the beginning of the operation of the kingdom or new nation, which is the “holy nation” of God and of which nation Christ Jesus is “King of kings”. (1 Pet. 2:9; Rev. 17:14) The fact that the man child is pictured as being caught up to heaven proves that it is God’s kingdom the authority of
which is exercised by and through his beloved elect and anointed One, Christ Jesus.
Jehovah had foretold by his prophet of the time coming when He would send forth his Son out of his organization Zion to rule in the midst of his enemies, and that war would follow. Psalm 110:2-7 reads: “Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion: Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. Thy people offer themselves willingly in the day of thy power, in holy array: out of the womb of the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth. Jehovah hath sworn, and will not repent: Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. The Lord at thy right hand will strike through kings in the day of his wrath. He will judge among the nations, he will fill the places with dead bodies; he will strike through the head in many countries. He will drink of the brook in the way: therefore will he lift up the head.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) This period of time necessarily began when Christ was placed upon his throne, in 1914. (Ps. 2; 6) That would mark the time when war was begun by Christ Jesus against the enemy Satan.
In harmony with this it is written: “And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.”—Rev. 12:7-9.
It is the great Prince Christ Jesus that began the war against Satan, and in the seventh verse He is identified by the name “Michael”. The only other place that the title Michael is applied to God’s great Prince, Christ Jesus, is at Daniel 12:1. That trouble in heaven ended with the casting out of Satan. In 1918 that time of trouble on earth was halted for a season, in which time the work by Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions must be done, and then shall come the final end of Satan’s organization.—Matt. 24:14, 21, 22.
Rejoice tn Jehovah, O ye righteous: praise is comely for the upright. For the word of Jehovah is right; and all his work is done in faithfulness. He loveth righteousness and justice: the earth is full of the loving-kindness of Jehovah.—Psalm 33:1,4,5, A.R.V.
(Continued from page 290)
off the press. You may obtain it at 10c a copy. Organized companies should combine their orders and forward same through the company servant.
“CONSPIRACY AGAINST DEMOCRACY”
No brochure could be of more instant importance and aid to those residing in democratic countries than this new booklet, Conspiracy Against Democracy. Many millions of persons of good will are m the mood to get and read this book, especially as this 64-page publication contains the entire proceedings on the occasion of Judge Rutherford’s speech to the recent Theocratic Convention on “Religion as a World Remedy”, and also his other speech on “Times and Seasons”, and to which these many millions were personally mvited. Conspiracy Against Democracy displays an appropriate and attractive front cover. It may be had for 5c a copy. Time of release for general distribution in the field is announced elsewhere.
“RELIGION”
With especial pleasure we announce the new book Religion, released by its author, Judge Rutherford, at the recent Theocratic convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. It offers the indisputable evidence, both Scriptural and factual, that religion is opposed to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and is therefore the mortal enemy of man, and that Christianity is the only way of escape for people of good will. The book contains 384 pages, including color-illustrations, and a valuable reference mdex, all bound within beautifully embossed covers in a refreshmg green cloth and gold-stamped. You will prize the author’s edition, which contains an autograph of a letter in his own handwriting addressed to the Theocratic ambassadors. This special edition is limited and may be had on a contribution of 50c per copy Those in organized companies may combme their individual orders and send them through the local company servant.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
SAFE FLIGHT OF REFUGEE WITNESSES
“Two of Jehovah’s witnesses from Ghent, Belgium, arrived in London, Saturday, May 25: one, a Mrs. Van D-,
who together with her husband pioneered in Belgium for more than five years, and a Mrs. S---, a Jonadab, who
has been faithful in the work for the past eighteen months and closely associated with Mrs. Van D. As soon as the invasion began, Mrs. Van D’s husband was immediately detained by the police and taken away. The authorities then made her a prisoner in her home for three days, suspecting she was a fifth columnist. It was about this time that the enemy began to bombard Ghent and the surrounding territory. Mrs. Van D. arranged to leave her home immediately and get in touch with her Jonadab companion. The two of them then decided, in view of the approaching destruction to the city, to flee north and, if possible, seek refuge in England. These two women had little time to get their clothes and succeeded in getting their bicycles and a few odds and ends ready for journey.
“While yet in sight of Ghent, they report, the city was razed to the ground. On their way to the coastal town of Ostend they were constantly harassed by German planes and bombardments. They were approaching the town of Maldegen, near Ostend, when they were halted by a Belgian army officer and commanded to seek refuge in a ditch in view of an air raid. A few minutes later, after they were lying on their stomachs together with a group of other people, a tremendous explosion occurred as a result of a bomb and both were covered with a layer of soot. After a few minutes they arose and found they were the only two living of the entire number who had sought refuge in the ditch. The Jonadab had a piece of shrapnel enter her back and pierce her body, and the pioneer reported the loss of hearing in her right ear; otherwise they were unscathed and gave praise to Jehovah for their miraculous deliverance. Their cycles were not damaged, and they proceeded to Ostend. On their trek they had to pass over the Dampoort Bridge, which was very shaky as they crossed it. As soon as they arrived on the other side the bridge was immediately blown up as a result of an air bombardment. Once again they expressed the remarkable protection from the Lord. When reaching Ostend they learned it was impossible to obtain passage on a boat for England, and so they started to travel along the seaside towards the French border. While cycling along the seaside, a group of seven planes continued to harass them from above and followed them in an endeavor to destroy them, but, with the Lord’s grace, they succeeded in going right forward, untouched. On reaching the Belgian and French frontier they were extremely fortunate in being allowed to pass over; multitudes of refugees were refqsed entry into France.
“When they reached Dunkirk, they were informed they must proceed to Calais to get passage for England. They continued their journey and had to pass through the town of Greville, between Dunkirk and Calais. They planned to spend the night at Greville. That night they received warning from a French soldier that the Germans were fast approaching Greville. He advised their turning back toward Dunkirk, as Calais was being heavily bombarded by the enemy. They immediately retraced their steps and learned next morning that Greville had been razed to the ground,
as well as Calais. After much waiting they were finally fortunate to arrange for passage on a British hospital ship which left Dunkirk for England. A group of ships left Dunkirk under convoy that day, and as they were proceeding across the channel a Greek ship alongside the hospital ship struck a mine and, with its overload of refugees, was sent to the bottom. The crowded hospital ship remained untouched and proceeded towards the English coast. They report that British Tommies in France gave them assistance in many ways and were unusually kind to the refugees, and that there were many kind people in both Belgium and France who endeavored to do all they could for the refugees fleeing from the center of Belgium. The Tommies gave up their own food for the refugees. The officers on board the destroyer which accompanied the hospital ship were extremely courteous and kind to the witnesses and heard their tale of remarkable escapes. They report further that there was nothing but destruction and continued bombardment and on the way from Ghent buildings were burning and small villages and towns destroyed. They rejoice greatly in being received in London by the English refugee committee, which prepared for them a bath and a meal of wholesome food and gave them clothes and food and spending money to proceed further in their stay in England. For several days before the invasion these two faithful witnesses were busy in their local territory in Belgium distributing the new French booklet Refugees, little expecting at that time that shortly they would be actual refugees on flight to England. Now that they are settling in England for the duration of the war they expressed their desire to again take up a share in the ‘strange work’, but this time to use the English booklet Refugees to help people of good will.”
EFFORTS OF BOBBIES TO QUELL MOB (ENGLAND)
“In a Catholic section of Liverpool yesterday morning two of our sisters were the victims of a mob attack. Both were thrown to the ground, one being dragged along by her hair and being rescued by a young girl belonging to the district; the other received a nasty knee bruise when she was thrown to the ground. Both had their literature stolen and a few coppers. A brother, a pioneer not living at Kingdom House, was also hit in the eye, but I have not yet been able to reach him to know the circumstances. There were five witnessing parties in the neighborhood, and a considerable amount of literature was left among the people Police protection was sought by the two sisters, and we cannot speak too highly of the manner in which they handled the mob When I arrived on the scene they were doing their best to sort things out. One held up the booklet Government and Peace and said: ‘Isn’t this what you want—government and peace?’ He also told them that Judge Rutherford was a fine man. The crowd shouted that it was German propaganda, but the constable opened the book Salvation and said: ‘All I can see in this book is about Jesus Christ.’ The instigators of the attack could not be seen. It appears that it was the magazine Consolation that aroused their ire. The police escorted us from the scene of the incident to the nearest police station, where the inspector received us kindly and laughingly said: ‘You’ve come into a hot quarter, you know.’ ”
304
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death ; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to "fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Ga American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bunk Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Bemittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian ................ 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian ......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W , Australia
South African ..............   Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each j ear, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label witbin one month A lenewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y, under the Act of March 3, 187$.
“CHALLENGE" TESTIMONY PERIOD
The above period embraces the entire month of October and applies to all countries. Its name refers to Jehovah’s challenge to the opposing nations for a showdown fight. That challenge is set forth, in no mincing words, m the feature publication which will be circulated during this Period, to wit, the new book Religion. At the same time there will be released for public distribution the new booklet Conspiracy Against Democracy. Both publications will be offered together on a contribution of 25c. No time to be lost now, and all desiring to do their proper part will promptly take this Period under consideration as to material, territory, procedure, etc. Any Watchtower readers wishing to get in touch with the nearest company organized for this service should write us or our branch office for references, now. Each one’s full report of activities is expected at the close of the month for inclusion in a world report.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of November 17: “Ehud” (Part 3), fl 1-13 inclusive, The Watchtower October 15, 1940.
Week of November 24: “Ehud” (Part 3), fl 14-30 inclusive, The Watchtower October 15, 1940.
OPPORTUNITIES OF SERVICE
Jonadabs between 20 and 30 years of age, both male and female, married and single, who desire to file an application for assignment to service by the Society, please write the Society Address your letter
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society President’s Office
124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York
“THE MESSENGER”
The full history of the first Theocratic Convention of Jehovah's witnesses is now published in the 1940 issue of The Messenger This eighteen-city, five-day convention, which culminated in the nation-wide address by Judge Rutherford on “Religion as a World Remedy”, was an event of no passing importance. The Messenger, with its sweep of information, and its emphasis on the vital features, brings out the significance thereof which fast-moving future events will only verify. This issue contains 64 pages, is replete with action pictures, and also contains the stirring non-programmed speeches of Judge Rutherford not elsewhere published. It is now (Continued on page 319)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	October 15, 1940	No. 20
EHUD
PART 3
"And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them?"—Luke 18:7.
JEHOVAH is certain to square all accounts. This he will do in his own due time and way. The use of his name by men to operate an organization that opposes The Theocratic Government and does violence to those who love God and advertise his government shall not go unnoticed by the Lord. It is the name of Jehovah, the Almighty God, that is involved. Those who do violence to God’s servants are fighting against God. For many centuries God’s name has been defamed by Satan and his many earthly agents, particularly the religious operators, and now the time has come when God for his own name’s sake will avenge his elect and vindicate his own great name. The prophetic drama in which Ehud performed the principal part is further evidence of God’s purpose to avenge his chosen people and to vindicate his name. It is for his own name’s sake that he takes account in behalf of those who love him. —Ps. 23:3.
2 The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, in their effort to hide their treacherous co-operation with the leaders of the corporate states, such as Hitler, Mussolini and Stalin, falsely charge Jehovah’s witnesses with being what is modernly called the “fifth column”. They falsely charge that the literature Jehovah’s witnesses place in the hands of the people is subversive. The Hierarchy well know that they are lying. There have been no witnesses or others on the earth that have said as much to expose Nazism and Fascism and Communism, and the Catholic Hierarchy, as Jehovah’s witnesses. Because the literature published shows that the Hierarchy is working directly with the enemies of democracies and against God, these truths published greatly anger the Hierarchy; and hence their wicked persecution of the servants of the Most High. Recently the Hierarchy and their deluded dupes, moved by the spirit of the adversary, have attempted to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses, but by the grace of the Lord his faithful servants have escaped. They are under his protection, and God will see to it that the enemy shall not prevail against them.
’ Ehud made good his escape: “When he was gone out, his [Eglon’s] servants came; and when they saw that, behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he covereth his feet in his summer chamber.” (Judg. 3: 24) After Ehud escaped Eglon’s servants were near by, but the Lord held them back until Ehud had finished his work at that place. Eglon’s servants were anxious, of course, to obey his orders. Likewise with the Hierarchy in prosecuting their campaign called “Catholic Action”, the servants of the Hierarchy are always at hand, ready to do the bidding of the Hierarchy and to perform whatever acts may be required of them, whether lawful or unlawful. Eglon’s servants found the door locked. Likewise the Hierarchy and allies sometimes find that the law of the land has locked the door against them in carrying on their wrongful action to prevent the proclamation of the Theocratic message. Thus it appears that the fundamental laws of America were made by men who had the spirit of the Lord and who were guided by the Lord for the very purpose of protecting his servants in the present hour and until God’s “strange work” is completed in America. For this the servants of God are grateful to him, that he makes it possible for them to continue for a time in proclaiming the Theocratic message. It is entirely proper, and therefore must be according to the will of God, that his servants take advantage of the just and righteous laws of the land to prevent the shutting down of their work and service until God’s due time for it to end. Thus the servants of the religious element, engaged in persecuting Jehovah’s witnesses, are prevented from stopping God’s “strange work” until his due time. The work in Europe of proclaiming the Kingdom message seems to be done, and manifestly this is because God’s due time has come. It would then appear that the final witness would be given on the Western Hemisphere.
1 When Eglon’s servants found the door locked they said, according to the marginal reading of the text: “Surely he doeth his easement.” The Douay or
307
308
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Catholic version renders this part of the text thus: “Perhaps he is easing nature." Today the servants of antitypical Eglon now occasionally find that the door is locked against them and their efforts to carry out the Hierarchy’s demand. The dirt or excrement now proceeding from the antitypical Eglon’s body turns the thoughts of the cruel servants of the Hierarchy to things of dirty or unclean methods of action ; therefore they resort to such things as mobs, burning of books and destroying property in the possession of Jehovah’s witnesses. This is particularly true along the borders of the United States inhabited by blinded religionists. In those places the proof is produced beyond any question of doubt that Catholic priests incite the ignorant and rabid members of their congregation to organize mobs and assault Jehovah’s witnesses, destroy their property, beat them and drive them out of the community.
’ Under the fundamental law of the land the people have a right to peaceably assemble and confer and speak together about God’s Word, even though that speech or message is offensive to religious racketeers. The Supreme Court of the United States has plainly so held. Here is another example, then, of the servants of the Hierarchy acting in an unclean way. At Madison Square Garden a public assembly of Christian people was had June 25,1939. The Hierarchy had done everything possible, according to law, to stop that meeting. Failing in that, they ordered unlawful or dirty methods to be performed. “Catholic Action’’ then stooped to violence. God’s people there figuratively locked the door against the unlawful deeds of the Hierarchy and their unclean methods, and “Catholic Action" failed. This failure of the unclean or dirty methods of the Hierarchy caused one of their spokesmen to publicly give utterance to words in substance as follows: ‘When political governments fail to protect us [Catholic Action] we [the Hierarchy’s agents and servants] will resort to Franco's way in the use of bullets instead of ballots.” There is abundant evidence that Franco, Hitler and the Hierarchy work together to accomplish their selfish ends, that is to say, to destroy everything pertaining to The Theocracy, that they may rule the world by selfish men. Thus “the abomination of desolation” stands where it ought not to stand. (Matt. 24:15 ; Mark 13:14) This is a warning to people who love righteousness and hate iniquity to flee to The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus.
6 The servants wish to carry out the commands of their chiefs; and so the servants hesitated to disturb the king, not knowing that he was dead: “And they tarried till they were ashamed; and, behold, he opened not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened them; and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.”—Judg. 3: 25.
' Here this point of the drama shows the antitypical Eglon hiding their wickedness, even from their servants or allies. Eglon’s servants waited to the point of embarrassment. True to the picture, the facts at the present time show that officials, the allies of the Hierarchy, stand by and let the Hierarchy ease themselves in an unclean manner against the witnesses of Jehovah, hesitating to interfere with the Hierarchy and their unlawful and wicked action. To illustrate this, mayors of towns, police officers and other law-enforcement officers look the other way when the Hierarchy is engaged in some open demonstration of their dirty methods. As Eglon’s servants finally made an investigation by opening the door, even so now public officials, politicians and the strong-arm squad begin to look into the facts and they find that they have been deceived, that there was much more dirt there than they had anticipated. This they discovered when they ‘opened the door’. The Hierarchy never welcomes investigation, not even by their own servants and allies, because they know of their own uncleanness, and their efforts are always to keep their fraud and hypocrisy hidden from those who serve the Hierarchy’s organization. The Lord now begins to open the door and let the people in general view the wickedness and uncleanness of the hypocritical religious organization. The servants of Eglon used a key to open the door. The Bible truths furnish the key which now unlocks the doors and discloses the deeds of wickedness, and these are discerned by the people who have a desire to learn the truth. The Lord is now opening the door to all sincere persons that such may see the duplicity and wickedness of the religious systems. Other scriptures show that God will cause the servants and allies of the Hierarchy to see and to understand the hypocritical action of big religious systems, and that then action against that element of Satan’s organization will take place; as it is written : “And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast [which becomes anti-religious], these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.” (Rev. 17:16,17) Thus God permits their eyes to be opened to fulfill his purpose. Then the radical element takes action, as the Lord foretells. God makes them to understand what a wicked and hypocritical institution the great religious system is. And after their eyes are thus opened, what do they see! The words recorded in the prophetic drama are: “And, behold, their lord was fallen down dead.” They saw their lord and king exposed in his own dirt; thus indicating that men will see the hypocritical religious element exposed in their own dirty methods. A sorry mess! Religion has never been alive to Jehovah God. Therefore from Jehovah’s viewpoint religion has ever been a dead
October 15,1940
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
309
body. But the politicians and commercial men have been deceived and have not seen the facts, and their eyes are not opened until God’s “strange work” on earth is done. Then those political selfish allies and dupes see that religion is a fallen thing. They see that religion is hypocritical, claiming to serve God while acting at all times as servants of the Devil, having always an unclean record and entirely averse to being viewed in the light of God’s Word of truth. Now the political and commercial elements cry out, “We must have more religion”; because they have not yet seen and realized that religion is diametrically opposed to “Christianity”, hence opposed to everything that is right. When once these people see what a filthy, hypocritical, fraudulent and devilish thing religion is, they will take action against everything that appears to be religious.
' While Eglon’s servants waited Ehud was on his way, making good his escape: “And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the quarries, and escaped unto Seirath.” (Judg. 3:26) Without doubt the servants of Eglon would have pursued Ehud had they been aware of the true situation. Ehud’s escape, then, pictures the members of Jehovah’s witnesses, the faithful servants of God, escaping from the vicious servants of the religionists, bent upon their destruction. Jehovah’s faithful witnesses have had a part in thrusting the “sword of the spirit”, the Word of God, into the belly of the religious systems. While doing so Jehovah’s witnesses have been severely reproached, ill-treated and put in very great danger; yet by the grace of God they have escaped through it all and will continue to escape until their work is finished, before Armageddon begins. In the meantime the allies of the big religious system are waiting and stupidly clamoring for more religion. Then the door opens and they see the real situation of the religious institution. They learn that Jehovah’s witnesses have been proclaiming the truth, to wit, that religion originated with the Devil, is a snare to all who want to serve God, and is employed as a racket by selfish men who hypocritically use religion against truth and righteousness. When these allies become aware of the facts, that religion is in fact fraudulent and wicked, then, the Scriptures show, they are enraged against everything that appears to be religious. Not having given their hearts to Jehovah, they are under the influence and power of the demons and really blind to God’s purpose. Such servants of the religious systems even doubt the existence of God, and, being influenced by the demons, they put forth their efforts to make an end of Jehovah’s witnesses. Disregarding their own human laws, they put forth their efforts to wipe out everyone who names the name of Jehovah God and his kingdom. This is shown by the fact that the servants of Eglon
pursued after Ehud with the purpose of destroying him.
• The text shows that Ehud “passed beyond the quarries”. Those “quarries” near Gilgal were graven images, erected under demon influence to reproach the name of Jehovah. (See Judges 3:19, margin.) Ehud passed beyond those images “and escaped unto Seirah” (A.R.U.); which name means “roughness”. The place was evidently a rough country, which was assigned to the tribe of Ephraim, and not far from Shiloh, where the tabernacle was erected. (Josh. 18:1) That territory bordered on the territory of the tribe of Benjamin, to which tribe Ehud belonged. At this point Ehud pictured Jehovah’s faithful servants now on earth; and the picture shows that such receive protection and find refuge in Jehovah’s organization, which organization is pictured by the nearness of the tabernacle. That rough or mountainous country furnished protection to Ehud. The Theocratic organization furnishes protection to the faithful servants of Jehovah who have fled to that organization. Have in mind that Ehud in the organization at times pictured Christ Jesus, at other times the “remnant” (Rom. 11:5; Rev. 12:17); while at other points in the drama he pictured or played the part pertaining to Christ Jesus alone; and fleeing near to the mountains would picture those who flee to God’s kingdom for protection now. The scene now changes to show another important thing: “And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the mount, and he before them.”—Judg. 3: 27.
J	0 At this point of the drama Ehud pictured or represented Christ Jesus alone. He blew the trumpet to assemble all of the Israelites, and thus pictured the Lord Jesus Christ in command of ‘the armies of heaven’, that hear his trumpet sound for war and follow him. (Rev. 19:14) Undoubtedly Ehud blew his war trumpet that same day of his escape, and the trumpet was to summons the men of war. Ehud must strike at the time, while the enemy was still demoralized. Thus at that point Ehud pictured Christ Jesus at the particular time when the “strange work” of Jehovah on earth is completed. It is the time anti-typically to begin the “strange act”, and Christ Jesus, the Greater Ehud, sounds the war trumpet, calling the angelic host of heaven to follow Him into the war for the execution of the enemy. This part of the picture exactly corresponds with the prophecy of Ezekiel wherein it is written that ‘six men with slaughter weapons’ went into action after the man with the writer’s inkhorn had placed the mark upon those who would be spared in the slaughter. (Ezek. 9:1-6) The “strange work” of Jehovah in which the remnant and their companions participate being
310
SEe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
completed, then the servants of the Most High are in great danger through the enemy. All the ruling factors of the earth become the open enemies of those who are on the side of the great Theocrat. Then Christ Jesus, the Greater Ehud, sounds his war trumpet and the heavenly host go into action and the battle of the great day of God Almighty begins and rages, resulting in the complete destruction of all of Jehovah's enemies, both visible and invisible to human eyes. This part of the prophetic drama, therefore, shows that God's “strange work” will be carried on in some part of the earth until the time for the beginning of his “strange act”, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty,” and then God will avenge his elect servants who are standing faithful and true, carrying out the terms of their covenant.
11	No doubt Ehud was carrying out a well-laid plan of action previously arranged; and therefore we must conclude that he had previously organized Israel and posted his key men at certain points, who were to go into action upon a given signal. This he would be doing without the knowledge of the Moabites. So likewise the Lord Jesus Christ, the Greater Ehud, the Executive Officer of Jehovah, is carrying out the purpose of Jehovah and has his host ready to act upon the giving of a command to advance. Ehud’s trumpet sounding from the high point in the mountains would be heard by his posted servants and immediately repeated by many other trumpets stationed throughout the land, and within a very short time the country would be aroused, ready to march, and the march would begin upon the enemy. It was the duty of the priests of Israel to participate in the trumpet sounding: “And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.” (Num. 10:9) It is therefore the duty of all of the anointed of the “royal priesthood” to participate in sounding the kingdom message.
12	Hearing the trump call, “the children of Israel went down” from the mountain to follow Ehud their leader. Their going down well illustrates how the Lord Jesus leads his heavenly host, who go down from heaven to fight against Gog, who as Satan's chief officer attempts to destroy everything on earth, and particularly those faithful servants of the great Theocrat. This is particularly shown by the record, to wit: “And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.”—Rev. 19:14,15.
” Referring now to the text at the beginning of this article: “Shall not God avenge his own elect?” In this hour of darkness on the earth, when the ruling factors are in the dark as to God’s purpose; in this time of gross darkness upon the people, when the wicked rulers ride in the saddle, and those who are on God’s side are being pursued and persecuted everywhere, the situation seems hopeless to all except those who have full faith and confidence in Jehovah God. Foreseeing this condition, the Lord Jesus propounded the question: “But when the Son of man comes will he find this belief on the [earth] ?” (Luke 18:8, Diaglott) Clearly this shows that the number of persons who will have such faith, and who will hold steadfastly to that faith, will be small in number; therefore it is written: “According to your faith be it unto you.” (Matt 9:29) Again said Jesus: "He that endureth to the end shall be saved.” (Matt. 10: 22; 24:13) In view of the physical facts that have been brought to pass and of the plain statements of the Word of God, is there now any reason for any of the servants of the great Theocrat to doubt what will be the result? Shall any such quail before their enemies? Those who are strong in faith will be blind to everything except Jehovah’s Word and will permit nothing to turn them away from the great Theocracy. Their determination is and will be: Come what may, we will serve Jehovah God and his King.
14	There cannot be the slightest doubt about the result of “the battle of that great day of God Almighty” Christ Jesus, the Field Marshal of Jehovah, is certain to gain the victory. Regardless of how terrible conditions in the earth may become, know this: that victory is with the great Theocrat and his King. The faithful shall share in that victory who fully trust in God and in Christ, and henceforth they will continue to say, as it is written: “But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. 15: 57) Also they v.ill continue to sing in their hearts: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.”—Ps. 13: 5.
15	Those on the earth now and who are fully and wholly devoted to Jehovah God well know that all of these prophetic pictures or dramas and all prophecy are set down in the Scriptures recorded long ago for the very purpose of giving aid, comfort and hope to those who now sincerely serve God and his kingdom. As the Israelites followed Ehud, so now every one of those who are of the remnant and all those who have taken their stand on the side of The Theocracy, and who continue faithful, will follow Christ Jesus in full confidence. If in doing so some are put to death they have the assurance that their full faith and devotion will be rewarded by a resurrection to life forevermore. The faithful cannot and will not fear and will not for one moment compromise with the enemy.
October 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
311
They have made the great Jehovah God their fear, and by his grace they will now prove their full faith and devotion to Jehovah and to his King, and will thus maintain their integrity to the end. The Watchtower sets forth the facts and the Scriptures showing that Armageddon is very near. The darkest hour of all time will soon give way to the most brilliant light that has ever come to humankind. This will be the reward of those who fully trust Jehovah and his King and who remain true and steadfast to the end. God has provided salvation for those who love and serve him, and all the faithful are now and henceforth fully trusting God and rejoicing in their hearts, looking to that hour of salvation.
” Returning now to the prophetic drama: We see that the Moabites occupied the territory on the opposite side of the Jordan and that territory God would not permit the Israelites to invade. (Deut. 2:8,9) At the time of this drama the Moabites under Eglon the king had moved from the Jordan to the west side and taken possession of the land which God had previously assigned to the tribe of Benjamin. Eglon had no vested right there. The time had come for the Moabites to get out. Just so now, the time has come when the commercial religionists and allies must vacate. The time had come for the Israelites to make war upon the Moabites and to drive them out of the land which God had given to his people. Ehud there took the lead and the faithful Israelites followed him in the war. “And he said unto them, Follow after me; for the Lord hath delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over? (Judg. 3: 28) So now the Greater Ehud, Christ Jesus, summons his faithful followers. Christ Jesus takes the lead, and he says to those who have covenanted to do the will of God: “Follow me? The faithful on earth obey his command. The host of heaven hear the command of the great Executioner, and to them he says: “Follow after me? The hour has arrived for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and Christ Jesus leads on to battle. Those who are with Christ Jesus and who remain faithful and true will now falter not; and concerning them it is written: “These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth?— Rev. 14:4.
17	Ehud foresaw that the Moabites, when the battle would begin, would attempt to seek safety and therefore to escape across to the east side of the Jordan, and so he arranged to prevent that very thing. “And they went down after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab.” Thus the army of the Lord, under the leadership of Ehud, cut off the way of escape for the Moabites. Another division of his army made a frontal attack on the Moabites and started
them on the run toward the Jordan fords. Hemmed in on both sides, the Moabites were cut to pieces. This is another prophetic account, drama or picture of the complete destruction of Satan’s forces that will take place at the battle of Armageddon, and which is fully corroborated by the following prophecy: “And the shepherds shall have no way to Hee, nor the principal of the flock to escape. A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard; for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture.”—Jer. 25 : 35, 36.
” “And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.” (Judg. 3:29) This description here given of the fighting men of Moab, with whom were “all lusty, and all men of valour”, appears to mean that Satan’s visible organization, which engage in the battle, will be in fighting trim and fully equipped when Armageddon begins, but their strength will quickly disappear. They will go down to destruction at the very time when they appear to be at their greatest strength. This is indicated by the number 'ten thousand that were slain’. Ten thousand is the fourth power of ten (10X10X10X10), meaning all the enemy. Ehud could not have accomplished that great slaughter in his own strength. He had the help of Almighty God. Full and complete power was with him. Even so at the battle of Armageddon, the Greater Ehud will have the full support of Jehovah, the Almighty power. (Ps. 110: 5) That will result in the complete annihilation of God’s enemies. Other scriptures fully support this conclusion, to wit: “And Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he hath magnified himself against the Lord. Woe be unto thee, O Moab! the people of Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken captives, and thy daughters captives.” (Jer. 48:42,46) “And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army. And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth; and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.” (Rev. 19 : 19, 21) “Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies; thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee. Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger; the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men. For they intended evil against thee; they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform.”—Ps. 21: 8-11.
18	The battle, led by Ehud, was decisive. “So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years.” (Judg. 3: 30) So
312
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
likewise the battle of Armageddon, led by Christ Jesus, will be decisive. Ehud made a quick work of it. The Greater Ehud will make a quick work of God’s enemies: “For he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness; because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth.”—Rom. 9: 28.
20	The Israelites were God’s covenant people, and therefore that nation was a typical Theocracy. The great Theocrat had placed his people in that land and assigned a particular portion of it here under consideration to the tribe of Benjamin, whose name means “son of the right hand; fortunate”. Christ Jesus is the beloved Son and “the right hand” of Jehovah God’s favor. To Christ Jesus Jehovah has given all the earth for his possession. (Ps. 2:8) Eglon held possession of that land assigned to Benjamin, and was where he had no right to be. The selfish and devilish combine of religion, commerce and politics now hold possession of the earth, claiming the right to rule it, and hence stand where they have no right to stand. That is “the abomination that maketh desolate”. (Dan. 11:31; 12:11) It is now desolating the earth. God has made known to those who seek an understanding of the truth that “the abomination of desolation” is today boastfully manifesting itself. Satan’s abominable organization has reached the peak of wickedness. The time for Jehovah’s “strange act” is about due. In the typical fight the Moabites’ god Chemosh failed to withstand the assault of Jehovah’s executioner, Ehud. In the battle of Armageddon the demons now controlling the world will completely fail to withstand the onslaught of the Greater Ehud, Christ Jesus the King.
21	In times past there have been many battles fought. The World War from 1914 to 1918 was terrible beyond description of human words, and in that war millions died. The war now being prosecuted by wicked dictators from 1939 and into the year 1940 is without doubt the most destructive that has ever been known to this time. The demons control the invaders or dictators. Millions have fallen into the trap of Satan because they have embraced religion and ignored Jehovah God. It is difficult for the human mind to imagine a more destructive war than that which is now in progress in this year 1940. The whole world is astonished, in perplexity and in great distress.
22	The wars that are now in progress, however, are not the battle of Armageddon. The battle of Armageddon, which is “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”, is yet future, and for destructive results nothing that has ever come to pass can or will equal the battle of Armageddon. That will be a time of trouble such as the world has never known, and there shall never be another. This is proved by the words of Jesus recorded at Matthew 24: 21. All
the power and all the equipment that the Devil and his agents visible and invisible can bring into action will perish before the onward and irresistible assault of Christ Jesus and his heavenly host. When the battle of Armageddon is done there will be so many dead that the survivors will not be able to bury them. The whole earth will be a place of shambles. —Jer. 25: 33.
23	Repeatedly God has given warning of that approaching battle. He caused many prophetic pictures to be made in times of old foretelling that great and terrible conflict. Amongst those prophetic pictures is the one here recorded, in which Eglon and Ehud performed important parts. In these latter days God is now revealing to those who seek to know the meaning of such prophetic dramas. Why? In order that those who love God and his kingdom may have hope and be strengthened and may maintain their integrity. (Rom. 15:4; 1 Cor. 10:11) God has permitted his remnant and their companions to be on the earth and have a part in his “strange work” amidst many trying conditions, and now those who love him see that these trying experiences are for their good.
24	If God had caused only one prophetic drama to be made and recorded it would now be harder to have and to manifest strong faith. In his loving-kindness God has made many prophetic pictures, and in these present days has permitted to come to pass trying and terrible experiences which try the patience and faith of his people. Those who love Jehovah and his government will by reason of these prophetic dramas and God’s precious promises be strong in faith, “strong in the Lord and in the power of his might,” and will stand firm, trusting fully in the Lord to the end, having in mind at all times that “he that en-dureth to the end shall be saved”.
REST
25	The nations of the earth are torn with strife and war. The masses of the people hate war and long for peace and rest. They do not find rest and peace; and why? Because they have fallen victims to religion and have been ensnared by the demons, of which Satan is the chief. With one hand Satan, by the use of religion, lures the credulous people into his snare, and with the other hand he slays them. His purpose is to carry out his original threat to turn all men against God and destroy them. The religious institutions, and particularly that institution manipulated by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, induce the people to believe that religion furnishes to them protection. Other religious organizations join with the Hierarchy in blindly leading the masses of the people into the snare of Satan and into the ditch of destruction. The peoples of earth who are thus ensnared are
October 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
313
well pictured by those who hold on to the leaders of Moab. None of them found any rest or escape. Those who in this day of distress hold on to religion and religious leaders will find no escape and no rest.
28 Ehud pictured Christ Jesus, “the Prince of Peace.” Those who went down with him to battle and who remained with him saw the result of that battle and afterwards enjoyed rest. “And the land had rest fourscore years.” That was eighty years of peace and rest, which were enjoyed by the Israelites because that typical nation served God. A “score” is a double ten, and four times ten a symbol of perfection or that which is evenly balanced. The “fourscore years of rest” which followed Ehud’s victory is symbolical of the rule or government that is first righteous and wholly devoted to the Almighty God. Therefore it pictured the everlasting government of the great Theocrat ruled over by “the Prince of Peace”, Christ Jesus, the Greater Ehud. That government of the great Theocracy is “the holy city” representing the organization of the Most High, over which Jehovah has placed Christ Jesus, and concerning which it is written: “And the city lieth foursquare.”—Rev. 21:16.
27 That Theocratic Government is the only place where men will ever find rest. The faithful remnant will be blessed by having a part in that glorious organization under Christ their Head. The “other sheep” of the Lord will form the “great multitude” (Rev. 7:9-17), and these now must hasten to that city of refuge, and must do so before Armageddon, if they would find protection and rest. The remnant by faith have entered into rest. (Heb. 4:1-3) They are in Christ Jesus, fully united to him, and hence a part of the antitypical Ehud. They know what is certain to come to pass, because they have learned it from God’s Word. They stand firm and immovable in Christ Jesus. They trust wholly and completely in Jehovah and continue to say: “My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.” All of such now must be fully
and completely united, standing foursquare, shoulder to shoulder, fighting for the good news of The Theocratic Government.
28 All persons of good will toward God, who have abandoned religion and fled to the antitypical city of refuge, the Theocratic organization under Christ, and who there remain in faithful obedience unto the Lord, now by faith have rest, and they confidently trust in the Lord for full deliverance at Armageddon, and look forward to deliverance.
28 The present duty of the remnant and their companions is to be now fully and completely at unity in heart devotion to God and in his service. They must be active and diligent in informing others of the only place of safety and rest. Only those who have a desire for righteousness will hear the message delivered by the faithful servants of God. It is the duty and privilege of all who have been blessed by a knowledge of The Theocratic Government to inform others who will hear. Waste no time now in brooding over present wicked conditions existing in the earth. With faith and joy lift high the banner of The Theocracy that those who desire to learn may find the way to salvation and rest.
80 During the remaining days of Ehud there was rest in Israel. The Greater Ehud’s day will be endless. Of his government and peace there shall be no end. (Isa. 9: 6, 7) That means that never again shall the wicked be permitted to rise up and oppress the people and take away their ease and comfort. “Affliction shall not rise up the second time.” (Nah. 1:9) Under The Theocratic Government there shall be peace and rest and joy forever. All persons that find life must come under and be fully and joyfully obedient to The Theocratic Government. Every creature that lives shall delight to serve The Theocracy. The name of Jehovah will then be upon every tongue. Then shall “everything that hath breath praise Jehovah”.—Psalm 150: 6, Arn. Rev. Ver.
THE ROD UPON THE NATIONS
JEHOVAH employs signs or miracles to bear testimony. Hence it is written that ‘the sign has a voice’. The term “voice”, as used in the Word of God, means a proclamation or address. It is a message bearing testimony of and concerning Jehovah’s purpose. At times Jehovah has given his creatures the power to perform miracles or signs, which signs bear testimony of Jehovah’s purpose and from which testimony the wise derive profit.
At the burning bush at the base of Mount Horeb Jehovah ordered the refugee Moses to return to Egypt, there to serve notice on the king Pharaoh and then to lead the enslaved Israelites out of Egypt and bring them to Mount Horeb to worship Jehovah. Moses feared that they would
not believe he was sent by Jehovah God. “And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice; for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee.” Thereupon Jehovah gave Moses the power to perform signs or miracles. The three signs Moses performed before the Israelites, and in this Moses’ brother Aaron was associated with him. Two of those signs were performed before Pharaoh. First Jehovah would supply the evidence and convince the Israelites that He had sent Moses to them, and then He would also give proof to Pharaoh as a warning to him and his organization. Both the Israelites and Pharaoh must know that Jehovah is the Almighty God. Now, in our day, both the people of Jeho
314
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
vah and those of the organization of the greater Pharaoh, Satan, must be informed that Jehovah is God.
The first sign was with the rod of Moses which was thrown to the ground and which became a serpent. As a herder of sheep Moses carried a shepherd’s rod. This was used in connection with the first sign. “And the Lord said unto him, What is that in thine hand! And he said, A rod. And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it. And the Lord said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand: that they may believe that the Lord God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee.”—Ex. 4:1-5.
The time had then come for Jehovah to send his deliverer to Egypt to make for Himself a name; concerning which it is written: “And what one nation in the earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem to be his own people, to make thee a name of greatness and terribleness, by driving out nations from before thy people, whom thou hast redeemed out of Egypt!” (1 Chron. 17:21) Jehovah had selected Moses for this purpose to deliver his testimony to the Israelites, and Moses had raised the question as to whether the Israelites would hear him and believe that the Lord had appeared unto him or not. The modernday fulfillment of this prophetic picture began in A.D. 1914, the year the first World War broke out, and when the “times of the Gentiles”, the “seven times”, expired.—Luke 21:24; Dan. 4:16,23,25,32.
The time had then come for Jehovah to send forth his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, whom the prophet Moses foreshadowed, to make for himself (Jehovah) a name. It was then that Jehovah placed Christ Jesus his King upon his “holy hill of Zion”, which is Jehovah’s capital organization ; wherefore He says to the opposing nations of earth: ‘Wet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2: 6) It was then that He sent him forth to rule amongst the enemy, as foretold at Psalm 110: 2 : “Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion: Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) That was the appropriate time for Jehovah to propound the question to the Greater than Moses, Christ Jesus: “What is that in thine hand!” Moses of old held a shepherd’s rod in his hand. The shepherd’s rod of Moses could be used as a weapon against beastly and human enemies. It was a rod that could be used as a scepter.—See Ezekiel 19:14.
Concerning his second coming as Judge and King, Christ Jesus said: ‘When the Lord shall come in his glory, and all his holy angels with him, then will he sit upon his throne of glory.’ He said that then would be the time that he would as a shepherd divide the sheep from the goats. (Matt. 24: 31-46) The proof, from modern physical facts and inspired prophecy, has been set forth elsewhere that Christ Jesus began his reign from heaven in A.D. 1914, but it was in 1918 that he came to Jehovah’s spiritual temple for judgment of Christians and for the separation of the sheep and the goats. He was sent to shepherd the nations, and his rod appears then to be “a rod of iron” toward the wicked. To him Jehovah says: “Ask of me, and let me give nations as thine inheritance, and as thy possession the ends of the earth: thou shalt shepherd them with a sceptre of iron, as
a potter’s vessel shalt thou dash them in pieces ” (Ps 2 • 8, 9, Rotherham) Concerning the birth of The Nation, or the beginning of the kingdom of which Christ Jesus is King and which is symbolized as the “man child”, it is written: “And she brought forth a son, a manchild, who was about to shepherd all the nations with a sceptre of iron.” (Rev. 12: 5, Roth.) These scriptures prove that the rod or scepter is a symbol of authority and power which Jehovah has delegated to Christ Jesus and to be used to carry out Jehovah’s purpose by his Theocratic Government.
Referring back to the prophetic picture: At the command of Jehovah Moses cast his rod on the ground. This could not mean the casting away or letting go of all power and authority by Jehovah or by Christ Jesus that wickedness might run riot in heaven and earth. Long before Moses performed the sign with the rod Satan, who possessed the power to rule, had rebelled against Jehovah and had challenged Jehovah to put on earth men who would maintain their integrity toward God. The wicked one thereafter continued to operate in heaven as well as on earth. (See Genesis 3 :1-15; Job 1: 6-12; 2 : 1-5.) Later in the prophetic picture made at Egypt Satan is represented by his servant Pharaoh who was then opposing God’s power as expressed through his prophet Moses. Moses represented Christ Jesus, concerning whom Moses said: “The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken.” (Deut 18:15) At the end of the “times of the Gentiles”, in A.D. 1914, that is, at the end of the time of Satan’s rule without interference from Jehovah, Christ Jesus is sent forth to begin his reign. It would be inconsistent for Christ Jesus then to let go his power and authority to rule and at the same time fulfill Jehovah’s commandment, to wit, “Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” On the contrary, the casting of the rod to the ground or earth by Moses pictured the projecting or extending of the active power of Christ Jesus to things pertaining to the earth. Thus he did when the kingdom was born in heaven and the war in heaven thereafter took place and Satan and his angels were cast down to the earth. (Rev 12-1-10) Thereby Christ Jesus made all his enemies his footstool, that is to say, he confined them to the earth and its vicinity. No longer are there any enemies in heaven; and now there is but one center of disturbance, to wit, the earth, where Christ Jesus keeps a watchful eye upon the enemy and by his power holds the enemy in restraint until God’s due time for the enemy and his organization to be destroyed. Casting the rod to the earth or ground had nothing to do with the permission of evil or wickedness which began long before Moses was used to make the prophetic picture in Egypt. The “voice of the first sign” (Ex. 4: 8) speaks a message relating to the coming of the Greater Moses to deliver God’s creatures; and this deliverance is done centuries after wickedness has been in the world.
Immediately after Moses cast his rod to the ground “it became a serpent”. It was the rod that became the serpent when it reached the ground or earth. The serpent is a symbol of evil, but not always a symbol of wickedness. The power and authority which Jehovah has delegated to his beloved Son, Chnst Jesus, the Greater Moses, now takes on the form of evil to the things pertaining to the symbolic “earth”, that is to say, to Satan’s organization, which is
October 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
315
now confined to the earth. Evil is that which is hurtful and brings distress, adversity, affliction and sorrow upon the one against whom it is used. Jehovah God exercises his power to inflict punishment or to enforce his judgment, and such exercise of power results in evil or that which hurts the wrongdoer; but that evil is righteously used. Jehovah says: “I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I am Jehovah, that doeth all these things.” (Isa. 45:7, Am. Rev. Ver.) That is, Jehovah forms the light for the righteous, and creates darkness for the wicked, his enemies; he makes peace or “prosperity” {Roth.) for his faithful remnant of witnesses and their earthly companions, and creates evil for Satan and his organization. (See also Psalms 97-11; 82:5-7; 107:10; Jude 13; also The Watchtower 1930, pages 131-147.) All wrongdoing or wickedness results in evil to someone, but not all evil is wrong. When Jesus punishes his enemies, that is evil administered in righteousness. Therefore the Scriptures support the conclusion that the casting of the rod to the ground and its becoming a serpent foreshadowed the extension of Jesus’ power and authority and activities to the earth, which action becomes serpent-like or hurtful to Satan’s organization.
This conclusion as to evil as used by Christ Jesus against his enemies is fully supported by other Scriptures. At Revelation 9:11 Jehovah’s anointed witnesses are likened to locusts, concerning whom this verse says: “And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon [that is, Destruction], but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon [that is, Destroyer].” Christ Jesus is that king, and as such he commands his organization and he inflicts punishments, which is evil, upon Satan’s organization. (See Light, Book One, page 145.) According to Revelation 9: 19, even the “horses” in the army of the Lord inflict evil like serpents; as it is written: “For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails; for their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt.” To those who become the enemies of Jehovah he says: “For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 8:17) Also Amos 9:3- “And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them.” The Scriptural evidence is therefore conclusive that Moses’ rod cast to the ground and which became a serpent pictures power and authority from Jehovah which he had delegated to Christ Jesus and which is being used against the enemies of Jehovah who are now confined to the earth.
Christ Jesus is “the head over all things to the church, which is his body”. “And he is the head of the body, the church.” (Eph. 1:22,23; Col. 1:18) He does not flee. When the rod of Moses was suddenly turned into a serpent, “Moses fled from before it.” It is certain that Moses did not here represent Christ Jesus himself. In this part of the picture Moses represented the footstep followers of Christ Jesus on the earth at the time when Christ cast the enemy out of heaven by the exercise of power and authority conferred upon him by Jehovah. Christ Jesus, clothed with all power in heaven and in earth, did not flee. Those in Christ and on earth and who are, because of their devotion to God,
counted as members of the body of Christ, did flee, as foretold at Revelation 12:6,14: “And the woman [symbolic of God’s organization] fled into the wilderness where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days. And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.” (See Light, Book One, pages 246, 247.) The rod of Moses did not at any time picture Satan the Dragon. The rod pictured the power of Jesus Christ exercised against Satan and his angels, and it was that power that cast him out of heaven and thus stirred up the hatred of Satan against the members of Jehovah’s organization then on earth, and these fled to the wilderness where Jehovah had provided shelter and protection for them after the strife of the World War. The fleeing of Moses before the serpent corresponds to this; and the one fact corroborates the other and thus shows the fulfillment of the prophecy.
About A.D. 1918 fear laid hold upon Jehovah’s people on the earth. The faithful must overcome fear in every way as it relates to Jehovah’s use of power to bring about evil or punishment upon the enemy. Jehovah then sent forth his witnesses, the approved and anointed remnant, to declare his message of evil or his vengeance against the enemy ; and now his witnesses, the remnant, must take in their hand the prophetic message of God’s vengeance and use it against the enemy as an evil thing, as a serpent, serving notice upon the enemy organization and sounding the warning to all. In making the picture, therefore, Jehovah said to Moses, who here represents the faithful remnant: “Put forth thine hand, and take it [the serpent] by the tail.” In fulfillment, the world-wide distribution of the message of truth which declares God’s purpose by his Theocratic Government to vindicate his name and to destroy Satan and his organization is the exercise of evil against the enemy. This message has been and is being distributed by the remnant throughout the earth, and symbolically that work represents the taking of the serpent by the tail.—See Light, Book One, page 167.
Moses put forth his hand “and caught [the serpent], and it became a rod in his hand”. In this he pictured Christ Jesus. This part here pictured shows that Jehovah determines the time when the final battle of the day of God Almighty, the battle of Armageddon, is to be fought against Satan and his organization and when it shall end. Christ Jesus uses the rod of power and authority as a serpent of evil against the enemy organization and fully and completely metes out judgment against Jehovah’s enemies. This being accomplished, there is no further need for the rod to be used as a serpent, but thereafter it is used as a means of shepherding and healing; as it is written: “I will also smite mine hands together, and I will cause my fury to rest: I the Lord have said it." (Ezek. 21:17) Jehovah’s power and authority delegated to and used by Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, ceases to operate as a serpent at the conclusion of the battle of the great day of God Almighty. Christ Jesus then reports to Jehovah with his rod or power, and thereafter the rod is used, not to smite, but to heal; as prophetically foretold: “And the Lord shall smite Egypt; he shall smite and heal it: and they shall return even to the Lord, and he shall be entreated of them, and shall heal
316
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
them.” (Isa. 19:22) This Jehovah does in vindication of his holy name, that all may know that he is God and has sent Christ Jesus as the Deliverer; as stated: “That they may believe that the Lord God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee [the Greater Moses].”—Ex. 4:5.
In 1914 Christ Jesus began to exercise his power to cast the enemy to the earth. From and after 1918 he executes judgment, which will terminate in the great battle of God Almighty. Since the beginning of his exercise of judgment the faithful remnant have learned that Christ Jesus is at the temple and that the name of the Almighty God is Jeho
vah, and have been advised as to the meaning of that name It is since 1918 that the remnant have learned the meaning of “evil” and why Jehovah does “create evil” like a serpent. For the first time, in May, 1930, The Watchtower published the Scriptural proof of this, under the title “Peace and Evil”, and this is a confirmation to the remnant that Jehovah has sent his Vindicator, his Great Prophet Christ Jesus, who was foreshadowed by Moses. The remnant therefore see why these things “written aforetime” are for their comfort, and now also their earthly companions, the “great multitude” of the Lord’s “other sheep”, draw comfort and strength therefrom.
END OF WAR IN HEAVEN
( ( A ND there was war in heaven: Michael and his X-X angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon
** fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.” These are the words of an eyewitness, who foresaw the events of our modern years in prophetic vision and symbolisms, and recorded them at The Revelation chapter 12 verses 7-9.
He that began the war against Satan is identified by the name “Michael”, which means “Who is like God?” and which name designates the great Godlike Prince, Christ Jesus, who is “the brightness of [God’s] glory, and the express image of his person”. (Heb. 1:3) The manifest purpose of the use of this name is to call attention to the corroborative prophecy of Daniel, thus furnishing two witnesses to this important fact. The only place in the ancient Hebrew Scriptures where the title Michael is applied to God’s great Prince, Christ Jesus, is in Daniel’s prophecy, chapter 12, verse 1, where it is written: “And at that time [at the birth of the man child or kingdom of God described in Revelation 12:1-5] shall Michael stand up, the great [heavenly] prince which standeth for [is ruler of] the children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble [in heaven and also on earth], such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time [A.D. 1914, when the World War on earth began].” In heaven the trouble ended with the casting out of Satan and his demons; and the time of trouble on earth was halted in 1918 for an interval in which the witness work by Jehovah’s witnesses must be done, and then shall come the final end of Satan’s world organization.— See Matthew 24:14, 21, 22.
This and other scriptures prove that Satan had a plaee where he was permitted to be in heaven. Probably God confined him to a certain zone, but that he was permitted to appear in the presence of God is made certain by other scriptures, such as Job 1: 6; 2:1-5; Zechariah 3:1, 2.
Four names, to wit, Dragon, Serpent, Satan and Devil, God gave to the great adversary as a means of identification, and those names symbolize the wicked work in which he engages. It is stated that he “deceiveth the whole world”, but evidently what is meant is ‘the whole inhabited earth’; and this meaning is in harmony with the American Revised
Version and the Emphatic Diaglott translation rendering of the text. It would not apply to God’s anointed witnesses and their “great multitude” of companions, who arc not a part of the “earth” under Satan.
When Christ, the great Prince, was placed upon his throne as the world’s Rightful Ruler, in A.D. 1914, the first work was to oust Satan from heaven. Satan assembled all his host of powers and principalities and angels, symbolized under the figure of the “seven heads” of the dragon, as described at Revelation 12: 3. Then Satan and all his associate demons resisted the new king, and war followed It was a war between Satan’s heavens and the “new heavens” under Christ the Messiah. The “kings of the earth” were not in that fight, because they could do nothing in a heavenly battle to assist their father Satan. But every head or prince in Satan’s invisible organization would be involved. These would induce the visible organization of Satan on earth to war against the members of God’s organization on earth, which did take place.
On the side of Christ in this fight were his myriads of holy angels, but none of the Christians who make up the anointed “body of Christ” were involved. Christ Jesus had not yet come to God’s temple for judgment of Christians, and hence those Christians who had died faithful had not even been resurrected, and none of the members of the anointed servant class on earth could render any aid in that warfare in the invisible heavens. The strength of the enemy was no match for Christ, who has all power in heaven and earth This is proof that the former interpretation by men of Matthew 12: 29 is wrong and that Jesus does not have to first bind Satan before his demons can be cast out of those demon-possessed or before Satan’s earthly organization can be destroyed. We may expect the Lord to give Satan full opportunity to fight all he can and then bind him when he is thoroughly whipped. Satan and his forces in that fight were completely defeated and cast out of heaven, and this is proof that in God’s due time Christ will completely destroy Satan’s organization and then put Satan into the pit. —Rev. 20:1-3.
It was not Jehovah’s due time to kill Satan; therefore he had Satan and his angels literally thrown out of heaven. Speaking of things certain to be as though they had already occurred, Jesus had prophesied: “I beheld Satan as lightning [that is to say, with lightning speed] fall from heaven.” (Luke 10:18) The time arrived for Jesus to do that very
October 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
317
work, and it must have afforded him great joy to thus vindicate his Father’s name before the hosts of heaven. That work, however, could not serve to vindicate the name of Jehovah before earthly creatures. That vindication will take place at the battle of Armageddon, now near. God permits Satan to continue his wicked work about the earth, and in due time God will destroy Satan’s organization by and through His great Prince, and that will be a complete vindication of His name.
Satan having been cast out, a voice in heaven is heard by the apostle John, who represents Jehovah’s anointed witnesses today on earth, proclaiming, ‘'Now is come salvation. and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.” (Rev. 12: 10) This further shows that the war in heaven and the proclamation took place at the birth of the kingdom or nation of God. The proclamation would be heard by all the angelic host of heaven, and heard by the Christian saints after their resurrection out of death and being made like Christ Jesus in heaven. (1 Cor. 15: 42-44; 1 John 3: 2) It was not until 1925 that the faithful saints on earth who were devoted to The Theocratic Government began to see and understand; therefore that must have been God’s due time for the latter to see. The Lord revealed this and caused it to be published in the March 1, 1925, issue of The Watchtower, to wit, that there had been a war in heaven, Satan had been cast out, and there was much rejoicing in heaven because the birth of The Nation or kingdom had come. The “strength” of the Lord was demonstrated against Satan and his angels, and later demonstrated to God’s resurrected saints, and revealed to his faithful ones on earth. These then learned that “the Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation”. (Ps. 118:14) Isaiah had long before prophesied of the “robe of righteousness” and the “garments of salvation” with which the Lord would clothe his organization Zion and those who were members or children thereof (Isa. 61:10), but such robe of righteousness and garments of salvation were not understood by Jehovah’s witnesses until the February 1, 1925, issue of The Watchtower. Then they appreciated what was meant by the robe and the garments of salvation.
The period of waiting by Jesus at Jehovah’s right hand had ended, as foretold at Psalm 110:1, 2, and the time had come for Christ’s “all power ... in heaven and in earth” to be exercised. (Matt. 28:18) This is what constitutes the "dispensation of the fulness of times”, or (according to Rotherham) the “administration of the fulness of the seasons”. (Eph. 1:10) The immediate ousting of Satan from heaven shows the beginning of the exercise of the power of Christ and marks the beginning of a new era in the kingdom of the great “King of Eternity”, Jehovah, and a new era or kingdom beginning before the complete destruction of Satan’s organization and power at the battle of Armageddon near at hand.
All the holy angels are sons of God, and are therefore the “brethren” of those Christians who have died faithful and of the faithful ones yet on the earth and who are “in Christ” as members of His anointed body. To these the proclamation in heaven refers, saying: “For the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.” This accusing is well illustrated in the
case of one of the ancient witnesses of Jehovah named Job Satan accused him before Jehovah and declared that Job would not maintain his integrity toward Jehovah if he were put to the test. God permitted Satan to try out his scheme on Job. The test was made and Job did maintain his integrity before God. Satan has always constantly accused the followers of Christ, declaring they would not remain faithful when put to the test. But those who have been faithful and true to God have maintained their integrity and Satan could not overcome them. On the contrary, these faithful ones have overcome Satan, as it is stated in the further part of the proclamation: “And they overcame him [the accuser] by the blood of the Lamb [Christ Jesus], and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.”—Rev. 12:11.
By their faith in the blood of Christ as compensating for all their natural weakness and other unintentional imperfections, and holding on to Him, these anointed Christians gained the fight. “This is the victory that o\ercometh the world, even our faith.” (1 John 5:4) They overcome “by the blood of the Lamb”; which means that the Lamb of God is their advocate with God, making intercession for his weaker brethren. (1 John 2:1) “The word of their testimony” is also mentioned in the proclamation, which manifestly means that these have been faithful witnesses to the name of God and of Christ, giving testimony thereto One cannot be pleasing to God who does not act as a witness to the name and word of God. To be his witness is one of Jehovah’s positive commandments. The truth was given to God's people, not merely as something to enjoy personally, but to tell to others to the glory of his name. For a time his witnesses testified “in sackcloth”, figuratively speaking, and when that period was ended their witness was killed, as described in Revelation 11:3-8. In his due time, to wit, in 1919, God resuscitated his witnesses on earth and gave them a change of raiment to identify them as his cleansed witnesses; and now, clothed “with the garments of salvation” and “the robe of righteousness”, these go forward with great zeal to the giving of the testimony, and their witness work is a boomerang to Satan and his agents on earth —Re\ 11: 9-12.
In the language of the proclamation (Rev. 12.11), those who went to make up the “two witnesses” testifying in sackcloth “loved not their lives unto the death”. They preferred to die rather than to yield to the solicitations or demands of Satan’s crowd. They would be faithful to the Lord at the cost of their lives. To such God’s “lovingkindness is better than life”.—Ps. 63: 3.
The proclamation continues: “Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them [ye who in them are tabernacling (Roth.)].” (Rev. 12:12) The remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses or “faithful servant” class on the earth are, by reason of their conditional right to eternal life in heaven, truly now tabernacling or tenting in the heavens or heavenly places. (Eph. 2:6) By faith they now see how marvelously God has dealt with them and how his purposes he so wonderfully unfolds for them, and that soon his word and name shall be completely vindicated and their own joy shall be complete. Such is the portion of those who faithfully serve God.
Since being cast out of heaven Satan is limited in his operations to the things of the earth. Therefore warning is
318
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
given to the inhabitants of the earth, at Revelation 12:12: “Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.” The remnant and their companions who are the Lord’s “other sheep” are no part of the “earth”; hence the “woe” is not to them or for them, but is directed to Satan’s visible, earthly organization and those who bear it up and support it, and who are subject to it. The remnant and their companions are now proclaiming this “woe” of warning; and for this reason and cause they witness to God’s name and word and Satan tries to destroy them. This text would further indicate that Satan will drive his representatives, to wit, Big Business, politicians, and clergy, to the extreme limit in their opposition to God and to Jehovah’s faithful servants on earth.
Satan’s great wrath is directed against God and his organization. He therefore oppresses the people in divers and numerous ways and causes great sorrow and trouble to befall them and then induces his pious-faced and lying-lipped clergy to charge all these sorrows, woe and calamities up to Jehovah God. The reason is to turn the people away from God before Armageddon is fought. Satan sees that his time is short before the battle of Armageddon, when he shall be destroyed, and his purpose and attempt to turn people away from God is to get all on his side. The proclamation of the voice from heaven ends at this point of the Revelation, which indicates that the woes of the peoples of earth will continue and will reach a climax in Armageddon.
The result of the war in heaven found Satan entirely excluded therefrom and he could take no further offensive operations against the heavenly host. His wrath was great against God’s “woman”, that is, God’s organization, of whom God’s anointed remnant of witnesses on earth are a part, and therefore the Devil must exercise his vengeance against God’s people on earth. Hence it is written that the Dragon, or Serpent, Satan, and his associate demons “persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child [God’s kingdom under Christ Jesus]”. (Rev. 12:13) This is a warning to all of God’s anointed witnesses, and now also to their earthly companions who form the “great multitude”, that they should expect the persecution of Satan and his opposition to be exercised by and through his agents as long as the “strange work” of Jehovah continues and until his “strange act” at the battle of Armageddon, when he will destroy all the demons and their chief, Satan. This is conclusive proof that if anyone is found earnestly and zealously serving God by giving testimony concerning God’s great name and purpose and his Theocratic Government, that one will be persecuted by Satan and his demons and some members of his visible organization.
In the face of the continuing persecution, Jehovah resuscitated the work of his witnesses on earth in 1919 Now call to mind that, immediately following Jesus’ baptism in the Jordan river, Jehovah by his spirit led his beloved Son away into the wilderness for a period of time. At the end of that period of time Satan violently opposed the Lord Jesus, in the great temptation. (Matt. 4:1-11) And then Christ Jesus began his aggressive work in preaching the kingdom of God. (Matt. 4:17) So likewise it would seem appropriate that, immediately following the reviving of his witnesses in A.D. 1919, Jehovah God should lead his faithful ones on the earth away into a “wilderness”. Thus it is written: “And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days. And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.” (Rev. 12: 6, 14) In olden time the prophet Elijah fled from before wicked queen Jezebel because of fear. But God’s “woman”, represented by the faithful remnant of his organization on earth, fled because God had made provision for these, and while they were in such wilderness condition the Lord fed those of his organization. During the period of the World War (1914-1918) and while God’s organization on earth was prevented from activities, the members thereof prayed the prayer the psalmist had put in their mouth, to wit: “Oh that I had wings like a dove ’ for then would I fly away and be at rest. Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.”—Ps. 55 ■ 6-8.
God resuscitated his witness work in 1919, and then he heard the prayer of his faithful ones and answered and provided even more than was asked of him. Jehovah God is “the great Eagle” whose wings provided the support and protection for his organization. Therefore his “woman” was given two wings of his provision, to wit, his love and power, to bear her away. As Jehovah had said concerning Israel “I bare you on eagle’s wings, and brought you unto myself ” (Ex. 19:4) After the birth of The Nation, or Kingdom, m 1914, and while the witness work was yet in restraint, Jehovah’s faithful ones on earth continued to pray • “Keep me as the apple of the eye; hide me under the shadow of thy wings.” (Ps. 17 : 8 ; also Pss. 57 ; 1; 61: 4) When the Lord’s people began to see his provision for them they said . “How excellent is thy loving-kindness, 0 God' therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings ” (Ps. 36:7) And Jehovah God, by his truth, revealed himself and his name and his Theocratic Government to his faithful remnant and their companions, and his ministration to them ever since has fed them.
(Continued from page 320)
bombarded by German planes. Two remarkable facts about this raid were that the sirens did not sound until bombs were already dropping, and the defense seemed very weak; at least, no French planes went up to try to drive the raiders off. Next day I cycled some 100 miles south to a port called Bayonne. ... It was not until we landed at Plymouth, feeling very thankful to Jehovah for having escaped the
Nazi menace, that we heard about the armistice and the collapse of another pillar of democracy. But, of course, when a country is sold and betrayed right and left by Fascist intrigues with the able help and support of the Catholic Hierarchy, there is little hope for it. All the Jonadabs and the people not duped by the clergy could see that the Roman Hierarchy had a lot to do with the downfall of France.”
LETTERS
CABLEGRAM
1940 Sep. 29 Rutherford—
In Lord’s providence thrilling London convention held today. 2500 children of light assembled. All send you and American brethren love and greetings. Your speeches have filled us with joy and zeal to continue the fight for The Theocracy, despite conditions. Standing alert for the sign of Armageddon.
JEHOVAH GIVES GRACE AND STRENGTH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Your air-mail letter of August 17 brought me great joy and encouragement. It came just the day before I left for the Manchester convention. I read most of the letter twice at the convention, which brought much delight and joy to the brethren. After much anxiety we also received on Thursday night the recordings of “Religion as a World Remedy”, which had arrived by air mail in London on the Monday previous. It took three days before the government released these to us, having been in touch with them night and day on the matter.
The holding of this convention in the heat of war was a miracle of the Lord. For the past ten days we have suffered constant heavy air raids which have resulted m much destruction in many parts of the country. In spite of this, 3,500 brethren made their way to Manchester. One thousand pioneers came from all over; some hitchhiked, others cycled or walked. But they got there. The brethren were most enthusiastic, and every session of the convention served as Theocratic instruction. The high point was Sunday night, when 4,000 packed out the Free Trade Hall and the lesser halls connected by wire to hear your talk “Religion as a World Remedy”. The lecture was so clear that it sounded as if you were there. The audience applauded most enthusiastically with the American audience. Your very warm remarks to the brethren at the end of the resolution stirred the hearts of the British brethren as much as it must have the American brethren. Then the reading of the London cables by Grant Suiter came as a pleasant surprise to all of us. Then Sunday evening we received your wonderful cable from New York. This came too late for the convention, but its warm message has been conveyed to the brethren.
At a public meeting I also answered the many false charges made against us by the Manchester judge, Frankland, and the local press. In quoting from the 1936 Yearbook and the general financial report therein, I pointed out how the deficit shown in the report should fully answer their charges that the Brooklyn office of the Society owns a good share of America’s gold reserve. The brethren gave me most enthusiastic support throughout the halfhour’s talk, and especially when I asked the press and Judge Frankland why they did not ask for the balance sheet of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. This indeed brought down the house. Much of the press have made reports of this speech, but, of
course, as is their policy, they left out the charges made against the old “harlot” and her agents. The entire assembly supported this statement I made in answer to these enemies, and copies will be sent to the judges and press concerned.
There were 249 immersed. It was a sight to see more than a thousand brethren wearing their magazine bags wherever they went in Manchester. On Saturday night a thousand of them were on the streets with The Watchtower. Kingdom News No. 7 was released for the first time as far as Manchester was concerned. The whole city was covered. On Sunday morning a serious not occurred in the Catholic section of Salford, where five brethren were badly injured. Enclosed find several press reports from Manchester.
The field report for the convention showed 2,843 publishers in the field, placing 2,026 bound books, 13,395 booklets, 2,020 magazines, and sound attendance of 1,230.
Manchester had air raids every night of the convention and it seemed as if the demons were bent on preventing us from having this convention. One bomb fell and destroyed a theater located 100 yards from the Free Trade Hall on Saturday night. On Thursday night a large department store was destroyed not so far from the hall. But all this did not faze the brethren and everything went off as scheduled. The brethren had no fear and they went about their busmess as if there were no war. I have never seen such a large group of brethren so full of life, smiling, possessing great peace of mind and determination to serve The Theocracy. Your reference to Britain in the public lecture and your remark in my letter “I feel sure that a great portion of the multitude will come from Britain and will be the ones that will be privileged to fulfill the divine mandate of populating the earth with a righteous race” have pleased the faithful brethren very much, likewise the host of Jonadabs who attended their first convention. Surely this determination on the part of the brethren in this hour of great distress upon this land will bring much pleasure to our heavenly Father.
I personally wish to express my gratitude to the Lord and His organization for having had a share in this Theocratic convention, which has been the happiest I have attended. At a special pioneer meeting the thousand full-time warriors wished to send you their special love and wish to thank you for the gift of the new book, Religion. I promised to send you their greetings.
I am sorry to learn from your letter that you are not so well, but am glad that you are slowly gaining strength. Surely Jehovah gave you grace and strength for the Detroit convention, and indeed he will preserve you for the victory shout just ahead It is my earnest prayer that the “everlasting arms” will continue to uphold you that your faithfulness and boldness may be an inspiration to all of us.
Your fellow servant by His grace,
A. D. Schroeder, London, England
(Continued from page 306)
off the press. You may obtain it at 10c a copy. Organized companies should combine their orders and forward through servant.
“CONSPIRACY AGAINST DEMOCRACY”
No brochure could be of more instant importance and aid to those residing in democratic countries than this new booklet, Conspiracy Against Democracy. Many millions of persons of good will are m the mood to get and read this book, especially as this 64-page publication contains the entire proceedings on the occasion of Judge Rutherford’s speech to the recent Theocratic Convention on “Religion as a World Remedy”, and also his other speech on “Times and Seasons”, and to which these many millions were personally invited. Conspiracy Against Democracy displays an appropriate and attractive front cover. It may be had for 5c a copy.
“RELIGION”
With especial pleasure we announce the new book Religion, released by its author, Judge Rutherford, at the recent Theocratic convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. It offers the indisputable evidence, both Scriptural and factual, that religion is opposed to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and is therefore the mortal enemy of man, and that Christianity is the only way of escape for people of good will. The book contains 384 pages, including color-illustrations, and a valuable reference index, all bound within beautifully embossed covers in a refreshing green cloth and gold-stamped. You will prize the author’s edition, which contains an autograph of a letter m his own handwriting addressed to the Theocratic ambassadors. This special edition is limited and may be had on a contribution of 50c per copy.
3ie
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEERING IN WAR-RAVAGED FRANCE
“Outbreak of war in September, 1939, found me in southwestern France where for the past three years I had the privilege of pioneering. Naturally Satan lost no time in attacking those who bear witness of our Lord and the next month the Society’s activities were forbidden by ministerial decree and the Paris office was closed. There were several reports in papers obviously of Jesuit origin. One described the Society as a ‘secret society called “The Knights of the Watchtower’'’, or shameful, disguised Communists, and mentioned that in the hall for meetings there was an altar with a white cloth and candles and that the chairman wore a hood. Anyone with the slightest knowledge of Jehovah’s witnesses knows how ridiculous this account is. Shortly after the closing of the Paris office I was called up by police authorities in Bordeaux and questioned by one official after another. Why was the Society forbidden 11 replied, ‘Because our books expose the lies of religion.’ They wanted to know what I intended to do. I replied that as the Bible itself was not forbidden (at least not yet) then I would carry on with that. Of course, I made no mention of the large stocks of literature hidden in the homes of people of good will which would not be idle.
“A few weeks later my partner, a French pioneer, was called up for military service. He took his stand as a faithful member of Jehovah’s Theocracy and was arrested and imprisoned. After two months in jail he so bewildered the authorities with his determined stand and bold witnessing that they certified him as a lunatic and sent him to an asylum. (Acts 26:24) But his faith and determination were a great encouragement to the Jonadabs in Bordeaux.
“Not being of French nationality, I was free to carry on and soon adopted the system of working in the morning offering first the Bible and then, if a spirit of good will was shown, placing a booklet or two, of which I carried a small quantity in a hidden pocket. The afternoon was dedicated to back-calls. Despite adverse circumstances this system worked well; interest steadily increased, so that several small studies were held in private homes in different parts of the city. Meetings in halls were out of the question, as we had to go very carefully. In January of this year we held a small immersion service, when four Jonadabs symbolized their consecration. This was held in a carpenter’s workshop. Although circumstances were so difficult, a few Jonadabs engaged in service work and the rest gave a witness among their family and friends. One sister living in a country village who has never had the privilege of attending meetings forged ahead with the door-to-door work in the face of much opposition. She was arrested and threatened several times, and police came to her home and seized her literature. We just cycled out to her place and left her a stock in the home of a near-by Jonadab. Finally she was prohibited even from selling the Bible, but she got over that by calling from door to door and simply giving away New Testaments to anybody who desired one and reserving the Society’s literature for those who showed real good will. In the spring of this year my stock of literature ran out, it being impossible to replace it from the Paris office, though right up to the last we received The Watchtower. We also received small quantities of the two latest booklets Government and Peace and Refugees. However,
320
this supply was not sufficient to keep us going. If we were to carry on, a larger stock was necessary; and the Lord made provisions for that.
“A few months previously an American pioneer working in a country district had been arrested and, after many complications, finally expelled. He had been obliged to leave his stock of literature at his last lodgings in a small village To get his stock out and transport it to Bordeaux was a rather tricky job under the circumstances, but with Jehovah’s help it was done and we were supplied with spiritual ammunition for months ahead. I had to spend a night at this lodging house where the literature was and I was very touched by the kindness of the old landlady. The American pioneer had left such a good impression that she gave me a warm welcome and (without my knowing it) she even slept on the floor in the kitchen so that I could have her bed
“Meanwhile the ‘old harlot’ had been twanging her harp with great gusto and the Roman Hierarchy had increased their influence with the politicians. Nearly every day over the wireless we were subjected to some of this harp music in the form of Catholic propaganda and broadcasting of different ceremonies. One day, for example, the pope was referred to as ‘the Christ of 1940’, and on the occasion of Cardinal Verdier’s death his praises were sung to a nauseating degree.
“Finally the big Nazi offensive began in May, and I shall never forget the wave of dismay, fear and utter amazement that passed over France when Paul Reynaud announced over radio that the Germans had broken through and reached Amiens. . . . When Italy declared war on France and England there was no great sensation, the spirit of the people was so low already. Certain Catholics had believed the pope would prevent this step. What hopes! This situation with other circumstances must surely open the eyes of many people befooled by the religious racket. For example, when the new cardinal of Paris took over his position, he held a special ceremony in the Sacre Coeur of Pans, during which he ‘blessed’ France and dedicated it to the ‘saered heart’; they also sang the Marseillaise, a political revolutionary song, for the first time in church history When I heard all that, I said to the brethren: ‘Poor old France! she’s done for now.’
“Then new circumstances of the war made the work more difficult. I was constantly being suspected of being a spy or a parachutist Several times police or soldiers stopped and questioned me. On one occasion a gendarme was curious to know what I had in the cases of my bike Now there were some booklets there which I was not keen on his seeing But the first thing I brought out was a phonograph record en titled ‘The End of the World’. When the gendarme saw that he said hastily, ‘Oh yes! that’s all right,’ and wanted to sec no more.
“The Nazis steadily came south, and in the middle of June the British consul warned British subjects to leave Being loathe to abandon the work and the Jonadabs, I hesitated; but when I heard that the British consul had already left and no more boats would leave Bordeaux, it seemed time to move, unless one was keen on having firsthand experience of a Nazi concentration camp. On the last night I spent in Bordeaux, June 19, the city was heavily
(Continued on page 318)



WATCHTOWER
They shall know that lam Jehovah^
Vol. LXI
-EttNel 35:15.
Semimonthly No. 21
NOVEMBER 1, 1940

CONTENTS
Salvation ....................
The Issue ....................
Dividing the People.........
Witnesses ..................
Totalitarianism ............
Salvation ..................
The Reality ................
Devil’s Own ................
What to Do..................
Identification .............
Christendom’s” Malady Fatal Field Experiences ............
“Courage” Testimony Period ... 1941 Calendar.................
Opportunities of Service ....
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses 322
“The Messenger” ...........
“Conspiracy Against Democracy”
Watchtower” Studies ......
323 323
325 325
326 32S 329 330 331 332 333 336 322 322 322
335
335
335
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street »	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth" with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Gs American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British..............-......... 34	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian ..................._. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian............. 1	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
/South African ...................  Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty of adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once eact year, stating the reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid tb< needy, but the written application once each year Is required by th< postal regulations.
h'otice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal sub scription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, a her requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with thi journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, A’. T., under the Act of March 3, I87S.
“COURAGE" TESTIMONY PERIOD
This special Period which occupies the entire month of December is marked by the term “Courage”, a quality which Jehovah repeatedly exhorted Joshua to exercise in driving out the enemies of the theocracy, for an example to us today. December should shatter all previous records in booklet distribution, due to the almost unbelievable offer of seven of any of the Society’s booklets on a 10c contribution. If possible, every packet of seven should include the latest booklet, Conspiracy Against Democracy. A special wrapper, provided by the Society, helps make the 7-booklet combination all the more attractive. AU this will require special advance work, so start preparing now. Especially, attend the weekly service meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses, where the details of the work of “Courage” Testimony Period will be discussed. If you are not in touch with such, write this office for references. Keep accurate record of your activities and report same fully at close of December.
1941 CALENDAR
The 1941 Calendar is exceptionally beautiful and expressive. Under the yeartext, to wit, “Salvation unto our God . . . and unto the Lamb” (Rev. 7:10, A.R.V.), the artist portrays with Scrip
tural symbolisms and modern details Jehovah’s “strange work” o' judgment now fast reaching its climax among all nations. Thi Calendar date pads mark the special testimony periods for 1941 and also give field service suggestions for the intervening months A contribution of 25c per copy is asked therefor, or $1.00 for fivi copies mailed to one address. Companies do well to send in com bination orders through the local company servant.
OPPORTUNITIES OF SERVICE
Jonadabs between 20 and 30 years of age, both male am female, married and single, who desire to file an application fo assignment to service by the Society, please write the Society Address your letter
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society President’s Office
124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York
1941 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
In the face of an almost impossible year the publication of th 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses represents an accomplish ment made possible only by Jehovah’s power. Confirmation of thi {Continued on page 335)
ffieWOTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	November 1, 1940	No. 21
SALVATION
"And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God ivhich sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.”—Rev. 7:10.
JEHOVAH, the Most High, has provided complete salvation to them that avail themselves of the great ransom sacrifice. By His permission Jesus purchased the members of the human race that accept and comply with the terms of salvation which Jehovah has made. This great truth is now being made clear to all w’ho seek righteousness and who seek meekness. It necessarily follows that those who hate righteousness and who spurn the truth and who oppose the great Theocracy and the King thereof cannot be among those who will find salvation to life through Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy.
2	Why are cruel dictators destroying all the nations that refuse to yield to the totalitarian rule? Why the rapid growth of dictatorial power since the World War ended in 1918? Will the totalitarian rule succeed in overrunning the earth ? Is there any way of escape from the cruel rule of the ‘’corporate state-’ organization and control by religionists and their allies ?
3	These and related questions cannot be properly answered by the expressed opinions or theories of men. There is but one true and correct answer, and no man is wise enough to authoritatively give that answer. If you believe that Almighty God is perfect in wisdom and supreme in power, and that he is the rewarder of them that are diligent to learn from him, then you are beginning to have faith. If you fear God you are beginning to have wisdom and you will be diligent to seek the Lord. If you believe that the Word of Almighty God is the truth and you confidently rely upon that Word, then you have the foundation of faith by which you can grow in knowledge and understanding.—Heb. 11: 6; John 17:17.
‘ All things that have come to pass upon the human race since the beginning of creation until now wore known unto Almighty God from the beginning: "Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of the world.” (Acts 15:18) Know and understand, then, that God foreknew of these days of peril coming upon the nations of the earth and he foretold the same time and again and caused that
prophetic testimony to be recorded in the Bible, which is given to man for his guidance. (Ps. 119:105) Only those who believe in God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” and who rely upon his Word as the truth will ever learn the correct answer to the foregoing questions. All persons who fear men, and who follow the traditions of men and who refuse to give heed to the information contained in the Bible because of fear of receiving an unfavorable opinion by men, will never get the correct answer. To persons who are sincere and honest and who are suffering under the burdens now weighing upon mankind the Almighty God says: “Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.”— Isa. 1:18.
5	Only persons of good will toward God will reason upon his Word. They will discard everything of the teachings of men because unreasonable. It is such persons of good will that The Watchtoue: desires to aid to the end that they may profit by the provisions which God has made for all those who love and serve him.
THE ISSUE
6	It is necessary to understand the great issue or question for determination in order to get a clearer vision of why the present conditions exist on earth and what will be the end thereof. That great question at issue and which must be finally determined soon is: Who is the supreme one and therefore whose rule shall prevail? God is the Creator and all of his creation is perfect. (Deut. 32:4) He created man and endowed him with the power to multiply and fill the earth with a righteous people. God gave to man his perfect law for his guidance and informed man that willful disobedience to that perfect law would result in his death. (Gen. 2:17) Man’s right to life and his continuance for ever thereafter depended upon obedience to God’s law, and disobedience meant death, or the end of life. Lucifer, also now known as Satan the Devil, introduced perfect
323
324
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
man to religion and induced man by religion to take a wrongful course. To Eve he said, in substance: “A violation of God’s law will not bring death upon men, but in the day that you eat of this forbidden fruit, contrary to God's law, you shall be as wise as gods [that is, as the demon gods associated with Satan].”—Gen. 3:1-5.
’ The desire to do something contrary to God’s will led man into Satan’s trap. Man’s departure from the Word of God and his yielding to the word of the creature, the Devil, brought man’s downfall, and therefore all of the descendants of Adam were born in sin and without any right to life. “Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.”—Rom. 5:12; Ps. 51: 5.
8	Having succeeded in turning the perfect man away from God the Devil then boastfully challenged God to put any man on earth that would remain true and faithful to the Almighty. (Job 2:5) If Satan could cause all men to willfully disobey God, that would prove that the powTer of the Devil is equal to or superior to Jehovah God’s power. Thus the question of supremacy was raised. God accepted the challenge and gave Satan full opportunity to make good his boastful challenge. To that end he said to Satan: “But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.”—Ex. 9:16, Leeser.
9	The Word of God set forth in the last above text showrs that there must be at some time a final settlement of the issue raised by the wicked challenge and at that time God will exhibit his power against Satan and all who remain on the side of Satan. At the settlement of that issue the question must be determined as to who is all-powerful, therefore who is supreme. In the centuries past Satan has had opportunity to use his power in his endeavor to turn men and nations against God. The time must come when Satan’s uninterrupted efforts to rule the world cease. Such time is known and designated in the Scriptures as “the end of the world", that is to say, of the day of Satan’s uninterrupted rule over the nations and peoples of the earth. The coming of the World War in 1914 marked that time, as shown by the fulfillment of prophecy, and particularly the prophetic testimony of Jesus Christ, the great Prophet. The Lord God brought about the physical facts in fulfillment of such prophecy, thus showing that 1914 was the correct date. There and then the fulfillment of the prophetic words of Jesus was noted, to wit: “For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places.”—Matt. 24: 7,8.
10	Giving further evidence of the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule, Jesus said that these other things would come to pass, to wit: “Upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; . . . men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth.” (Luke 21:25,26) Those words exactly describe the conditions that have existed since the World War of 1914 to 1918.
11	Long ago God announced his purpose to set up his kingdom with Christ Jesus as King, and made known that his King must rule the world in righteousness; and for this reason Jesus admonished his followers to likewise pray to Almighty God: ‘Thy kingdom come; thy will be done, on earth as it is done in heaven.’—Matt. 6:10; John 18:36,37 ; Dan. 2: 44.
12	The coming of Christ Jesus the King and his enthronement as such must be at God's appointed time, and until that time the Lord Jesus must wait. Therefore God said to Christ Jesus when he ascended into heaven: “The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.” (Ps. 110:1; Heb. 10:12,13) The enthronement of Christ Jesus as the rightful ruler of the world would necessarily be resisted by Satan the Devil, and hence a war between the Lord Jesus and Satan and other demons. (See Psalm 110: 2-5.) The fulfillment of that prophecy began in 1914, when Jesus was enthroned according to the will of Jehovah ; as it is written in the Scriptures: ‘Thou hast taken thy great power and reigned, and the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come.’ (Rev. 11:17,18) Then began the “war in heaven”, with Christ Jesus and his host pitted against the Devil and his associate demons, resulting in the defeat of Satan and his army, all of whom were cast down to the earth.— Rev. 12:1-10.
WOES
13	From that time forward the Devil must confine his operations to the earth; and the facts show that he has done so. Concerning this it is written: “Woe to the inhabiters of the earth [that is, to the powers that rule], and of the sea [the sea symbolically representing the people of the nations of earth under the ruling powers] ! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.”—Rev. 12:12.
14	It was in 1918 that the World War ended, and thereafter the totalitarian dictatorial rule came to the fore. Since then the woes upon all the nations have increased; and the reason is, because Satan knows that his time is short until the final settlement of the question of supremacy and therefore he puts forth his endeavors to turn all men against God and to destroy the human race. It is the Devil who has been bringing woe after woe upon the peoples of the nations, and who continues to do so. With
November 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
325
each succeeding year since 1918 those woes have increased, and they will continue to increase until “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”, which will be fought, on one side, by Christ Jesus and his righteous host, against the Devil and all his followers. In the meantime, from 1918 onward, preparation is being made for the great and final battle, and at the same time another great work is going on.
DIVIDING THE PEOPLE
15	The kingdom of God, for which Jesus taught his followers to pray, is The Theocracy, because it is the government of the Almighty God with Christ Jesus as King, who is the world’s rightful and righteous Ruler. All unrighteousness is pitted or arrayed against The Theocracy. This marks the dividing of the people of the earth into two separate and distinct groups. Concerning his enthronement as King and his coming for judgment it is written: “When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats; and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.”—Matt. 25: 31-33.
lb Christ Jesus is the great Judge. (John 5: 22, 27) He sits in judgment of his own people and of the nations, and the judgment of the nations is the dividing of the people, and that judgment has for some time been in progress. It was in 1918 that Christ Jesus came to the temple and began judgment. As to the nations and the two classes into which the peoples are divided Jesus shows by symbol that those who oppose him are “goats” and that those who are favorable to him and his righteous rule are designated as “sheep”, that is, those who are of good will toward God and his kingdom. Every person upon the earth now must be put in one of these two classes, and by his own course of action he puts himself in one or the other. Therefore everyone must end up either as a “goat” or as a “sheep”, namely, one opposed to The Theocratic Government or one in favor of it.
WITNESSES
17	Christ Jesus is “the Faithful and True Witness” of Jehovah. Therefore he is the Head of and Chief of all of Jehovah’s witnesses. The judgment of Christ Jesus, conducted from the time of his coming to the temple of the Most High, first began with those who at that time had made a covenant to do the will of Almighty God. (1 Pet. 4:17) All the professed followers of Christ Jesus must appear before the Lord according to this prophecy and be tested and judged. Necessarily there would be two classes of these who claimed devotion to the Lord: one class those who
are approved after standing the test, and the other class the ones disapproved after being submitted to the test. The announced purpose of such judgment was and is to afford opportunity to the consecrated to prove their integrity and that the approved or righteous ones might “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness”. Therefore it is written in the prophecy: “And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.”—Mal. 3: 3.
18	The “offering in righteousness” consists of a full and complete obedience to the commandment of the Lord, and particularly in making known the name and purpose of Jehovah, the name and purpose of his King, Christ Jesus, and the great Theocratic Government, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. The Lord there began to make known these great truths, and thereafter the approved ones received from the Lord this commandment, which they must obey, to wit: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations ; and then shall the end come.”—Matt. 24: 14.
19	“Gospel” means good news. The coming of Christ the King and the beginning of his kingdom is good news, or gospel, to all who love righteousness and who hate iniquity. Those approved ones at the temple judgment must therefore be witnesses to the Lord and to his kingdom; hence Jehovah says to them: “Ye are my witnesses . . . that I am God.” (Isa. 43:10,12) These witnesses must bear testimony to the name of Jehovah, to his government, and to his King; otherwise they would be unfaithful.
20	From and after 1918 the ones approved to God have gone forward proclaiming the name of Jehovah and his kingdom. Like others who have gone before them, they are Jehovah’s witnesses. They are not a sect, nor an organization founded by men, but have become members of God’s organization on the earth. Those faithful followers of Christ Jesus, and who are promised a place in the kingdom, he calls his “little flock” of sheep, and to them he says: “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” (Luke 12:32) The last of these witnesses on the earth are designated the “remnant” of God’s organization, symbolized by his “woman”, and therefore against these, as the Lord foretold, the Devil and his representatives wage a warfare of persecution: “And the dragon [Satan] was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.”-Rev. 12:17.
OTHER SHEEP
21	Those who serve the Lord and who are pictured under the symbol of “sheep”, both those of the little
326	3THE WATCHTOWER,	bSookly.n, n. y.
flock and those who shall receive salvation in the earth, are the people of the Lord. These are all gathered to him. The ‘‘little flock” being first gathered, Jesus then says: “And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.”—J ohn 10:16,17.
22	Those whom the Lord here calls his “other sheep” are the ones who compose the “great multitude” that has no limit to the number but is made up of all those who at the judgment of Christ Jesus are placed on “his right hand”, or place of favor, and are designated his sheep, and who receive the blessings of the kingdom. (Matt. 25: 35) In Revelation the seventh chapter it is stated that this “little flock” consists of 144,000 followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, and who are made members of “his body”. —1 Cor. 12:12,18, 27; Col. 1:18.
PROPHETIC PICTURE
23	Immediately following the description of the body members of Christ, designated his “little flock”, Revelation makes this statement: “After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands.”—Rev. 7 : 9.
24	From that and other corroborative scriptures now fix in mind the following prophetic picture: Christ Jesus, enthroned as King of the great Theocracy. In 1918 he is seated upon the judgment throne conducting judgment according to the will of Jehovah God. Before him must appear and do appear all the nations of earth, for judgment and separation, whether they know that fact or not. By their own conduct all peoples and nations show where they stand. The Lord has raised from the dead his faithful followers who died in faith and faithful, and these now are associated with the Lord in heaven. (Rev. 11:17,18) Christ Jesus is accompanied at this judgment by all his holy angels who serve him and carry out his orders or commandments. These are all invisible to human eyes. By faith in God and in his sure Word of prophecy we know that the picture portrays the true condition. On the earth the Lord has his faithful servants who proclaim his name and his kingdom and who are called “the remnant” of his organization. All of these zealously support The Theocracy and continually serve and praise the Most High.
25	Look now to the nations of the earth where the woes have increased year after year since 1918. The Devil and his company of demons are desperately
attempting to carry out Satan's challenge to Jehovah God, and to this end he is putting forth all his efforts to turn the people against The Theocracy. The Devil knows that his time is short to prepare for the final showdown at Armageddon, and therefore he resorts to every known means of wickedness to accomplish his purpose. To this end he is gathering the nations and has gathered them against God and against his people. Accordingly it is written: “And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon [one of the names of Satan, and which mean' ‘devourer’, indicating that Satan’s purpose is to devour all the nations], and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.”—Rev. 16:13,14,16.
26	The word Armageddon, as used in this text, means the place of assembly of God's servants; hence the Devil gathers all his forces against the sen-ants of God and in opposition to the great Theocracy. This he does in preparation for the final battle. How does he accomplish that work?
TOTALITARIANISM
2T	“Religion” means the doing or performing of anything that is contrary to the will of Jehovah God. Following the traditions of men and giving honor and glory to creatures is religion. The practice of anything that tends to give glory to creatures is religion. Religion is and long has been the chief instrument of Satan to turn men against God and to carry out his challenge. It follows, therefore, that the great religious organization known as the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is the chief earthly instrument of Satan. The Hierarchy is the head and leader of all religions now practiced amongst the nations, and towers over all other organizations. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy is against The Theocracy. Falsely the Hierarchy claims to serve God. If that organization were serving Jehovah God, then the men thereof would have nothing whatsoever to do with the dictators of the world who are under the control of the DeviL The Roman Catholic Hierarchy freely and fully support the dictators, becoming bolder each day in announcing the support of the Corporate State.
28	Nazism, Fascism, Communism, and all manner of religious isms, mean one and the same thing, because all such totalitarian or dictatorial rule that supports the power of government in the hands of dictators is against God and his government. All the dictators embrace and practice demonism or religion. AU are against Jehovah God and against Christ
November 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
327
Jesus; therefore all such dictators are against The Theocracy. Dictatorial power, like a great ravenous beast, is overrunning and spoiling the earth. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy is riding upon the back of that ravenous beast, as described in Revelation seventeen. All the dictators and their supporters are against the witnesses of Jehovah who are bearing testimony to the name of the Most High and to his Theocratic King and kingdom. Dictators have turned the nations against God; therefore the nations once professing to serve God have entirely forgotten him and become his enemies.—Ps. 9:17.
29	In confirmation of the foregoing, note an article published in the Chicago (Ill.) Daily Times of August 7, and contributed by the Times foreign editor, Irving Pflaum: “Port of Spain, Trinidad, Aug. 7 (Passed by British Censor).—Hitler intends to denounce Soviet Russia this autumn, return to the policy of the anti-Comintern pact, win the official support of the Vatican and ‘appease’ Roman Catholics in Germany, Poland. Belgium, and Latin America. This is the program Nazi agents say will be revealed by Berlin ‘as soon as the attack on Britain succeeds.’ I recently have had the opportunity to learn the inside story of future German policy as told to the highest South American leaders in ‘strict confidence’ by German agents now operating as diplomats or undercover men in South American countries. A president of an important ‘sister republic' himself told me what the Nazis have been telling him. . . . Alto the information which he gave me was confirmed in other quarters by diplomats and observers who are in positions to know what is going on in South America. . . . suspicion is Latin America’s natural attitude toward everyone. They began to believe that the Reich in its assistance to General Franco was really anti-clerical and anti-church. From the beginning, however, German agents smiled knowingly and told South Americans to wait and see what Hitler would do later. These agents spoke of the pact with Stalin as a clever trick which would be scrapped when Russia had been used. Now they are predicting that the time is near when Hitler can return to his former position as the arch foe of Communism and the protector of all things godly. They warn conservative Latin American leaders not to ‘fall’ for Anglo-American propaganda to the effect that Hitler is a godless revolutionary. These agents also say that when England has been subdued the world will witness der Fuehrer in his true and real light. He will then be able to show Latin America that he is a friend of the Catholic church and the one man who made the world safe for the Catholic antiCommunist communities such as Franco Spain and the present conservative forces in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and other Latin American countries.”
30	In agreement with the above article is an Associated Press dispatch published by the Philadelphia Record, on August 28, which reads: “Berlin, Aug. 27 (AP)—A pledge of loyalty to Adolf Hitler by the German Catholic Bishops Conference at Fulda is to be read to the faithful from pulpits at the end of the war, D.N.B., official news agency, said today. The pledge to Hitler is contained in expressions of gratitude to German troops adopted by the conference which ended August 22. The agency said the view predominated at the conference that ‘the Catholic church in Germany is indebted to German troops for the ■victorious advance and defense of the German homeland. Without the successful warding off of enemy invasion by German armed forces, German Catholics could not have pursued so undisturbed and quietly their church work and ministerial offices.’ ‘Publication of the pastoral letter, customary in past years after conclusion of the conference, is to be postponed until after the final victory of German troops,’ the agency added.”
31	All such opponents of The Theocracy, and who therefore persecute the servants and witnesses of Jehovah, the great Judge, Christ Jesus, designates as “goats”. The invisible demons, of which the Devil is the chief, are all in darkness as to God’s purposes. The visible part of the Devil’s organization, led by the religionists, are also blind as to Jehovah’s purposes. All these visible ones are “goats”. Therefore the demons invisible and the demoniacal leaders of the visible part of the organization are blind, and all such are headed to the ditch of destruction, symbolized by the Dead Sea. (Matt. 15:14) All the followers and supporters of that blinded, demoniacal crowd are in darkness; hence it is written in the Scriptures: ‘Darkness covers the earth [the ruling powers], and gross darkness the people.’ (Isa. GO: 2) Totalitarianism is a “complete black-out’’, that is, in darkness and entirely away from the favor of Jehovah God. Such is the Devil’s rule, and such is a meager description of his organization. That organization of Satan, both invisible and visible, is fatally bent upon punishing all who support The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus.
32	With this foreground the answers to the questions above propounded are clear: Why are cruel dictators destroying all the nations that refuse to yield to the totalitarian rule! Because such is the Devil’s scheme and means to carry out his -wicked challenge against Jehovah God. That religious, fanatical rule, it appears, will overrun the whole earth, but it will succeed for only a very short time, and then its final end must come at the appointed time.
83	The Lord further identifies the goats by showing in his prophetic utterances that they would ill-
328
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
treat and persecute his servants. Now the physical facts prove the fulfillment of this part of the prophecy beyond any question. Every totalitarian government is against the servants of Jehovah God, and they and all their supporters indulge in the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses. That persecution is induced by the chief religionists, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. In the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses these opposers of The Theocracy completely ignore the fundamental law of the land guaranteeing freedom of worship. Even though the Supreme Court of the United States has laid down the rule in harmony with the Constitution that Jehovah’s witnesses have the full right and liberty to go from house to house and present their literature, and to receive contributions from the people to carry on the advertising of the kingdom, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy incite public officials to ignore the law and to ignore the ruling of the court and to constantly and continuously harass, ill-treat, arrest, imprison and abuse Jehovah’s witnesses because they are announcing the name of God and his kingdom. Not only do they wrongfully and unlawfully arrest Jehovah’s witnesses, but then they cause the radio stations, over which they have control, to broadcast to the people throughout the land words to this effect: “A religious sect, known as Jehovah’s witnesses, have been rounded up and arrested and put in jail because of the selling of their pamphlets.” When these witnesses are discharged because there is no law against their work, the radio stations are silent about such discharge. The clear purpose of the entire combine is to defame the name of Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government. This persecution continues with increased viciousness day after day. The persecutors, including the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and public officials, well know that Jehovah’s witnesses are harmless. They are not afraid of any harm that Jehovah’s witnesses will commit, but their persecution plainly shows that these persecutors are fighting against The Theocratic Government. The Lord so counts it, and designates the persecutors as ones who fight against him, and to such he says: “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.” “Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.” (Matt. 25:40,41) This is proof that the religionists and the totalitarians are the instruments of Satan, working under his supervision and blindly attempting to carry out his challenge to Jehovah God, and hence against The Theocratic Government.
34	Wickedness in the earth will continue until the battle of that great day of God Almighty, at which time the religious, totalitarian crowd will be com
pletely wiped out in vindication of Jehovah’s name. Opposers of The Theocracy hate the name of Almighty God. This is particularly true with reference to the totalitarian rule. They take a delight in defaming God’s name and the name of Christ. They likewise take a delight in persecuting the followers of Christ Jesus, for the simple reason that such servants of the Lord proclaim his name. This wicked conduct on the part of religionists and their supporters the Lord foretold when addressing his faithful servants in these words: “Ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.”—Matt. 24:9.
salvation
35	But look at the other side of the picture, that glorious picture which the Lord has revealed by his Word. The King of the great Theocracy is enthroned. The glorious light of the Most High shines into the face of the King, and that light is reflected upon all who are of his organization, being fully devoted to The Theocracy. None of these are in darkness. There is no “black-out” for them, because they are in the light and know God’s purpose and know what will be the end. (1 Thess. 5: 4, 5) Those devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom, having been brought into the temple of God, where they receive the reflected light of Christ Jesus, the Head of the temple, now continue to “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness” by joyfully proclaiming his name and his great Theocratic Government. The angels of heaven, and the faithful ones who have gone before and are resurrected and now with the Lord, join in the song of praise to the Most High and to his King. The Lord opens the gate for his “other sheep" to enter; and behold them coming from every nation, of every kindred and tongue! They come with palm branches in their hands, waving these to the praise of the Lord, and thus hail him as King and the earth’s rightful Ruler. They come with songs of praise to his name and to the name of the great Theocrat. And what are they saying?
“Salvation to our God which sitteth upon THE THRONE, AND UNTO THE LAMB.”
30	It is the day of salvation, and all those persons of good will toward the great Theocracy and the King thereof are now diligently seeking righteousness and meekness while they joyfully journey to their everlasting home. It is the time of great tribulation on the earth when all the nations are in terrible distress. But out from that great tribulation those persons of good will, that is, the Lord’s “other sheep”, are coming. They are identified as being on the Lord’s side by white robes which they wear, white being a symbol of their love of righteousness and their hating of iniquity, and their faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus. Their faces are
\0VEMBER 1, 1940
SEe WATCHTOWER.
329
urned to the great Judge upon the throne and to the Ylmighty God. They join in the song of praise with he holy angels and faithful men who have died and ieen resurrected, and the faithful members of “the emnant” are singing. Together all are giving praise, lonor and worship to the Almighty God and to the .amb, that is, the King who sits in judgment upon he throne. It is the time and occasion of great reoicing to all of those who have taken their stand irmly on the side of the Lord and on the side of his government of righteousness. With this picture in nind foretelling what is going to be the result of all he distress now on the earth, those who love right-ousness can rejoice in tribulation, and they do re-'oice.
THE REALITY
3T The kingdom, for which Jesus taught those who ove righteousness to pray, is here. Who now will ind refuge from every increasing storm that lashes ill the shores of the earth? Who will be saved to life ind to endless joy? The answer must be found in the Scriptures, not in the theories of men. The answer s clear and emphatic: “To Jehovah belongeth salvation: On thy people be thy blessing! [Selah].”— Ps. 3: 8, Rotherham Pss.
33	That emphatic declaration from God's Word alone settles the question as to who will be saved and who will perish at Armageddon. What can be said of the combination made up of Fascists, Nazis, Communists, Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and other opponents of The Theocracy? It is certain that salvation cannot come to any of them. It is likewise absolutely certain that none of that organization can minister salvation to any other creature. Salvation belongs alone to the Almighty God. No one can find peace and life everlasting by adhering to that religious, political combination, above named. That organization of the enemy holds out absolutely no hope whatsoever, because it is Satan's organization and Satan is against The Theocracy. That organization of Satan and all its supporters are against Jehovah and against his King. If that organization of religionists and supporters is not for the kingdom of God, they are against the kingdom; and we know that no part of the organization is for the kingdom. (Matt. 12:30) All such are enemies of God, and concerning his enemies it is written: “Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies; thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee.” (Ps. 21:8) That religious, political organization hates the name of Jehovah and his King, and they hate those who proclaim The Theocratic Government and its King.—Matt. 24: 9.
39	Will Jehovah God grant salvation to his enemies? The Devil’s doctrines, proclaimed by those advocating “universal salvation”, the teachers of which are the blind servants of Satan, say Yes. God's
Word says No. To say that the ransom sacrifice of Christ Jesus is provided for all humankind, including those who hate God and hate his government under Christ, is wholly unreasonable and certainly un-scriptural. God permitted his beloved Son to purchase the human race in order that those who believe and serve him might not perish. This is definitely stated as follows: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) It necessarily follows that those who do not believe on the Lord Jesus Christ shall perish.
40	The entire human race came under condemnation because of Adam’s sin, and all must perish unless God provides salvation from death for them. That provision he has made by and through Christ Jesus, his beloved Son. Jesus purchased the human race, and by the will of God salvation is granted to those who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ; and believing means obeying also. Salvation is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and certainly a gift is not forced upon those who are unwilling to accept that gift. In fact, a gift is impossible to be conferred upon anyone who refuses that which is offered as a gift. All the wicked do refuse and have refused and continue to refuse, and oppose God and his kingdom. “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Rom. 6:23) The foregoing text plainly states the divine rule. If further proof should be desired, note these words: “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”—John 3:36.
41	But do not those of the religious Roman Catholic Hierarchy claim to be servants of God and to name his name? They make such a claim with their lips, but their heart devotion is entirely against God and for the Devil. They are Jehovah’s enemies and the enemies of his government, and, as stated in the Scriptures, they take the name of God in vain. (Ps. 139:20) The Devil is the great liar and destroyer and deceiver, and those who serve the Devil are in the same class. (John 8:44) The religious, demoniacal totalitarian rulers serve the Devil and follow his course. The claim of the religionists of being servants of God, therefore, is entirely false. Those of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy say of themselves: “The gates of hell shall never prevail against us.” In this saying they entirely misapply the words of Christ Jesus, which he applied to the faithful members of his heavenly kingdom. (Matt. 16:18; Eph. 1:22,23; 2:18-22) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy says: ‘We have made a covenant with death and hell, and no evil shall come to us.’ Jehovah answers
330
SEe WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
that boastful challenge with these words: “And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.”—Isa. 28: 15-18.
42	True, there are many persons who are known as Catholics who are of good will toward God and who desire to serve God and who are held back from doing so by reason of the powerful influence exercised over them by the “Hierarchy of Authority’'. It is the “Hierarchy of Authority” that leads in religion and politics, all of which oppose The Theocracy. All connive and conspire together to destroy the people and the nations that will not conform to totalitarian rule. All of them wickedly oppose and persecute the witnesses of Jehovah that proclaim The Theocracy. All such are therefore enemies of God and are wicked, and concerning them it is written: “The Lord preserveth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.”—Ps. 145: 20.
43	Fully corroborating the statement in that text are the words of the Lord Jesus, the great Judge, which he applies to the goats, which goats are made up of the religionists, the Hierarchy and politicians and cruel rulers aforementioned, and to which the Lord Jesus says: “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.” (Matt. 25:41) The judgment of the Lord is final, and that judgment does not change. The final judgment of the Lord against the goats will be executed at Armageddon, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty,” and none of the wicked shall find any way of escape.—Jer. 25: 34, 35; 1 Thess. 5: 3.
DEVIL’S OWN
41 Religionist, political and commercial combine, composing the dictatorial rule, is the Devil's own product, organized and used to destroy the earth; and it is written that, at the time when Jehovah God by and through Christ Jesus gives salvation to those who love and serve him, he will destroy those who now attempt to destroy the earth. (Rev. 11:18) The Devil’s servants are workers of deceit. There is no organization ever in existence on earth that compares with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and particularly the Jesuits. That organization excels in deceitfulness. These are a part of the totalitarian rulers, and all of them use means to deceive the people. Concerning all such it is written in God’s judgment: “He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house; he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.”—Ps. 101: 7, 8.
45 Vv ill any of the wicked be saved 1 “Salvation is tar from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.”
(Ps. 119:155) Further emphasizing the destiny of the wicked, mark these authoritative words from Jehovah God: “Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup.” (Ps. 11: 6) “Evil shall slay the wicked; and they that hate the righteous shil be desolate.” (Ps. 34:21) “The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow. to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation. Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken. But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs; they shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away. For the Lord loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints; they are preserved for ever; but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.”—Ps. 37:14,15, 20, 28.
46 Many Scriptural texts leave no doubt as to the complete destruction of the wicked oppressors of The Theocracy : “For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it. But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it.”—Prov. 2: 21, 22.
THOSE OF GOOD WILL
41 To be of good will, within the meaning of the Scriptures, is to have a sincere desire to know and to serve Jehovah and his King of The Theocracy. For this reason God sent Jesus into the earth, and at his coming the angel host announced: “Glory in the highest unto God! and on earth peace among men of goodwill.” (Luke 2: 14, Roth.) One who is of good will begins to seek the Lord. That way is now open to all peoples, kindreds, and tongues of every nation who desire to serve the Most High. God is no respecter of persons. Those who conform to his rules receive his favor. God specifically warns all such of the approaching day of his wrath to be expressed in the battle of that great day of God Almighty and tells them what they must do.—Zeph. 2:1-3.
48 The Scriptures abundantly show that only those who call upon the name of Jehovah and declare themselves for him and his Theocracy and its King can find salvation. It is in Jehovah's organization under Christ, the Head thereof, and who is the Minister of Jehovah and his Vindicator, that salvation can be found: “And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered; for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.”—Joel 2: 32.
48 Those of good will who desire to find the way of escape from death and to find salvation to life now say, as it is written: “Truly my soul waiteth upon God; from him cometh my salvation. He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shall not
November 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
331
be greatly moved. My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him. He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shall not be moved. In God is my salvation, and my glory; the rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in God. Trust in him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before him; God is a refuge for us. Selah.-’—Ps. 62:1, 2, 5-8.
50 Those of good will do not look to religion or politics to save them, but they say, as it is written: “He that is our God is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death.” (Ps. 68: 20) “But I am poor and sorrowful; let thy salvation, 0 God, set me up on high.” (Ps. 69:29) This is a time of great distress upon the people of earth, and for those of good will it is written: “Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee; and let such as love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified. But I am poor and needy; make haste unto me, 0 God; thou art my help and my deliverer; 0 Lord, make no tarrying.” (Ps. 70:4,5) Everyone of good will desires to put himself under the protection of the Lord and to become one of God’s people, and all such are assured that if they seek after the Lord in his appointed way they shall find him and receive his favor. “For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people; he will beautify the meek with salvation.”—Ps. 149: 4.
REFUGE
0	1 The “other sheep” of the Lord are refugees cast out by those cruel rulers who now are overrunning the earth. They are not desired by the religious totalitarians. (Zeph. 2:1) They must flee somewhere in order to find refuge until the great devastating storm passes. To whom shall they flee? Jehovah God long ago made a prophetic picture of the place of refuge by setting up “cities of refuge” wherein refuge might be found and there protection be given. Those cities of refuge pictured God’s organization, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. (Num. 35:6-12) Jehovah God is over all, and he is the great refuge of those who are oppressed by the enemy and who are of good will toward Him, seeking to know and to serve the Lord; and all these blessings he administers through Christ Jesus: “The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.” (Deut. 33:27) Note these further precious words of promise to all of good will: “The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble.” (Ps. 9:9) “Trust in him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before him: God is a refuge for us. Selah.” (Ps. 62: 8) “For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the ter
rible ones is as a storm against the wall."—Isa. 25 • 4.
“ The religious, totalitarian combine now are actually destroying the nations of the earth. Not only that, but the religious, totalitarian-combine conspirators claim the full and exclusive right to rule the world, although Christ Jesu* is the world s rightful ruler, God’s anointed and enthroned King of the great Theocracy. To all persons of good will God gives this warning: “When ye, therefore, shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:) then let them which be in Judiva flee into the mountains.” (Matt. 24:15,16) "But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the mountains?’-Mark 13 :14.
53	In these texts the word “Judaea” means and applies to those persons who are in the place or condition of giving honor and praise to Almighty God and to Christ his King. The “mountains” there represent The Theocratic Government of Jehovah God with Christ Jesus as King. Refugees seeking refuge and safety, therefore, must flee to The Theocracy, that is, to Jehovah God, the King of Eternity, and to Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocratic Government. All the evidence shows that the present is the time to flee. Therefore all persons who are of good will toward God and Christ must now for ever forsake and abandon religion or demonism and all religious organizations and flee to the organization of Jehovah God and there under Christ the King find refuge. Thus they show that they are for righteousness and desire to know what God’s will is concerning them. To such Jehovah says: “Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness; it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.” (Zeph. 2:3) This is not the theory or command of men, but the authoritative statement of Almighty God. Do you desire to be guided by the Most High? Then note this plain statement of his Word: “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.’-Prov. 3 :5,6.
WHAT TO DO
54	Christ Jesus is the purchaser of all men who desire to do the will of God. To all who believe on him, and who obey him, God ministers life by and through Christ Jesus, and this He does as a gracious gift. (Rom. 6:23) To all seekers of refuge and safety Jesus says: “I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father but by me.” (John 14:6) The seeker for safety and life must therefore believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as his
332
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Redeemer or purchaser, not only of himself but of all those who are of good will toward God. The promise of God is salvation to such. (John 3:16) The seeker must then exercise faith in God and in Christ Jesus by fully agreeing to do the will of God concerning him. That is consecration. Then the seeker must carry out that agreement by studying to show himself approved unto God, and not unto men. (2 Tim. 2:15) That means to study God's Word and the helps that God has provided for understanding his Word. That is ‘seeking meekness’. He must devote himself to God and his kingdom and be diligent to learn what the Word of God discloses that all such persons must do.
IDENTIFICATION
“ Those who form the “great multitude”, that is, the “other sheep” of the Lord, must identify themselves before other creation as having faith in and being on the side of the great Theocrat and his King, and this they must do before the battle of that great day of God Almighty begins. In the Scriptures the garment or mantle a man wears is a means of identification denoting where he stands, and whom he supports. Note what is written concerning the great multitude: “After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands.”—Rev. 7: 9.
30 The white robe symbolically testifies that the person wearing the same is on the side of righteousness. The Theocracy is the side of righteousness. ‘Palm branches in the hand’ symbolically says: “We are supporters of the King of The Theocracy, Christ Jesus; therefore we are for God and for the Lamb, Christ Jesus.” All of these refuse to hail, honor, praise and worship men or things and thereby ascribe salvation to men or things or man-made organizations. All of those of the “great multitude” ascribe salvation to God and to his Lamb, Christ Jesus, the King. All of these make known that they are for The Theocracy. They are diligent to do so.
COMPANIONS
57	Those of the “great multitude”, called the “other sheep” of the Lord, become companions of the “remnant” of the capital organization of Jehovah and who are called “Jehovah’s witnesses”. Their protection and refuge is under the organization of the Lord, and there they dwell together in peace with all who are of that organization. This is the song all of that organization together sing: “For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.”—Ps. 122: 8, 9.
58	Everyone of God’s organization must be busy, and not idle, slothful or indifferent. The Lord says to such (which command is set forth in his Word): “And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” (Rev. 22:17) Christ Jesus is that great Spirit, the King of The Theocracy. He is the “express image” of Jehovah God, his Father, and always does the will of his Father Jehovah. The faithful apostles and others who have followed their lead and devoted themselves entirely to Jehovah and Christ Jesus form the body of Christ, and collectively such are designated the “bride” of Christ, “the Lamb’s wife.” All these in harmony with the will of God make known to the people now that The Theocracy is the only hope of humankind, the only refuge and only place of safety, and therefore all such say to the people of good will: “Come.” This is exactly in harmony with the prophecy of God, which says: “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfied) not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.”—Isa. 55:1,2.
30	No reason to pay money to men for alleged “purgatory” service. Such men are obtaining money under false pretenses and hence are robbing those from whom they take money. Those who receive the blessings of the Lord do so without money consideration. They “buy” with full devotion and service to the great Theocrat and his King. Therefore all persons of good will join in the service and say to others: "Let him that heareth say, Come”; that is, all join in directing the people to the way of refuge and safety under God’s organization, and all together they say: “And let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will [who is of good will toward God], let him take the water of life [truth] freely.” Salvation is free to those who give their heart devotion to God and his King, Christ Jesus. Everyone who takes his stand on the side of The Theocracy and fully supports that government of righteousness under Christ, and who therefore serves God, in spirit and in truth, shall find salvation. Their devotion and service to the great Theocrat and his King brings to them marvelous blessings. “Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead
<) <)<)
000
November 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.” (Rev. 7:15-17) What Jesus said long ago is true now, to wit: “Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” (Matt. 11: 28) Those who now
seek rest, refuge and salvation will find their heart's desire only by and through Christ Jesus and by full devotion to Jehovah and his great Theocratic Government under Christ the King.
[Note: For further explanation see 1941 Calendar.]
"CHRISTENDOM’S” MALADY FATAL
WHEN the time arrived to make for Himself a name in ancient Egypt, Jehovah God selected Moses to be his witness and clothed him with the means to bear such testimony. In order that Moses might be sure that Jehovah was with him and upholding him, God gave him three signs. In order that Moses’ people, the Israelites, might know Jehovah God and might know that the God of their fathers had appeared unto Moses and had sent him to the Israelites, these three signs Moses and his brother Aaron performed before the Israelites. The first sign was performed with Moses’ shepherd rod which being cast to the ground turned into a serpent. The second sign was concerning the hand.
“And the Lord said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom; and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.” (Ex. 4:6) Manifestly the hand in such an instance was used as a symbol to teach Moses and others of God’s chosen people, particularly Jehovah’s witnesses today. Two of the signs were performed by Moses before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. There seems to be no good reason why the sign of the leprous hand should be performed before Pharaoh, and there is no record that it was performed before him. This seems plainly to teach that the sign pertaining to the hand is one of the means employed by Jehovah to testify to his selected people, and to them alone, and is to inform them, that they may be equipped for his service. What is the symbolic meaning of the hand of Moses as here used in this prophetic picture?
It has been said that the hand is a symbol of divine power always, but the Scriptures do not at all times support that conclusion. When Jehovah puts his “hand” upon a creature, such, the Scriptures show, means that Jehovah has selected that creature and clothed him with authority to perform certain duties in the execution of God’s purpose. Jehovah has selected Christ Jesus as his special ‘elect servant’, whom he uses to execute his judgments, and therefore Christ Jesus is symbolically “the hand of Jehovah”. For example, at Deuteronomy 32:41, Jehovah says: “If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.” AU just powers reside in Jehovah; and the fact that he has committed to his beloved Son all power in heaven and in earth is further proof that Christ Jesus is the elect instrument of Jehovah to execute his purposes and hence is symbolically represented by Jehovah's hand laid upon him.
As further references to the “hand”, note: Ezekiel had a vision concerning which he said: “An hand was sent unto me, and, lo, a roll of a book was therein.” (Ezek. 2: 9,10) The roll or book is a symbol of a message or testimony of
Jehovah, and its being in a hand symbolically says: ‘This testimony is provided by the power or spirit of Jehovah, and this is his means of making it known.’ When the time came for Ezekiel the priest to begin his service, he says, “the hand of the Lord was there upon him.” (Ezek. 1:3) “And the hand of the Lord w’as there upon me ; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee.” (Ezek. 3:22) When the time came for Ezekiel to proclaim the prophecy concerning the royal house or temple, it is written, “the hand of the Lord was upon me.” (Ezek. 40:1) In these references “the hand of the Lord” clearly means that Jehovah has bestowed upon his creature divine favor and authority to represent him in bearing his testimony, and this he has done by and through Christ Jesus, who is his chief means of carrying out his purposes, or His “right hand”.
When the hand of a creature is employed or used the symbol clearly teaches a different thing. Let it be kept in mind that it was Moses’ hand that he put into his bosom and that there became leprous. For two reasons that hand could not represent divine power: (1) because it was the hand of a creature; and (2) because divine power cannot become leprous. Nor could the hand that became leprous represent anything in the heavenly or invisible part of Jehovah’s capital organization, because that part of his organization never becomes sinful or displeasing to Jehovah God. The conclusion must therefore be that the hand of Moses in this prophetic picture represents something pertaining to the followers of Christ Jesus while they are on earth and while in an imperfect condition.
For the above reasons the following definition is given of the symbolic meaning of the “hand”: The hand of a creature on the earth, which creature is in a covenant with Jehovah, symbolically represents the divinely provided ways and means or equipment of that creature to actively engage in the service of Jehovah. In support of this definition the following is submitted: Moses was being sent to Egypt, not to deliver his own message, but to deliver Jehovah’s testimony. Jehovah had provided the ways and means and had equipped Moses to do that service For Moses to become negligent or slothful in the performance of that service after having undertaken it would have been sin, and sin is symbolized by the malady of leprosy. Such negligence or indifference would be illustrated by putting the hand in his bosom, even as Moses did. “A slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.” (Prov. 19:24; see also Prov. 2G : 15.) He who would thus do would become poor and an unfaithful servant. “He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent maketh rich.” (Prov. 10:4) These Scriptures definitely prove that the hand is a
334
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
symbol of activity and service and that when it becomes inactive disintegration always follows.
To Moses God gave this miracle or sign of the hand, and it was being performed chiefly for the benefit of God’s covenant people on earth at the end of Satan’s world, hence was meant to give them some special instruction. (Read Romans 15:4.) These covenant people, particularly “the remnant” of Jehovah’s witnesses, God has taken out for his name’s sake from among all nations of the earth, and has provided them with the ways and means and equipped them to bear his testimony to the world. (Acts 15:14) To be negligent or slothful in the performance of that service would be sinful. Jesus tells of the “wicked and slothful” servant class, at Matthew 25:26. Jehovah’s witnesses are admonished to be “not slothful in business [the King’s business'] ; [but] fen-ent in spirit; serving the Lord”. (Rom. 12:11) Hebrews 6:12 admonishes: “That ye be not slothful, but follovers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.” Proverbs 21:25: “The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to labour.” These scriptures show that unfaithfulness and inactivity on the part of the servant result in sin and death, whereas zeal and faithfulness in service bring the promised reward.
Under Jehovah’s direction Moses was making a prophetic picture. The putting of Moses’ hand into his bosom symbolically teaches negligence or slothfulness in the use of the ways and means with which Jehovah provides and equips his servant class. As the Israelites were in a covenant with Jehovah God. even so that organization that is called “Christendom” or “organized Christianity” was. because of its claims, in an implied covenant to do the will of God by reason of having taken the name of Christ and assumed to teach God’s Word. Jehovah provided them with the ways and means for bearing testimony, or his message of his kingdom, to others. In this “Christendom” became negligent. slothful, sinful, and was led into death and shall early be destroyed at Armageddon. That organization put its hand in the bosom and became ver}- slothful and hence sinful; and when the World War came on, it became even more sinful by completely repudiating the kingdom of God and adopting in its place and stead the Devil’s makeshift, which is the League of Nations and which has now given way to that beastly totalitarian monstrosity, “the abomination of desolation,” that now attempts to rule the world in conjunction with religion. (Matt. 24:14-16) Thus “Christendom” presumptuously assumed to set up a kingdom of its own contrary to God’s will and to perform a priestly service unwarranted, like unto that which was attempted by King Uzziah of Jerusalem, who was smitten with the incurable disease of leprosy, in the days of the prophet Isaiah. (See 2 Chronicles 26: 16-23.) Attention was called to the incurable condition of “Christendom”, in 1922, in a great world-proclamation by Jehovah’s witnesses, which corresponds with the pouring out of the first vial of God’s wrath upon “Christendom”. The symbolical description of this, at Revelation 16:2, reads: “And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth ; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image [the League].” “Organized Christianity” or “organized religion v ill never be restored to the favor of Jehovah, because of the incurable disease resulting from unfaithfulness.
The picture made long ago by Moses concerns, however, more particularly those of God’s covenant people who will ultimately prove their faithfulness as his witnesses That does not mean that a time would not come when they would be in an unclean condition. There did come a period of slothfulness in the Lord’s sen-ice on the part of those consecrated to the Lord and to which the Lord Jesus prophetically referred in his parable of the ten virgins that went out to meet the bridegroom when he said: “While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.” (Matt. 25: 5) During the World War of 1914-1918 and for some time thereafter the consecrated were fearful of the enemy, and there was very little testimony to God’s kingdom publicly delivered. That slothfulness and negligence or lack of vigorous activity in using divinely provided ways and means to serve Jehovah God brought the consecrated ones into a leprous or unclean condition. Concerning this Leviticus 13:44,45 reads: “A leprous man ... is unclean . . . And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, Unclean, unclean.”
It was in the year 1922 that the Lord revealed to his covenant people their uncleanness resulting from inactivity in serving as his witnesses, this revealment taking place at the time that it was discerned that the Lord had come to his temple for judgment; which fact was announced at the international convention of Jehovah’s witnesses in 1922 A picture thereof was set forth long ago in the prophecy of Isaiah, wherein the prophet Isaiah represented God’s covenant people on earth today: “In the year that king Uzziah [who pictured ‘Christendom’] died [of leprosy, for attempting to perform priestly service in Jehovah’s temple unwarranted] I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet and with twain he did fly. And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory. And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke Then said I [representing Jehovah’s covenant people], Woe is me’ for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips for mine eyes have seen the King: the Lord of hosts.” (Isa. 6:1-5) That uncleanness clearly was due to lack of activity or to slothfulness in the use of the divinely provided ways and means (the “hand”) to deliver the testimony of Jehovah, and this is shown by the fact that the prophet was cleansed by fire being put upon his lips: “Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar; and he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo. this hath touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged. Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me. And he said, Go, and tell this people.”—Isa. 6: 6-9.
The hand of Moses in his bosom particularly represented the period of time from 1918 to 1919 inclusive, when there was little or nothing done in the way of giving the testimony of Jehovah by Jehovah’s covenant people on earth. God told Moses to take his hand out of his bosom, and when he took
November 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
335
it out then he discovered that it was as leprous as snow. Then God told him to again put his hand into his bosom: “And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again, and plucked it out of his bosom; and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.”—Ex. 4: 7.
The command of Jehovah here given teaches that Jehovah would not completely cast away his people for their negligence, but that, when informed of their unclean condition, if they then manifested repentance and became zealous for the Lord he would again bring them into his favor. Note the record: “And he put his hand into his bosom again; and when he took it out of his bosom, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) This latter action foreshadowed that, when in 1922 Jehovah's covenant people discovered their uncleanness because of inactivity in God's service, they immediately became active and the service work went forward from that time with energy and with a zeal peculiar to the Lord’s house.
The conclusion as to fulfillment of the prophetic picture is further supported by the following: Jehovah has selected his people to bear testimony to his name, as a “people for his name”. (Acts 15:14) He has given them certain work to do, which is pictured by the “hand”, and to be pleasing to the Lord it must be done with energy; as it is written: “Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.” (Eccl. 9:10) This admonition was written for the benefit of the “remnant” of Jehovah’s witnesses as was every other admonition in the Scriptures written. (See Romans 15: 4.) Furthermore for their benefit it is written concerning the time following the second coming of Christ, and particularly after he comes to the temple for judgment: “In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem [Jehovah's covenant people, including their earthly companions], Fear thou not; and to Zion [the anointed of God’s organization], Let not thine hands be slack. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with
joy; he will rest in his love; he will joy over thee with singing.” (Zeph. 3:16,17) God rejoices over his servants when they are zealous and faithful, and is pleased when they thus faithfully bear his testimony. Said Jesus: “Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples.”—John 15: 8.
The point of instruction, therefore, is that the remnant keep themselves clean by faithfulness and zeal in the performance of the terms of their covenant, which covenant requires them to bear Jehovah’s testimony as his witnesses. That means that they must be entirely devoted to Jehovah and his Theocratic Government under Christ in order to be clean; as it is written: “Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord.” (Isa. 52:11) “Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.” (2 Pet. 1:10) And concerning the bride of Christ, “the Lamb’s wife,” it is written: “And it was given unto her that she should array herself in fine linen, bright and pure: for the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints.” (Rev. 19: 8, Rev. Ver.) Such “righteous acts” consist of full obedience to God in keeping his commandments and in giving the testimony of Jesus Christ committed to them. (See Light, Book Two, page 156.) The faithful remnant, without slacking of the hand, must continue to deliver the testimony of Jehovah until Satan’s organization is destroyed, as stated at Isaiah 6:11; and the “great multitude” of the Lord’s “other sheep” must be companions with the remnant in such witness work.
No cure for the disease of leprosy has ever been found by man. The only cure is by the power of Jehovah, and he cures only those who obey him. “Christendom,” like King Uzziah, was willfully disobedient to Jehovah at the time the Lord came to the temple, and since, and will never be cured of the deadly malady symbolized by leprosy. The hand of Moses was healed only after full obedience to the commandment of Jehovah. The covenant people of Jehovah can be healed and kept clean only by the willing obedience and unselfish devotion to Jehovah.
(Continued from page 322)
you will find when you read the comprehensive report, as written by the Society’s president, covering the world-wide activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, under continuous enemy fire, during the past service year. Besides this amazing report the Yearbook also offers the president’s comment on the 1941 yeartext and a text with a Watchtower comment thereon for each day of the new year. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thus enhancing the costs involved; hence a contribution of 50c per copy is stipulated therefor. Organized companies should combine the orders of all individuals therefor and send such through the company servant.
“THE MESSENGER”
The full history of the first Theocratic Convention of Jehovah’s witnesses is now published in the 1940 issue of The Messenger. This eighteen-city, five-day convention, which culminated in the nation-wide address by Judge Rutherford on “Religion as a World Remedy”, was an event of no passing importance. The Messenger, with its sweep of information, and its emphasis on the vital features, brings out the significance thereof which fast-moving future events will only verify. This issue contains 64 pages, is replete with action pictures, and also contains the stirring non-programmed speeches of Judge Rutherford not elsewhere published. It is now off the press. You may obtain it at 10c a copy. Organized com
panies should combine their orders and forward same through the company servant.
“CONSPIRACY AGAINST DEMOCRACY”
No brochure could be of more instant importance and aid to those residing in democratic countries than this new booklet, Conspiracy Against Democracy. Many millions of persons of good will are in the mood to get and read this book, especially as this 64-page publication contains the entire proceedings on the occasion of Judge Rutherford’s speech to the recent Theocratic Convention ou “Religion as a World Remedy”, and also his other speech on “Times and Seasons”, and to which these many millions were personally invited. Conspiracy Against Democracy displays an appropriate and attractive front cover. It may be had for 5c a copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 1: “Salvation,”
[[ 1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1940.
Week of December 8: “Salvation,”
[[ 23-43 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1940.
Week of December 15: “Salvation,”
][ 44-59 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1940.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
A CATHOLIC’S TESTIMONY AT TAYPORT, SCOTLAND
“The witness calling at a house was accosted by the woman who came to the door with the expression: ‘You are the one that sold a book to my husband a little time ago. When he brought it in I went for him, for we could ill afford the shilling. I opened the book and saw it was against the Catholic church, so I made after you to tell you what I thought; but when I got to the door I met two men who were looking for lodgings, and by the time I had finished talking to them you were not to be seen. I then wrote you a hot letter, but it was never posted, and I intended, the first opportunity I had, whether in the public street or not, to give you a piece of my mind. Soon after this my two children were laid up with measles Slipping out one morning to get something from the shop, I met the priest and he wanted to know why I had not been to mass. I told him the children had the measles. That he said was no excuse. “But,” I said, “I cannot leave the children in the house by themselves.” “Nothing,” said the priest, ’’should prevent your attending mass; if you don’t come to mass you will roast in hell, and it will be for your own sin.” I was furious, and when I got home something made me go to that book my husband bought from you. What I read has made me determined never to go near a Catholic church again. I feel wild to think it should have held me in bondage so many years.’ This woman has promised to come to a study of the book Salvation, that opened her eyes.”
AT PIONEER HOME NO. 4, LONDON, ENGLAND
“A lady called at the home last Monday and stayed three hours hearing lectures and having questions answered. She had been looking for the International Bible Students Association and located us by the Salvation sign in the window. The lady had lived in Canada for some years and remembered a visit from a publisher who had told her that the League of Nations would fail. Later she had purchased The Harp of God, and just recently world events caused her to turn to the Bible for comfort. She found she was unable to understand the Bible and thought The Harp of God would help her. She could not find it, however, and hence tried to find the organization. She was on her way to the doctor’s when she called to see us, and said on leaving that she felt so much better that there was now no need to visit the doctor. She took Salvation with her and has been to two studies since. She told us her husband was amazed at the change in her and asks what had happened to cause it. We have now made an appointment to call on her husband with the recorded lectures. Today also a member of the home placed a half-year’s subscription for The Watch-totcer with a young gentleman from Edinburgh who had purchased a Watchtower from a witness on the pavement in Edinburgh. There is so much joy in seeing the gathering of the great multitude that we can hardly contain it.”
ON MY LAST EVENLNG CALL, LONDON, ENGLAND
“A girl, aged about 23, having read the testimony card, expressed desire to read the literature, but was afraid to do so, sinee the entire household, herself included, were Roman Catholics. As I continued my witness to her, a boy,
much the same age as herself, came to the door to enquire what it was all about. After my explanation he exclaimed: ‘Why, out in Africa three months ago I encountered some of your people doing this same work. Judge Rutherford writes these books, doesn’t he?’ I replied, and he continued: ‘Yes, I read some of his books out in Africa, and I think they’re fine.’ He told me he himself was a Roman Catholic, but expressed fear of taking the literature because of opposition from the rest of the household. He and his sister looked once more through Riches and Government and Peace, which I had handed to them. Glancing furtively over their shoulders to make sure their mother was not listening they said: ‘We’ll take them.’ Just as they were producing the money for the books, their mother, with beetling brows, appeared out of the back room to enquire my business. Quick as lightning the girl hid the literature under her overall, while her brother warded off the mother with evasive replies. When she was safely in the background, the boy and his sister brought me some additional money as a contribution to the work. As he was pressing it into my hand the boy whispered: ‘To tell you the truth, my sister and I have for some time been coming to the conclusion that the Roman Catholic religion is all bosh. We will certainly read these books.’ ”
POLICE STATION IN MAGAZINE ROUTE (MICHIGAN)
“Saturday while engaged in street-corner magazine work I was approached by a police officer, who asked me if I had any free literature. Being careful to answer, because of previous arrests and trouble, I told him we gave free copies to those that have a sincere desire to know about this. However, I soon found that he had read a Fifth Column booklet, and he said it is the truth. He advised me to leave some free literature at the police station. Publisher: ‘Suppose they will not accept the literature—’ Officer: ‘Tell them that some of the police request that you leave it and they will call for it. The others leave their literature.' Publisher: ‘You mean the Roman Catholie organization?' Officer: ‘Yes, and they have a clique down there, and I don’t like to see it so one-sided.’ So I left ten Fifth Column booklets and ten Consolations, and leave ten copies of each current issue of Consolation.’’
ON AN AUGUST SUNDAY IN PHILADELPHIA
“The man was working in a vacant house. We played the record ‘Enemies’ for him. After playing we were showing him the book Enemies when another man came from behind the house, glanced at the title of the book, and said: ‘I know who our enemies are, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Right?’ We agreed. He then asked if he contributed a quarter would we play the record again. When the record was over he asked if any of his four neighbors had obtained the book Enemies. We told him, ‘No,’ and he said, ‘They arc willingly ignorant, but they must know of the impending disaster, even if I have to pay for it myself.’ He took five books, five Refugees, five magazines. As we were leaving he was going to each of his neighbors with the literature he had obtained from us. It was a thrilling experience to watch him witness to his neighbors who would not listen to us.”
330
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburoh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare bis purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
TPIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge In controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British _____-.............. 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian......-..  7	Beresford Road, Stratbfleld, N. S, VV., Australia
South African __________________ Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa.
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.}
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The WatcA-toioer free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T , under the Act of March S, 1ST)
“COURAGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This special Period which occupies the entire month of December is marked by the term “Courage”, a quality which Jehovah repeatedly exhorted Joshua to exercise in driving out the enemies of the theocracy, for an example to us today. December should shatter all previous records in booklet distribution, due to the almost unbelievable offer of seven of any of the Society’s booklets on a 10c contribution. If possible, every packet of seven should include the latest booklet, Conspiracy Against Democracy. A special wrapper, provided by the Society, helps make the 7-booklet combination all the more attractive. All this will require special advance work, so start preparing now. Especially, attend the weekly service meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses, where the details of the work of “Courage” Testimony Period will be discussed. If you are not in touch with such, write this office for references. Keep accurate record of your activities and report same fully at close of December.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 22: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 1), fl 1-25 inclusive, The Watchtower November 15, 1940.
Week of December 29: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 1), fl 26-49 inclusive, The Watchtower November 15, 1940.
“SATISFIED”
In these days of increasing dissatisfaction with everything of the world, the title of this new booklet, “Satisfied,” strikes the reader with a strong appeal. The contents of this 32-page booklet show how and by whom the heart’s desire of all men of good-will shall early be satisfied. The front-cover picture visualizes the setting of the story’ as related by the author, Judge Rutherford Satisfied is now being mailed to all contributing 5c per copy. Date of its release for general distribution is announced elsewhere
1941 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
In the face of an almost impossible year the publication of the 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses represents an accomplishment made possible only by Jehovah’s power. Confirmation of this you will find when you read the comprehensive report, as written by the Society’s president, covering the world-wide activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, under continuous enemy fire, during the past service year. Besides this amazing report the Yearbook also offers the president’s comment on the 1941 yeartext and a text with a Watchtower comment thereon for each day of the new year. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thus enhancing the costs involved; hence a contribution of 50c per copy is stipulated there-(Contsnued on page 351)
feWffOTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	November 15, 1940	No. 22
DRAMA OF VENGEANCE
PART 1
"Rejoice, 0 ye nations, with his people; for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people."—Deut. 32:43.
TEHOVAH caused his servant Moses to record the I prophecy of the foregoing text and determined J that the fulfillment thereof should be at the time appointed. That appointed time is just at hand, as the physical facts show. Let all who faithfully obey the Almighty God be assured that he will completely carry out his announced purpose. Having purposed it, he will do it.—Isa. 46:11.
2	These are days of peril, and therefore “the last days”. Knowing that his time is short, the Devil now would destroy all persons who have declared their purpose to serve Jehovah God. The fight is totalitarianism against The Theocracy. It will be a fight to the finish and must shortly take place. Who shall win ? “According to your faith be it unto you.”
3	The faithful servants of Jehovah know that The Theocracy shall completely triumph and everything that survives and breathes will forever praise Jehovah’s name. All the fearful will fall under the control of Fascism, which is another name for totalitarian rule or demonism, and the leaders and the multitudes that follow that wicked rule will perish together. They are all blind as to God’s purpose and all headed for the antitypical Dead Sea of complete annihilation. Those who remain true and steadfast in the Lord will share in the victory of The Theocratic King. Let these truths be burned into the mind of everyone who loves righteousness and hates iniquity.
4	As Jehovah through Joshua spoke to his typical covenant people, so now by Christ Jesus, the Greater Joshua, he speaks to his covenant people, to wit; “Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.”—Josh. 1: 9.
5	To be of good courage means to know and to completely rely upon the great truth that we are backed up by almighty power, overshadowed by the banner of love, and led by perfect wisdom. Then with full confidence the faithful press forward, doing with their might the work which the Lord has committed
into the hands of his devoted people. The cruel action of religionists against the servants of Jehovah God will in no wise cause those faithful servants to be dismayed. Courageously they march on! Jehovah God, whom we serve, will deliver his servants. Seeing the prophecies unfolding so marvelously before our eyes, this is the time to “look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh”. (Luke 21: 28) It is the time to rejoice. Now God will show his mercy to all who fully trust him and serve him. He will bless their condition, pictured by “the land”. He will preserve and bless his people. He will fight their battles against their adversaries. He will lift the faithful ones high up and make them rejoice. Let all those who love righteousness now be diligent to seek righteousness and seek meekness and be always very courageous.
6	The people of The Theocracy realize that they are rapidly approaching the mighty climax, and they look back over the experiences of the few years just past and rejoice that they have been privileged to be on the side of Jehovah and his King, advertising the name and the kingdom of the Most High. During the past twenty years the faithful servants of Jehovah have been proclaiming the message of his kingdom, and by so doing the truth has uncovered the filth and dirt of the religious racketeers and defaniers of God’s holy name. This has enraged the enemy and caused them, under the leadership of the Devil, to form a mighty crowd of “goats”, carrying on wicked deeds against the Lord’s “sheep”, and themselves hurrying on to destruction. The work which the people of God has been privileged to engage in has served to open the vision of many honest persons who are held in bondage to the religious systems, and these honest ones have joined themselves to the army of the Lord.
T Recently the Most High, through Christ Jesus, has revealed to his people the meaning of the prophetic drama made long ago, and in which Ehud played an important part. This revelation God has
339
340
iffie WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
given to his people now in the closing hours of his “strange work”. That revelation has been and is a great comfort to the faithful servants of the Lord. The great Theocrat and his King are safeguarding the supporters of The Theocracy and are looking well to their interests. The Lord has in store still more comforting food to be ministered unto those who love him. He is the God of all comfort and the Father of all mercies, and those abiding in his love receive his mercy and comfort and rest. Blessed is their portion! Amidst the greatest turmoil that has ever afflicted the earth up to this time God’s people serenely march forward, never breaking their ranks. Their complete unity was foreshadowed in the drama concerning Ehud. Their complete unity was manifested in the convention held in July 24-28, 1940. It is a day of rejoicing. And those now devoted to The Theocracy can say, and do so, by the grace of the Lord: “Rejoice, 0 ye nations, with his people.” The only joy on earth for the people of any nation can be found in the Lord. It is now our blessed privilege amidst the storms that beat upon mankind to carry the message of consolation and comfort to the people of good will, pointing them to The Theocracy.
8 The opposers of the great Theocracy are not idle. Satan and his chief officer, Gog, leading the legions of invisible demons, are supported by a mighty crowd of visible, demonized religionists on the earth. Of these the Roman Catholic religionists are the most subtle, and they with their religious allies, the Nazis, Fascists, and Communists, and other demonized agents made up of fanatics and hypocritical “goats”, are all opposing viciously those who support The Theocracy. This is to be expected, and the servants of God are in no wise dismayed or disappointed. Never in the history of the nations has there been such an unwarranted and vicious world-wide persecution of God’s servants as now. All of Europe has suppressed the publication of the Kingdom message. Only England continues to show favor to Jehovah’s witnesses. Canada, contrary to the will of the people of that nation, has installed in office a Roman Catholic dictator who, without regard to reason or right, makes and enforces his orders in council, particularly directed against those who advertise The Theocratic Government, the only hope of humankind. The publication of the Kingdom message is prohibited in Canada for the sole reason that the Hierarchy, acting as the chief agent of the Devil on earth, demands that it shall be suppressed. Let the good people of Canada rejoice, because this is further corroborative evidence that the day of deliverance draws nigh.
* In the United States the persecution of the followers of Christ Jesus viciously goes on for no reason whatsoever. Faithful witnesses of Jehovah
are indicted for high treason because they advocate The Theocratic Government, the only hope of the world. The Theocracy the Devil and all his agents hate, and hence those agents utterly disregard the laws of the nations and the states. Public officials, sworn to do their duty, join fanatical mobs. Catholic priests, who falsely claim to serve God, participate and many times lead those mobs, and these demonized creatures destroy the property of Jehovah’s witnesses, drive them from their homes, and cruelly persecute them. And why? Because those faithful servants of the Almighty declare his name and his kingdom. These are the days in which the words of Jesus apply and are fulfilled toward Jehovah’s faithful servants: “Ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.” (Matt. 24: 9) “They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues [religious rulers], and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake.” (Luke 21:12) “But take heed to yourselves; for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten; and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them.”—Mark 13: 9.
10	These prophetic utterances of Christ Jesus are now daily being fulfilled upon the faithful servants of God, and that wicked persecution in fulfillment of these prophecies is carried on in the land that boasts of freedom of worship and freedom of speech. Religionists, demonized, fanatically sing patriotic songs and wave the American flag, while engaged in violating every rule or principle for which that flag stands. And why? Because Jhe demons have besieged and possessed the religious practitioners. Why does the Lord permit the same to be done? many may ask. Manifestly for two primary reasons: to afford an opportunity for all persons who so desire to put themselves on the side of the Devil and become opposers of the great Theocracy; and, a stronger reason, to afford opportunity for the servants of God to prove their integrity toward him. It is a crucial and fiery test. Christ Jesus was put to the severest test, and now his faithful followers on earth must have a like test, and they delight to fill up some of the sufferings of Christ “left behind”, sharing in his trials and persecutions, and to thereby prove their faithfulness and integrity that they might share in his great and eternal blessings. Deliverance of his faithful servants is certain and will be soon, and the prophecy which God caused Moses to utter long ago is certain now to be fulfilled.
11	The Most High is not unmindful of his people. From the very beginning Jehovah God knew that these present days of stress and turmoil would come. (Acts 15:18) Centuries ago God caused prophetic dramas to be enacted that these, in his due time,
November 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
341
might serve to be understood by and to comfort those who truly love him. Using the Israelites and others to make these dramas, he caused them to be recorded that his faithful servants now on earth, seeing their fulfillment, might have comfort and hope. (Rom. 15:4) Jehovah is the God of light, and his light is sown for the faithful servants of The Theocracy. (Ps. 97:11) His light is now shining into the mind of each one of those who wholly devotes himself to God and his kingdom. Jehovah is revealing his purpose to very soon “avenge the blood of his servants” and to “render vengeance to his adversaries” and to make manifest his mercy and blessing to <rhis land [the condition of those who support The Theocracy]” and to bless all “his people”. God, by the hand of Christ Jesus, has led his people, particularly since 1918, when Christ Jesus appeared at the temple. Now in this year 1940 he permits them to look back over the way he has led them and to see how he has used his faithful servants, and he now lets them visualize the approaching vindication of his holy name. This knowledge is now a great comfort to his people, and it is clearly the will of God that they should keep before their minds what he has done for them in order that their comfort might continue and that their hope might increase.
DRAMA OF VENGEANCE
12	Dramas of the Bible are practical, moving pictures, made and recorded by the Lord for the aid and comfort of his people, disclosing to them in advance his purpose, which he will perform in his own due time: “Vengeance” means, primarily, vindication. The great issue for determination is the supremacy of Jehovah, and hence the vindication of his name. The execution of vengeance necessarily means the punishment of all the enemies of God by completely wiping them out, which destruction will take place at “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”, which battle will be led by Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s vindicator. Preparation has been in progress for some time for that battle, and it is certain to be fought in the very near future. That will be the end of wickedness in the earth, and that end “shall be at the time appointed”.—Dan. 11: 27.
1S	The record of the drama of vengeance here considered is found in the Bible, at Judges chapters four and five. The prominent parts of that drama were performed by the typical people of God in connection with the enemies of God, and we are specifically informed that such dramas or prophetic pictures were performed for the special benefit of those faithful servants of God now on the earth: “Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.”—1 Cor. 10:11.
PLAYERS
14	In this prophetic drama here considered the principal players are as follows, to wit:
Barak, who played the part particularly picturing Christ Jesus, the Vindicator of Jehovah God.
Deborah, the prophetess, who played the part picturing Jehovah’s organization.
Jael, picturing the people of good will who support Jehovah’s witnesses and put themselves under the protection of the great Theocratic King.
18	Set over against these faithful servants was Jabin, the Canaanitish king, who pictured the Devil and also Gog, the Devil’s chief-of-staff and active leader or captain of the forces of demons.
18	Sisera pictured demonism, particularly the religious organizations, including the Hierarchy, and the political, commercial and military forces made manifest specifically in the totalitarian rule that is now overrunning the earth.
17	In the fulfillment of the prophetic drama those pictured by the opposers are adversaries of The Theocracy and are shown to have formed a conspiracy against the great Theocrat and his servants and are now doing overt acts in the performance of that conspiracy and hence are attempting to bring about the destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses and all supporters of the great Theocratic Government. The purpose of the conspiracy and what shall be the result is emphasized by the prayer of God’s faithful servants, which prayer God long ago caused to be recorded and now puts in the heart and mouth of each one of his servants who utter that prophetic prayer, and which prayer is set forth in the eighty-third Psalm.
18	The primary purpose of the prayer recorded at the eighty-third Psalm is the vindication of the name of the Most High: “Whose name alone is JEHOVAH.” (Vs. 18) That of itself is conclusive proof that the prayer set forth in this Psalm is a prophecy, which Jehovah God has purposed to fulfill and is certain to fulfill. That prayer and prophecy is directly related to the events that came to pass upon Israel, the typical people of God, when Deborah was prophetess and when Barak led the assault upon the combined enemy. The climax in the fulfillment of both of these prophecies is “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”, which battle hosts of the Most High will be led by Christ Jesus, the vindicator of Jehovah’s name, and will result in the destruction of the opponents. That battle and its results are pictured by the prophecy set forth in the song sung by Barak and Deborah and recorded in the fifth chapter of Judges.
” Since the year 1922 Jehovah’s faithful servants have actively engaged in proclaiming this gospel of the Kingdom, that is, the message of The Theocratic
342
WATCHTOWER.
Government. (Matt. 24:14) About that time a conspiracy was formed by the enemies of God on the earth, the purpose of which is to wipe out of existence Jehovah’s witnesses and to prevent the functioning of The Theocracy. Of course, the Devil organized that movement and blinded men to carry it forward in opposition to The Theocracy. As the zeal and activity of Jehovah’s servants have increased in advertising God’s kingdom, the viciousness of the enemy against them has increased. The prophetic Psalm eighty-three, telling of the conspiracy, enumerates various nations conspiring together to bring about the destruction of God’s chosen ones. In fulfillment of that prophecy now it is clearly seen that the religious, political, commercial, military and others have joined together in a movement for the destruction of those who stand for The Theocracy. It is now that the prophecy uttered by Jesus, “Ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake,” is having its most marked fulfillment. Communists, Nazis, and Fascists are carrying on their back the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and these together with their dupes are all bent upon doing mischief to Jehovah’s servants. In proof of this it is only necessary to refer to the cruel and unwarranted treatment administered to Jehovah’s servants throughout the United States by Catholic clergymen leading mobs of hoodlums against Jehovah’s witnesses, in which mob action many public officials participated. The unprecedented opposition to the public assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions in convention put forth by their enemies in 1940 is conclusive proof that the conspiracy is reaching a climax. In the face of that opposition Jehovah showed his favor upon his servants and his protection of them by causing his servants to assemble in the greatest convention ever held by Christian people on the earth, and which was held at Detroit and other cities joined together by land wires, July 24-28. This is also proof that it is now most timely for Jehovah’s witnesses and companions to utter the prayer set forth in the eighty-third Psalm, to wit: “Keep not thou silence, 0 God; hold not thy peace, and be not still, 0 God. For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult; and they that hate thee have lifted up the head. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have consulted together with one consent; they are confederate against thee.”—Ps. 83:1-5.
20	The result of “the battle of that great day of God Almighty” is foretold by the prophecy of that Psalm, and also by the song of Barak and Deborah. A careful study of these prophecies will now be of real aid to the people of God and will make strong their hope.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
The Watchtower will endeavor to aid God’s faithful servants in this study.
THE DRAMA
11 Repeatedly the Israelites, the typical people of God, fell under the influence and power of religion or demonism. For his own name’s sake Jehovah showed his mercy to the Israelites when they repented, and then he delivered them from their enemies. Among those whom God used to show his power against the demonized religionists and oppressors of his chosen people was Ehud, the record of which prophecy has previously been considered in issues of The Watchtower. After the death of Ehud the Israelites again fell away to religion or demonism. Let it be kept in mind that the Israelites were the typical covenant people whom God used to set up a typical Theocracy. Moses was the mediator between Israel and Jehovah. Moses was a picture or type of Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, the great Prophet through whom salvation will be ministered to all who are saved. (Acts 3:22,23) The Israelites, therefore, pictured consecrated Christians who are now in a covenant with Jehovah God through their great Mediator, Christ Jesus. “And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord, when Ehud was dead.”—Judg. 4:1.
22 That part of the prophetic drama must have and has had fulfillment upon those covenant people who agree to do the will of God covering a period of years prior to 1916. Prior to that time there were a number of Christians who proclaimed the coming of Christ the King and the setting up of his kingdom. They looked forward to 1914 as that great and important date. The year 1914 was kept prominently before the people, when the Kingdom would be set up. Charles T. Russell, better known as Pastor Russell, was the most prominent one amongst those consecrated ones He was a faithful follower of Christ Jesus, and died in the year 1916, and died in the faith and faithful. Every Christian who knew Brother Russell loved him and delighted to serve with him. They bear witness to his devotion to God and to his King. Following the death of Brother Russell there began to appear a cleavage amongst those who had been associated with Brother Russell in the work of proclaiming the gospel. Some of them had a desire to be honored of men, and, themselves hoping that they might get some honor, they professed to attribute everything concerning the truth to Brother Russell, and hence by their words and actions set up a man as an object of great honor, adoration and worship. They failed entirely to see that the name of Jehovah God is of supreme importance and that all praise and worship should be given to the Almighty God and to Christ Jesus, the “express image” of Jehovah.
November 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
343
(Heb. 1:6) The practice of honoring men in the manner mentioned is a form of religion, and could not be pleasing to the Lord.
” Up until 1918 all the consecrated had more or less contaminated themselves with religion and religious practices, giving honor and praise to one man in particular and to as many other men as got in the limelight and were looking for praise. With religious awe and fear many showed terror of the political powers of this world, fearing that they might offend political powers if they were too strong in their proclamation of the kingdom of God. By means of this practice of religion many were sidetracked from the true worship of Jehovah God and his King, the chief of The Theocracy. A great trial came upon the consecrated from 1917 to 1919 in particular.
24	In 1918 Christ Jesus came to the temple of Jehovah to test and to judge the consecrated, the purpose being, as announced in the prophecy (Mal. 3:1-3), that the approved ones might “offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness”. That judgment of the Lord brought about a complete division between the approved ones, whom the Lord designates as the “faithful and wise servant” class, and the others who continue to practice religion and whom the Lord designates “that evil servant” class. (Matt. 24: 45-49) The latter class continue to practice religion and to acknowledge the rulers of this wicked world, that is, the political, financial and religious rulers, as the “higher powers”; otherwise stated, as a part of what is known as “organized religion”. Such religionists continue to say that The Watchtower has “repudiated Pastor Russell, the founder of Jehovah’s witnesses”. That claim is entirely false. The Society recognized Pastor Russell, or Brother Russell, as a true and faithful follower of Christ Jesus, but Pastor Russell was not the founder of Jehovah’s witnesses. Jehovah God alone is the founder of Jehovah’s witnesses. (Isa. 43:10-12) Christ Jesus is Jehovah’s "Faithful and True Witness” and is the chief witness of the Most High, and all the members of “his body” are witnesses of Jehovah. (Rev. 1:5; 3:14; Col. 1:18) From Abel to John the Baptist the faithful servants of the Most High God were witnesses of Jehovah. The true followers of Christ Jesus do not follow or worship any man, nor do they regard any man as the founder or leader of God’s organization. Christ Jesus is the Head of Jehovah’s capital organization, and is the duly appointed, anointed and chief and leader of Jehovah’s witnesses. It is contrary to the will of God that men be worshiped. (Rev. 22: 8, 9) The true followers of Christ Jesus are wholly and completely devoted to the great Theocrat, Jehovah, and to his King, Christ Jesus, and no human creature or thing do they worship. Well knowing the subtle schemes of the Devil to entrap the covenant people of God, faith
ful Christians avoid everything pertaining to religion. They recognize that it is religion and religious practices to honor and praise men and give men credit for things that belong exclusively to the Lord. It was religion that caused the Israelites, the typical people of God, to 'do evil in the sight of the Lord’. And what happened to them! “And the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles.” —Judg. 4: 2.
25	Here the typical, prophetic drama begins to foreshadow what has come upon the consecrated ones who practiced religion. It will be helpful to here consider somewhat in detail the facts relating to the parties involved in this prophetic drama.
26	As stated in the prophecy God sold the Israelites into the hand of the king of Canaan. That sale, however, was not beyond the right and power of Jehovah to redeem the Israelites from the receiver, the Canaanite king. It was a temporary letting of them go. God was angry with the Israelites because they had been unfaithful to their covenant, and hence he turned them away and over to the heathen king to have them dealt with as slaves. God had redeemed the Israelites from Egypt; therefore they belonged to him. (Amos 3: 2) He “sold them” to Jabin without money and without price consideration. Jabin paid nothing, and hence God held the title to the Israelites and the right to hold the takers or receivers responsible for their treatment. The Canaanite keeper had no permanent right or claim on the people taken over from the Lord. Jehovah retained what we might technically call a “lien”, which he had a right to exercise at any time. Thus was left open a clear way for God to redeem the Israelites when they had shown a desire and disposition to repent and to serve him.
2T Jabin’s forefather was Canaan, the one who was cursed by Noah. (Gen. 9: 25) He was a practitioner of demonism, or religion. Jabin was condemned to death at the hand of Jehovah’s executioner, represented in his typical theocratic nation Israel. Concerning this Jehovah says to his executioner: “But of the cities of these people, which the Lord thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth; but thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the Hittites, and the Amo-rites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee; that they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the Lord your God.” (Deut. 20:16-18) That judgment of Jehovah God against his enemies is final and unchangeable.
28 King Jabin’s rule was anti-theocratic, and in taking over a temporary control of the Israelites Jabin
344
STe WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
was an aggressive one and his was not an act of good will toward God, as was the case of the Gibeonites in the days of Joshua. Due only to the laxity and unfaithfulness of the Israelites after the death of Joshua and his faithful associates did Jehovah permit the king of the Canaanites to remain in the land after placing his typical theocracy there: “And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel; and he said, Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice, I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations which Joshua left when he died; that through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the Lord, to walk therein, as their fathers did keep it, or not.” (Judg. 2:20-22) “Now these are the nations which the Lord left, to prove Israel by them; even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan; only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon unto the entering in of Hamath.”—Judg. 3:1-3.
28 Jabin ruled at Hazor, which was situated north above the Sea of Galilee and west of the waters of Merom, the lake from which the Jordan river flows into Galilee. In Joshua’s day Hazor was the chief town or capital of a number of local kingdoms or states, and in the day of Joshua the ruler’s name was Jabin. That Jabin the First was defeated in a battle by Joshua: “And Joshua did unto them as the Lord bade him; he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire. And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword; for Hazor beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms. And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them; there was not any left to breathe; and he burnt Hazor with fire. And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the Lord commanded.”—Josh. 11:1,9-12.
80 During the time of Israel’s backsliding to demonism the Canaanites rebuilt the town of Hazor and there Jabin the Second ruled as king. Aside from being named Jabin, that king does not appear to take an active part in this recorded drama of vengeance. His general Sisera occupies the center of the stage in that drama. King Jabin appears therefore to picture the Devil himself, or Satan’s foremost demon prince, Gog, acting today against The Theocracy. (Ezek. 38:2,3) Gog has a visible representative on the earth now, prefigured by Captain Sisera.
81 The name “Sisera” appears to mean “battle array”. That name well befits an army captain. Sisera was a practitioner of religion or demonism, and he therefore pictured or represents demonism or what today is generally called “organized religion”. It is organized religion that is leading the visible fight against Jehovah’s Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. It is organized religion that is inciting all of the political, commercial, judicial and military element against Jehovah’s witnesses because those witnesses proclaim The Theocratic Government as the ruling power that will bless mankind.
82 Sisera’s mother was living in that day and she looked for him to gain the victory and was disappointed. (Judg. 5:28) She pictured the demon organization, of which Satan, the chief of demons, is the head, and which organization the Devil uses to mother and to bring forth religion and to organize and operate in the earth against The Theocracy. That opposition has now reached the height of its power, and the great and final conflict must soon take place.
88 At all times religion has been employed to oppose The Theocracy. Religion and religionists were employed by the Devil in violent opposition and action against Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy. By that means Satan brought about the death of the Lord Jesus on the tree at Calvary. Of all religions now on the earth the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority is the most outstanding and powerful, and it assumes the leadership in the “battle array” against The Theocracy as proclaimed by Jehovah’s witnesses. The Hierarchy really rides on the back of the beast totalitarianism, as pictured in the 17th chapter of Revelation.
88 In the “abomination of desolation” foretold by both Daniel the prophet and Christ Jesus, the great Prophet, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority is the controlling group or element.—Dan. 11:31; Dan. 12:11; Matt. 24: 15,16.
85 The city of Harosheth, the dwelling place of Captain Sisera, was on the north bank of the river Kishon about fifteen miles northwest of Megiddo. The city’s name means “workmanship of the nations”. It was an industrial center, highly commercialized and doing business with the nations round about. Well did it picture the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority, situated at Vatican City, which claims to be universal, is highly commercialized, and in the name of religion carries on its money racket with all the nations of the earth: “For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies."
November 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
345
(Rev. 18: 3) “With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication.” (Rev. 17 : 2) “And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord; for he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of Israel.”—Judg. 4: 3.
36	The Israelites, the typical people of God, cried unto Jehovah, repenting of their wrongful course; and thus the drama foretold what came to pass upon the anti typical people of Jehovah. The proclamation of the Kingdom message ceased during the World War as a result of the servants of the Kingdom yielding to the terrorizing action of religionists, led by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and fully supported by their allies in opposition to the people of Jehovah. The oppressed people of God, in 1919, raised a cry of repentance and with prayers and supplication sought the favor of the Lord. This was also foretold by Jehovah through his prophet Joel: “And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered; for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant [of the consecrated, who afterward served in the temple] whom the Lord shall call.”—Joel 2:32; see also Romans 10:13.
37	Jabin, the Canaanite king, had nine hundred chariots of iron, with which his captain Sisera made war and kept the Israelites under the iron rule of that potentate. Thus we are reminded of the great tanks and other iron instruments of the present time, with which the totalitarians carry on their terrorizing war against people and nations. The tanks of the present time are very effective in a plain country, but not so in a mountainous country like Norway or in the waters of the English channel. Likewise Jabin's iron chariots were found to serve well in the valley country, but they could not go well over the mountains or through the water. “And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us; and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, both they who are of Beth-shean and her towns, and they who are of the valley of Jezreel.”—Josh. 17 :16.
38	The Israelites were not equipped to meet the enemy oppressors on equal terms. Jabin’s nine hundred chariots were too much for them. Only Jehovah God could deliver the Israelites. Today the religionists, led by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and fully supported by the totalitarian armies, have all the weapons of oppression, and they use them against all who support The Theocracy. Only Jehovah our God, by Christ Jesus, can deliver his people, and those who are really devoted to him have full assurance that God will deliver them and will avenge them in his own due time.
’’ For twenty years the Canaanites had oppressed the defenseless Israelites. Likewise for twenty years and more the religionists have oppressed the supporters of God’s kingdom under Christ. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy was in the lead of the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses in the suppression of their work from 1917 to 1919, during the World War, and are still in the lead in that persecution. As a reminder of some of the cruel deeds of those religionists mention is made of a few as follows: It was “Judge” Martin T. Manton, a Papal Knight of St. Gregory the Great, who, while sitting on the federal bench and selling justice to the highest bidder, oppressed Jehovah’s servants and denied them an opportunity to give bail bond that they might be released from prison pending their appeal. They were held in prison for nine months; about which imprisonment, wrongfully done, the Hierarchy continues even to this day to howl and falsely claim that those imprisoned men were “convicts” and are now ex-convicts. They do this in the face of the fact that the judgment wickedly rendered against the servants of the Lord was reversed, they were discharged, the case was dismissed, and they were fully restored to all their rights, even under the law. It was the Hierarchy that boosted Hitler to the front and then induced that cruel dictator to punish Jehovah’s witnesses, to interdict their work and to destroy their property in Germany and in other countries. Cardinals and bishops of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in America have in the past twenty years wickedly oppressed Jehovah’s witnesses; they have caused many radio stations to forbid the use of their facilities to broadcast the Kingdom message; and they have used coercion and threats to accomplish that purpose. They have caused many sworn law officers to cut telephone lines to prevent the carrying of the message, and to otherwise interfere with the meetings and the proclamation of the Kingdom message. The Hierarchy has caused organized mobs to destroy the property of God’s faithful people on earth and to drive them like wild beasts from place to place. The Hierarchy has not only opposed the witness work, but caused many wrongful assaults upon Jehovah’s witnesses, the arrest of men, women and children, and imprisonment and much ill-treatment. The Hierarchy has wickedly interfered with the holding of conventions and assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses for the study of the Bible, and in this many public officials have acted with them in utter violation of the fundamental law of the land. Against all such cruel persecution Jehovah’s servants have been practically powerless. True, they have taken advantage of their rights to defend themselves in courts and otherwise, but with small results. They know that only Jehovah God by Christ Jesus can and will de
346
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
liver them. They suffer persecution for righteousness’ sake, the sake of Jehovah’s name and his kingdom, and they have full assurance from the Lord that he will avenge them in his due time and in his own good way. Note what God did in the typical drama, foreshadowing what shall come to pass: "And Deborah a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time.”—Judg. 4:4.
40 Many scriptures show that a woman is used to picture Jehovah’s organization. It was so with Deborah. Her name means "bee”; that is, a swarm, or swarmers. Bees are very energetic and wise in defense. It is well known that when bees attack they go in a well-organized body, led by one. The bee is not only a symbol of sweetness and noted for its honey, but particularly noted for organized action and work, and especially in united assaults upon opposers. In support of this conclusion, note the following scriptures: "And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto Hormah.” (Deut. 1:44) “They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of thorns; for in the name of the Lord I will destroy them.” (Ps. 118:12) “And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria: and they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes.” (Isa. 7:18,19) Thus is well pictured how God’s organization acts in full and complete unity.
41 Deborah, true to her name, put forth her efforts in due time to cause the Israelites to swarm like bees against their oppressors. God used other women as prophetesses: “And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.” (Ex. 15:20) “My God, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets, that would have put me in fear.”-Neh. 6:14.
42 Deborah was a prophetess raised up of the Lord, as such, not to “usurp authority over the man”, but for the purpose of picturing God’s organization and playing a certain part or role in this prophetic drama foretelling what God in his due time will do by and through his organization. Deborah, being a prophetess, pointed forward to the time when God ‘poured out his holy spirit upon all flesh’, that is, upon all in the flesh consecrated and devoted to the great Jehovah God, as foretold in Joel 2:28, 29. As to that prophecy of the result of pouring out God’s holy spirit upon his servants, as it is there stated, “Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,” it has been
literally fulfilled and is continuing to be fulfilled to the joy of the faithful women and others who have participated in the witness work of prophesying or preaching the message of the Kingdom and who have suffered great persecution at the hands of religionists for so doing.
48 Deborah was the wife of Lapidoth, whose name means “lamps, torches, or light”; that is, instruments of enlightenment. Deborah’s husband does not appear to have played any part in particular in this drama, but doubtless mention is made of him as Deborah’s husband to show that she was not a widow, forsaken and abandoned, hence she was not a sorrowing woman. Amongst the Israelites it was a reproach to be a widow; she was counted as a sorrowing woman. Deborah’s husband’s name meaning “lamps, light”, he well pictures Jehovah God, “the Father of lights," the Husband of his (God’s) organization, which organization is pictured by his woman. (Jas. 1:17) Now God causes the salvation of Zion to shine forth “as a lamp that burneth”. (Isa. 62: 1) Deborah therefore pictured Jehovah’s organization, and Jehovah, as the husband of his organization, was pictured by Deborah’s husband. To his organization, pictured by his “woman”, Jehovah says: “Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed; neither be thou confounded ; for thou shalt not be put to shame; for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more. For thy Maker is thine husband; the Lord of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called.”—Isa. 54:4, 5.
44 Jehovah’s King, Christ Jesus, is the Head over His church, and the chief member of Jehovah’s capital organization, called “Zion” and pictured by God’s woman. The church of Christ Jesus is called “the Lamb’s wife”, and hence the temple company is a part of that organization. It was in 1918 that Christ Jesus came to the temple of God and there began to gather unto himself and test the integrity of and to prove the faithful, and it was then that he brought the approved ones unto himself into the temple and they were made a part of God’s capital organization, hence are represented in Christ.
43 Deborah “judged Israel”. Thus God used her to picture how He would judge his people on earth and do it through his organization Zion, which judgment is conducted by the Head of Zion, the Chief One of his organization, that is, Christ Jesus. This he does at the temple and attended by his holy angels. (Mal. 3:1-3; Matt. 25: 31; 1 Pet. 4: 17) In Israel Deborah pronounced judgment according to what God inspired her to say; concerning which it is written in the prophecies: “The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah
November 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
347
arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.”—Judg. 5: 7.
46	It does not appear that the Israelites called her “mother”, but the drama shows that she pictured Zion, God’s organization, which is mother of spiritual Israelites. “My son, keep thy father’s commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother; bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck.” (Prov. 6: 20, 21) Likewise the members of “the body of Christ”, his organization, pronounce the judgment written by the Lord and recorded in his Word. (Ps. 149: 5-9) “And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah, between Ramah and Beth-el in mount Ephraim; and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment.”—Judg. 4: 5.
47	Deborah was as much associated with the palm tree as was the feast of tabernacles celebrated in the temple of God. (Lev. 23: 39-43; Neh. 8:15) Again the palm tree came into evidence when Christ Jesus rode into Jerusalem and presented himself as king to the house of Israel, thereby being laid as the Chief Corner Stone of Zion. (John 12:12-15; Isa. 28:16) The “great multitude” hailed the King by waving palm branches. (Rev. 7:9,10) This background of the palm tree clearly locates the time of the fulfillment of this prophetic drama as taking place from and after 1918, when Christ Jesus, the Chief Head of God’s capital organization and the Chief Corner Stone of the temple, was laid and when he came as great Judge and began judgment. It was thereafter that the “great multitude” began to come into sight. God’s organization is greater than Deborah and is likened to the palm tree with which Deborah was identified, and pictures righteousness; as observed by the following texts: “The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree; he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon.” (Ps. 92:12) (See also Canticles 7:7; Jeremiah 10:5.) The palm tree pictured the righteous standard of judgment and thus shows that Deborah pictured that righteous judgment, according to the will of God.
48	The dwelling place of Deborah was “between Ramah [evidently in the territory of Benjamin] and
Beth-el”. (Josh. 18:21,25) The town of Bethel was assigned to the tribe of Ephraim the son of Joseph. (See Judges 1: 22-25.) Bethel became a part of the territory of Ephraim. Deborah was probably of the tribe of Ephraim. Because she pictured God’s woman or organization Zion, these names were connected with her. “Ramah” means “the height”, and “Beth-el” means “house of God”; “Ephraim” means “double fruitfulness”. Deborah dwelt in the hill country ; therefore she dwelt in the heights. The Israelites went up to her for judgment. By doing so they turned away from lawlessness and debasement of religion or demon worship, which had caused them to be under Jabin, and they went up to God’s organization, pictured by his woman or organization, there to receive instruction and righteous judgment. In the fulfillment of this part of the picture, since 1918 the faithful servants of God have abandoned religion, completely turned their backs upon it, and have gone up to God’s organization to submit themselves to the righteous judgment of his organization, pronounced and executed by Christ Jesus, the Head and Judge thereof. There they have received instruction and guidance in the way they should go, and this is according to God’s promise. “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.” (Ps. 25:9) “For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of GodT” (1 Pet. 4:17) Deborah did not set herself up above any written law of God. but she did as commanded by God’s law. Likewise Jehovah’s organization proceeds strictly in conformity to the divine law and refuses to make any compromise with any earthly organization.
49	The drama up to this point identifies God’s organization as well as the other players in connection therewith, and from this point on shows preparation for and the carrying out of Jehovah’s purpose to avenge and fully deliver his own people.
(To be continued)
AFTER 1260 DAYS
WRITES a distinguished monsignor in The Catholic Telegraph-Register, of October 13, 1939: “The events in Europe, with two dictators of enormous power, both distinguished for their hatred of Christianity, gathering nation after nation under them, will undoubtedly make many wonder whether we are not seeing the gradual fulfillment of certain mysterious prophecies of the Apocalypse. Chapter twelve relates that a great sign appeared in heaven—a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of 12 stars. . . . She brought forth a man-child, who was to rule all nations
with an iron rod: and her son was taken up to God and to His throne. The woman fled into the wilderness, and there was a great battle in heaven, where Michael and his angels fought with the dragon; and that great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, who seduceth the whole world. When the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman. Commentators [Catholic] believe the woman is the [Roman Catholic] Church and her Son is Christ.”
The above human interpretation of divine prophecy is contradicted by the fact that Hitler, dictator referred to
348
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
above, is a Roman Catholic and is favored agent of the pope of the Roman Catholic Church to re-establish the so-called “Holy Roman Empire” and universal rule of the pope by means of totalitarian dictators. God is his own interpreter, and in A.D. 1925 he revealed that the “woman” is his universal organization, which in his due time brings forth the “man child”, to wit, the Kingdom, or Theocratic Government, under Christ Jesus. As members thereof, Jehovah’s faithful anointed witnesses are children of God’s woman or organization, and of them there is a remnant on earth at this time. After bringing forth the Kingdom at the end of “the times of the Gentiles” in A.D. 1914, God’s “woman” travailed during the persecution of faithful, conscientious Christians in the World War of 1914-1918.
It is written, at Isaiah 66:8: “Shall a nation be born at once 1 for as soon as Zion [God’s woman, his organization] travailed, she brought forth her children.” On earth there was brought forth a “remnant of her seed”, who must bear testimony or witness to the Kingdom born. In the “wilderness” was an appropriate place for the remnant of her seed to be brought forth and made a part of God’s temple and anointed with his spirit as his commissioned witnesses. For example, when Elizabeth learned that she was to be the mother of John the Baptist she went and hid herself for a season. (Luke 1: 24) God’s “woman”, Zion, brought forth her children in the “place” or condition that he had prepared for her, and then he fed them upon the spiritual food convenient for their growth as his witnesses. This seems to picture the Lord’s faithful people on earth preparing for and beginning the witness work as foreshadowed by the prophet Elisha.
Revelation 12:6 states that the period of time in the wilderness is 1260 days: “And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days.” In verse 14 the time is mentioned as “a time, and times, and half a time”: “And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.” Thus the Lord demonstrates that the period here is three and a half years; that is to say, a “time” being a year of twelve months of thirty days each, then three and a half years would equal forty-two months. The two periods of time mentioned in the above-quoted verses 6 and 14 are one and the same.
The outcome of the war in heaven found Satan and his demons entirely excluded therefrom and he could take no further offensive operations against the heavenly host. His wrath was great against God’s “woman”, that is to say, God’s organization “which brought forth” the Kingdom in A.D. 1914, and therefore the Devil was obliged to exercise his vengeance against those on earth who represented God’s organization or “woman”, to wit, “the remnant of her seed.” Hence it is written that the Devil “persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child”, or kingdom. (Rev. 12:13) The Kingdom having been brought forth in 1914, Satan and his official family must have been hurled out of heaven and down to the earth sometime thereafter and before 1918, when Christ Jesus came to the temple. After this battle in heaven Satan must have been so dazed
for some time that he did not realize what had happened to him. The expression “when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth” shows that it required some time for him to wake up to the fact. When he did, he realized that the woman (Zion, God’s organization) still had some people in the earth; and he set about to persecute these witnesses of Jehovah. In the spring of 1918 this persecution became so great that many of the Lord’s children of Zion were imprisoned and some were killed. The Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, proclaiming the Lord’s kingdom, was disrupted, its officers at headquarters were imprisoned, and the entire witness organization throughout the earth was restrained and greatly discouraged, as pictured by the death of the two witnesses. (Rev. 11:7-10) With the happening of these events brought about by Satan and his earthly religious representatives, evidently he reasoned that he was rid of this “pestiferous” company that stood in his way and exposed his wickedness. But on the 26th day of March, 1919, the imprisoned officers of the Society were released, and the next day, to wit, on the 27th day of March, 1919, they began to formulate plans for the aiding of God’s “remnant” and the furthering of the witness to the Kingdom. From that time dates the fleeing of God’s “woman” into the wilderness.
When Jesus was in the wilderness for forty days, God specially shielded and protected him there (Mark 1:13) A place symbolizes a condition. In Revelation 12 the wilderness seems to symbolize the condition prepared by divine providences for the “remnant” of the seed of God’s woman on earth; and under these divine providences she was fed or nourished by the food which Jehovah graciously provided in his chosen way. The “two wings of a great eagle”, which were given her to fly into the wilderness, seem clearly to symbolize divine provision made for Zion’s protection, as when Jehovah said to his chosen people: “Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto myself.” (Ex 19-4) The two wings, or divine providences, may properly be said to be God’s love and power exercised for the benefit of Zion’s faithful remnant to feed, shield and protect them from the enemy’s wiles. The food upon which the remnant of Zion was made to feed was the message of Kingdom truth provided by Jehovah through The Watchtower and kindred publications, which He provided on his table for his people’s benefit.
The members of God’s organization or “woman” must be fed and nourished and prepared for action Jehovah and his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, working through other invisible members of His organization, made provision for His witnesses on earth. The prayer of these was, “Feed me with food convenient for me.” (Prov. 30: 8) The promise of Jehovah is: “He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those [God’s woman, Zion] that are with young [the remnant of her seed].” (Isa. 40:11) And concerning Christ the reigning King it is written: “And he shall stand and feed [God’s people] in the strength of the Lord [Jehovah], in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God.”—Mic. 5: 4.
This feeding, done by Christ Jesus then at God’s temple, was the providing of the sustenance for the building up of
November 15,1940
STie WATCHTOWER,
349
Jehovah’s organization, and corresponds with the work of building up the organization on earth that proceeded from the spring of 1919 until the climax was reached in 1922, when the witness organization, equipped for service, went forth in Jehovah’s “strange work”.
Early in that period of 1260 days Jehovah revealed to his people that the Elisha witness work must be done, and preparation for doing it progressed. In that period of time the abandoned “Bethel Home” at Brooklyn, N. Y., was again made habitable and the office headquarters of the Society were returned to Brooklyn, and preparation was made for the publication of literature with the Society’s own equipment. Jehovah was giving proof that he had not forsaken Zion, as assured at Isaiah 49:15,16. This special provision for feeding and preparing Zion was to continue 1260 days, or for “a time, and times, and half a time”, or forty-two months.
In September, 1922, Jehovah caused his people to gather in convention at Cedar Point, Ohio. Those consecrated to Jehovah God came from Canada, the United States and Europe. Some time previous, and without any thought of the fulfillment of the prophetic dates, Friday, September 8, was designated on the convention program as “The Day”. It was on that day, at the meeting of the convention, that the presence of Jehovah’s Messenger, Christ Jesus, at the temple was proved from the Scriptures (Mal. 3:1-4), and then, amidst great enthusiasm and zeal for the Lord, the slogan was announced, “Advertise the King and the Kingdom” ; and from that day forward the organized witness work began. Jehovah’s devoted people took it as the keynote of the convention that the real privilege and duty of the consecrated ones now on earth is to advertise the presence of Christ Jesus, the great King of kings, and that his kingdom is here, and that this is the most important thing for them to do and the most necessary thing for them to do in order to prove their love and loyalty to the Lord God. Each one present was thoroughly impressed with the fact that the obligation is laid upon every one of the consecrated from this time forward to act as a publicity agent for the King and the Kingdom.
That date was exactly the end of the 1260-day period in the wilderness experience. Jehovah’s organization on earth had come out of the wilderness and the time had arrived for the beginning of the ‘sounding of the trumpet by the first angel’, as foretold at Revelation 8 :7. God’s “woman” in the wilderness had given birth to her “children”, and it would now seem to be an appropriate time for them to be anointed with God’s holy spirit and thus commissioned as His witnesses. What then occurred marks the second ‘outpouring of the holy spirit upon all devoted flesh’, as described by the prophet Joel (2: 28-32) and by the apostle Peter. (Acts 2:16-21) It was then that the remnant of faithful followers of Christ Jesus in an organized body heard and appreciated the call to go forward to the service. Their lips had now been cleansed and now the time had come to give the witness down to the conclusion thereof; all which Jehovah had foreshadowed by the experience of his prophet Isaiah (6:6-11). It was then that they began to see the great “serpent” organization as in existence and to appreciate its great wrath against God’s organization and the necessity of being true and faithful to the Lord.
The enemy’s name “Serpent” means deceiver; and it may always be expected that his actions are for the purpose of deceiving men and to turn them away from God. “And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood, after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.” (Rev. 12:15) The word for flood is by some translators rendered river. (Diaglott; Am. Rev. Ver.) This ‘flood of water” coming out of the mouth of Satan symbolized doctrines talked about, schemes and various palaver intended to deceive. Satan used every available instrument to accomplish that purpose. In the fiery times of 1917 and 1918 a number who had pretended to be in the truth and to be followers of Christ broke away from God’s organization and immediately began talking and publishing their own views in divers and numerous ways and taking special care that from that time forward those who remained faithful and held fast to God’s organization received copies of these messages. Their publications that began about that time increased and continue. The purpose manifestly was and is to draw others away from the Society. Thus Satan used these as instruments.
From the spring of 1919 on and thereafter there flowed a great “flood” of talk and schemes such as peace treaties, conferences, parleys, and political propaganda and a cavorting by the religious clergy, all of which was directing the common people away from God to Satan’s schemes The greater portion thereof came from Britain and America and the ‘forgotten harlot’, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. (Isa. 23:15-17) Politicians, Big Business and the clergy of religion joined together in the promulgation of these schemes. It may well be said that the Devil has been using all “seven mouths” of the Dragon’s seven heads, symbolically meaning all his instruments, to thus turn loose a flood of schemes upon the people. Satan’s purpose was to sweep the “woman” (God’s organization) on the earth along with the current or worldly opinions and talk and to coerce her thereby to worship the “beast” (Satan’s visible organization on earth) and “his image” by taking part in some of these schemes.
Quite a number of those claiming full consecration to the Lord were swept away by the flood, but the faithful remnant could not be swept away. This should be a complete warning to God’s people. It is only Jehovah’s organization that Satan is trying to injure and destroy. Other organizations, religious, political and commercial, Satan has under either his control or his influence. (1 John 5: 19) “By their fruits ye shall know them,” says the Lord. “The fruit of the spirit is love.” (Gal. 5:22) That means that those who love God put self in the background and devote their all to the Lord and to his glory. Such bring forth the fruits of the Kingdom, meaning a full and complete devotion to the Kingdom and the serving of His truth to others. That proves beyond all question that ail those who oppose the Kingdom and the giving of the testimony concerning that Theocratic Government, and advertising of it, are being used by Satan, whether they realize it or not. They are against God and his Christ and manifest the fruits of the enemy, to wit, opposition to the Kingdom work, Jehovah’s “strange work”.
But would the “woman”, Jehovah’s organization, yield to the pressure of this “flood” and drink thereof by going along with the advocates of a policy of compromising to
350
THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
wards Satan and his organization! No! the Devil did not succeed and could not succeed in sweeping the true followers of Christ, Jehovah’s witnesses, off their feet. Such schemes as the League of Nations, prohibition, worldly reforms of various kinds, peace treaties, peace pacts, having the appearance of righteousness, have all been religious schemes to turn away Jehovah’s people from him.
This “flood” of schemes and palaver that has flowed out of the mouths of the Devil’s organization was “swallowed up” by “the earth”, that is, the peoples of earth drank it in. (Rev. 12:16) The extremes to which the peoples have gone in their abortive effort to carry out such schemes have demonstrated to God’s remnant the absolute necessity of remaining entirely aloof from the world and standing firm for the Lord. With them there can be no compromise. And thus, as written, “the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth.” The remnant see that Satan’s flood has deceived many, but it cannot deceive God’s elect.
God’s servant class is blind and deaf to everything ex
cept the Kingdom interests. (Isa. 42:19) The faithfulness and persistence of this remnant in giving the witness to Jehovah’s name and speaking forth his glory greatly enrages Satan and his organization. Therefore Satan and his organization go forth to make war against the woman, God’s organization, and her remnant now on the earth. “And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.” —Rev. 12:17.
Jehovah God committed to Christ Jesus the great work of giving the testimony concerning Himself and his Theocratic Government. The honor of giving this testimony Christ Jesus shares with those of the temple class who are made a part of Jehovah’s “servant”. (Isa. 42:1) These faithful ones know that Jehovah’s commandments to them are: 'Ye are my witnesses that I am Jehovah; make mention that my name is exalted; the Kingdom is born, which is good news to all those who love righteousness. This gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached to all nations as a witness, and then the end shall come.’
FAILURE OF COMMERCIALISM
ONE of the outstanding signs of the times is the failure of commerce or commercialism. Such was foreshadowed thousands of years ago by the last of the three signs given to Moses to perform to prove that he was truly the prophet sent of Jehovah to deliver his people from the bondage of an oppressive commercial power, Egypt. The first sign was performed with Moses’ rod, and hence had to do with rulership and thereby affected politics. The second sign was made with Moses’ hand and had to do with the power and means to worship and serve God, and hence was against religion. The third sign was performed with water drawn from Egypt’s great artery of commerce and traffic, its famous river, and hence was directed against commercialism. Concerning this last sign Jehovah said to Moses: “And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.”—Ex. 4: 9.
It was out of the river Nile that Moses took the sample of water on his return to Egypt. That nation depended upon that river for her wealth, business and commerce, and hence it pictured particularly the commercial part of Satan’s organization, of which organization Egypt was a visible part, its ruler Pharaoh representing Satan “the god of this world”. Satan the Devil claimed that he made that river and that it belonged to him. (Read Ezekiel 29: 1-3.) It was chiefly the commercial support of Satan’s organization. In modern times it was chiefly the commercial element that Satan used to bring about and carry on the World War of 1914-1918. The commercial part of his organization has afflicted the world with its doctrines of propaganda, and it is Satan’s commercial element that is chiefly responsible for the economic difficulties and distress now upon the people, causing them much hardship and suffering.
For some time Jehovah’s anointed people, in declaring his testimony against the enemy organization, confined their
work to the religious element, but in more recent days the commercial part of Satan’s organization has come m for attention. In the prophetic picture made by Moses he took up the water out of the Nile and poured it on the dry ground; and now the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, and the faithful remnant of his footstep followers yet on earth take a sample of Satan’s organization, represented by the water, and give attention thereto. As the people of Egypt thought the Nile waters were good for drinking purposes, so the people of the world, including many professing Christians, have thought that the commerce of the world is vitally essential and is refreshing and life-sustaining; and hence some of those consecrated to God have engaged in the commerce of the world and later have come to sorrow’
The water which Moses took out of the Nile he poured upon the dry land. At that time many people resided m Egypt who were no part of the official organization thereof Today there are many people in the world who form no part of the official organization of Satan and who are completely out of heart sympathy with that organization. These include the class of persons of good will whom the Good Shepherd Christ Jesus gathers as his “other sheep” and who will form the “great multitude” that shall survive the battle of Armageddon and dwell in the “new earth”. At Haggai 2:6,7 the Scriptures mention the “dry land” in contrast with the “sea”, the restless peoples alienated from God and that bear up and support Satan’s commercial organization. Therefore the “dry land” well represents those consecrated to God and those order-loving people on earth who have a sincere desire to see righteousness established among men. Bear in mind that Moses’ performance of the three signs was primarily for the purpose of establishing the faith of the oppressed Israelites, foreshadowing God’s covenant people on earth, and that the later performing of two of them in Pharaoh’s presence was secondarily for the purpose of serving notice upon Satan’s representatives. Thus Jehovah showed first his anointed people that com
November 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
351
merce is the mainstay of Satan’s visible organization, and this he did in order that the people might be strong in faith and active in proclaiming the truth against that part of the enemy organization. This proves that the witnesses of Jehovah must pour the truth upon the “dry land”, that is, upon the order-loving people of good will, and must do so in the presence and hearing of Satan’s representatives in order that all may have an opportunity to know that Jehovah is God. Jehovah’s anointed people now know that the commerce of the world is not life-sustaining, and also the people of good will are learning the same thing.
To Moses Jehovah said: “The water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.” Thus today Jehovah shows his people, and those of good will, that commerce originated with the Devil, that it is the most powerful part of Satan’s organization visible, and that Satan has employed it to carry on his bloody and deathdealing work for centuries past upon the nations of the world. This being true, that water is not fit to drink, and those who are in a covenant to do God’s will and who then drink it shall die and not live. Not only God’s anointed remnant, but also the Lord’s “other sheep”, see that if they would live they must flee from Satan’s oppressive organization and take their stand on the side of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. For the benefit of his covenant people Jehovah caused to be written, at 1 Timothy 6: 9,10, this warning: “But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.” But religionists who call themselves by the name of the Lord have disregarded this warning and have turned to commercial methods, and concerning their house of religion Jehovah prophetically said: “Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 7:11) Jesus later quoted these words when casting the money-changers and commer
cial religionists out of the temple at Jerusalem.—Matt 21:12, 13 ; Mark 11: 15-17.
That commerce or Big Business is a part of Satan’s organization and is oppressive and death-dealing Jehovah began to make known to his people first in 1927, when the booklet Freedom for the People was issued. (See pages 23-28.) The books Prophecy, Light and Vindication, issued since, more fully brought these truths to the fore. Thus Jehovah has instructed his own people and has shown them that it is his testimony that they must give against Satan's organization and they must be zealous and active in declaring it against every part of Satan’s organization.
Ancient Egypt more particularly magnified the commercial and military part of the modern Satanic organization But, like a gigantic tree before the ax of the woodman, that commercial nation fell before Jehovah’s executioner. (Ezek. 31: 2-15) Many have long ago concluded that the prosperity of the people in general depends upon Big Business, but such has not prevented widespread business depression, and many complain and mourn. With the complete fall of the commercial power of the world there will be much mourning among the small as well as the great commercial dealers Many of the clergy have forsaken the Lord to engage m a commercial business, which commerce has become the welcome ally of “organized religion” and is the mainstay of big politics. Religionists envy the big tree of Big Business and have for selfish reasons tried to imitate the big tree and profit thereby. They will mourn when their idol falls
It is a common saying that when the commercial power goes down the governments will go with it. This must be true now, because Big Business controls the governments of the nations. When God uproots the commercial elements of Satan’s visible organization, everything else in the way of politics and militarism will go with it. Everything co-operating with or giving support to Satan's big business commercial power will fall before the forward march of Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s Executioner. The Lord God will clean the earth of everything that defiles, and his kingdom will make the earth a fit place in which obedient men may live in happiness for ever.
JEHOVAH’S LOVING-KINDNESS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Jehovah is never tired of dispensing new gifts to his children to make them happy. I venture the opinion that nothing has been written since the Light books were published that will cause so much rejoicing amongst the “remnant” as the new book Religion. While it is a terrible indictment and exposure of religion and its supporters, Almighty God shows throughout its pages his loving-kindness towards his faithful servants, and comforts their hearts and minds
Personally I am of a phlegmatic nature, but every now and then while reading this book exclamations of joy would escape
me. The words of Paul came to my mind “Rejoice in the Loi d alway: and again I say, Rejoice.” As The Theocratic Government is expanding, so also is the joy of the Lord expanding in the hearts of those who serve that government faithfully. A sentence on page 232 of the book sums up the matter. It reads “Those who have labored joyfully, looking always to the praise of Jehovah, have received their pay.”
May Jehovah continue to guide you, through Christ Jesus, a= you serve him and his people.
Your brother in The Theocracy,
J. H. Corr, Eire.
(Continued from page 338)
for. Organized companies should combine the orders of all individuals therefor and send such through the company servant.
1941 CALENDAR
The 1941 Calendar is exceptionally beautiful and expressive. Under the yeartext, to wit, “Salvation unto our God . . . and unto the Lamb” (Rev 7.10, A.R.F.), the artist portrays with Scrip
tural symbolisms and modern details Jehovah’s “strange work” of judgment now fast reaching its climax among all nations The Calendar date pads mark the special testimony periods for 1941, and also give field service suggestions for the intervening months A contribution of 25c per copy is asked therefor, or $1.00 for five copies mailed to one address. Companies do well to send in combination orders through the local company servant.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES UNDER AIR-BOMBING
“A witness called at a home in London, and a soldier came to the. door. She presented the testimony card and asked if he would like to hear the Bible message from her phonograph. He immediately asked if it was anything to do with the people he had recently met with at Dunkerque, France. The witness said she did not know, but that it was a work carried on by Jehovah’s witnesses. The soldier immediately showed great interest and told of his experiences at Dunkerque. He had recently returned from France and related the terrible experiences on the beach as the soldiers and civilians were being evacuated. Said he: ‘We were all gathered on the shore, and the Nazi bombers were over. We had to dig ourselves in on the sand, and near by was a small group of refugees who were doing the same; but as soon as the bombers passed over, this small group came up from their shelter and played over records to the soldiers and others gathered there awaiting the boats to take them to England. Time and again they came forward from their hole in the sands and moved amongst the others, playing their records and comforting the others. I’ll never forget the incident. They were marvelous in the courage they displayed and the wonderful help they gave to the children. Scores were gathered there, and all in great fear of the bombers that were coming over time and again, and with each lull in the bombing these good people moved amongst the others and rendered real practical aid, especially to the children. If those books have anything to do with that, I want some. Their courage and help to the others was an inspiration.’ Amongst the many refugees it is known that there were several of Jehovah’s witnesses, and the incident related above tells of the effect their faithful work and courage had upon one who witnessed it.”
MODEL STUDIES IN JAIL
“We were in jail ten days, but we had the wonderful privilege of conducting Model Studies with the prisoners. We placed one Salvation, one Refugees, and one Model Study booklet, and three magazines. Before we were turned over to the matron we played ‘Remedy’ at the sheriff’s request, also the Kingdom songs. I gave him the latest issues of The Watchtower and Consolation. He said he would be glad to read them. We had ten in sound attendance. The sheriff asked questions, but I told him the publications would give him the answers better than I could. I heard him say later, we should not be there at all. The great Theocratic Convention really has given my sister and me more courage and zeal to continue in this ‘strange work’ until Jehovah permits the enemy to stop us again.”
THE STINGING TAIL OF THE LOCUST (REV. 9: 10)
“Housewife and husband stated they were not interested. I excused myself, handing them a Kingdom News No. 6, stating it showed the fulfillment of prophecy (Isaiah 60: 2). Leaving the next house and getting into the car, I heard a woman yelling. Turning around, I saw the man running, at the same time yelling loudly, ‘Hey, wait!’ Coming up to the car, breathing very heavily and in his stocking feet, he stated he could not take any chances of our calling back, but wanted the book we spoke of. He hands us a quarter contribution, grabs the book Salvation, and starts back to his house all smiles, telling us to call again.”
CATHOLIC ACTION, STANDISH, LANCASHIRE
“The zone servant makes the following report, for Sunday, May 26: ‘I had a setup with the sound-car in some council houses and had played the lecture “Model Prayer”. After the lecture we worked the street without interference (three publishers visiting from house to house). Just as we were finishing, some Catholics came from their houses and started using abusive language and shouting about C. 0’s (conscientious objectors). None of us had said a word about C. O.’s when working, but evidently they assumed we were such. Since we had finished that section, I moved the car down, and the other two followed, walking. I had another setup some way down, using the same record, “Model Prayer.” There was a Catholic church near by. At that moment a large number of people were coming from it and passing the car as the lecture was played. Some stopped farther on to listen. People were standing at their doors all the way down, listening. Two women approached and immediately started using provocative language and attempting to start trouble. Within a very short time a large number of people had gathered round the car, shouting abusive language and threatening to smash the equipment. One leader of the mob gave witness Finney a violent blow with his clinched fist across his face. Several then rushed for me at the back of the car, threatening to smash the equipment. Finney pushed his way in front of me to keep them off. The man who had struck him then jumped at the loudspeaker, which was strapped to the roof, and ripped at the cable. I grabbed a stick which I keep in the back of the car and struck him a blow across his shoulder. He turned and gave me a sharp blow across the face, making my nose bleed. I immediately jumped in the car and drove away while my two companions managed to hold the mob and then clear off. We quickly reported the matter to the police and took out a summons against the leader, Mr. Cheetham, 105 Pepper Lane, Standish. June 18 the case finally came up at the court at Chorley. All charges were dismissed (In the meantime Cheetham had made a complaint against the zone servant.) However, our opponents have been let in for at least three guineas for their solicitor’s fees. The hearing took approximately one hour and a half. All our witnesses spoke extremely well, corroborating each other’s testimonies, and very clearly impressed the court when compared with the testimonies of the Catholic witnesses. I think we should have won easily if we had only had one or two outside witnesses. It seemed amazing how any person could stand before the court after taking the oath and tell the lies that were told. Not only did they deny striking any blows at all, but even swore that we assaulted them first. However, the last witness they called let the cat out of the bag, because she was deaf and had not heard what her fellow witnesses had said at all. Her testimony was a complete contradiction When we cross-examined her, she started shouting and abusing us, and had to be restrained by a police officer. In our testimonies we emphasized the fact that it was that woman who had started inciting the mob, and when she came on at the end of the hearing and started doing it in court it was obvious to everyone. I myself cross-examined Cheetham. He made his denials in subdued tones, gazing at his feet, and never once looking me in the face.”
352
3
WTCHTQWfp


THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:I3-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent In the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bora sinners and without the right to Life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with ail power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, ?1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6b. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian.................. 40	Irwin «Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian............ 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African ..........-......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-olass matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“COURAGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This special Period which occupies the entire month of December is marked by the term “Courage”, a quality which Jehovah repeatedly exhorted Joshua to exercise in driving out the enemies of the theocracy, for an example to us today. December should shatter all previous records in booklet distribution, due to the almost unbelievable offer of seven of any of the Society’s booklets on a 10c contribution. If possible, every packet of seven should include the latest booklet, Conspiracy Against Democracy. A special wrapper, provided by the Society, helps make the 7-booklet combination all the more attractive. All this requires special advance work. Especially, attend the weekly service meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses, where the details of the work of “Courage” Testimony Period are being discussed. If you are not in touch with such, write this office for references. Keep accurate record of your activities and report same fully at close of December.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 5: “Drama of Vengeance” (Part 2), fl 1-22 inclusive, The 'Watchtower December 1, 1940.
Week of January 12: “Drama of Vengeance" (Part 2), fl 23-45 inclusive, The "Watchtower December 1,1940.
1941 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
In the face of an almost impossible year the publication of the 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah's witnesses represents an accomplishment made possible only by Jehovah’s power. Confirmation of this you will find when you read the comprehensive report, as written by the Society’s president, covering the world-wide activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, under continuous enemy fire, during the past service year. Besides this amazing report the Yearbook also offers the president's comment on the 1941 yeartext and a text with a Watchtower comment thereon for each day of the new year. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thus enhancing the costs involved; hence a contribution of 50c per copy is stipulated therefor. Organized companies should combine the orders of all indi viduals therefor and send such through the company servant.
“SATISFIED”
In these days of increasing dissatisfaction with everything of the world, the title of this new booklet, “Satisfied," strikes the reader with a strong appeal. The contents of this 32-page booklet show how and by whom the heart’s desire of all men of good-will shall early be satisfied. The front-cover picture visualizes the setting of the story as related by the author, Judge Rutherford.
(Continued on page 367)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
Vol, LXI	December 1, 1940	No. 23
DRAMA OF VENGEANCE
PART 2
"Rejoice, 0 ye nations, with his people; for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.’’—Deut. 32:43.
JEHOVAH executes his fixed purpose exactly on time. His creatures whom he uses in the execution of his purpose he prepares aforetime. Jehovah never deviates one jot or tittle from his fixed purpose. Says the Most High: “I am [Jehovah], I change not.” (Mal. 3:6; A.R.V.) Prior to 1918 Jehovah caused his beloved Son, his Messenger and Executive Officer, to “prepare the way before” Him. Exactly on time Christ Jesus, the Vindicator and great Judge, appeared at his temple. (Mal. 3:1) Since then Christ Jesus, as Jehovah’s Vindicator, has been making preparation for the final battle. That preparation has not been in secret, but openly and aboveboard. In that work of preparation he has used those men and women who are faithfully devoted to and are serving The Theocracy. He gives them some opportunity of serving the great Theocracy in vindication of the name of the great Theocrat. In the time of great stress upon the world, and when the enemy viciously oppresses and assaults the people of God, they are favored by receiving a revelation of Jehovah’s prophecies long ago foretold and recorded. Among such is the prophetic drama of vengeance in which Barak and Deborah played the leading parts. These things having been “written aforetime”, they are for their learning, comfort and hope, and we take great joy in studying the same that we may more efficiently serve The Theocracy. Deborah, who played, the part representing Jehovah’s organization, acted exactly in due time under the direction of the Most High, and her action is stated as follows: “And she sent and called Barak, the son of Abinoam, out of Kedesh-naphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the Lord God of Israel commanded, saying, Go, and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali, and of the children of ZebulunT”—Judg. 4:6.
2	Deborah sent the messenger to the north of her place of abode, a distance of forty-five miles into the territory of the tribe of Naphtali and right close up to the Canaanite city of Hazor, the royal residence of Jabin the king. Thus she showed her faith in Jeho
vah and that she had no fear of the enemy and hence did not consider whether the king, Jabin, might be offended or not. She was doing her duty, fearing only God. This pictures that Jehovah’s organization obeys the Almighty, having full faith and confidence in him and fearing God only. His people know that the enemy is very vicious, but, these devoted servants of the Most High having agreed to do the will of God, they go straight forward doing so, well knowing that Jehovah will cause all things to ultimately work out for the good of his faithful people. Such he has repeatedly promised, and he always keeps his promises.
3	The messenger of Deborah was sent to Barak, calling him into active service. The name Barak means “lightning”. Satan, the mimic god, appears to have adopted the same name for his representative in Germany who now carries on a Blitzkrieg, or “lightning war”. The Devil usually seizes upon the things that Jehovah uses, and tries to mimic them and uses the same to reproach the name of the Most High. In the scripture here under consideration the word “lightning” seems to refer to a weapon of warfare used against the enemies of Jehovah. So far in these modern days the Devil, acting through his earthly agency, the Vatican, and the Nazis speak of their vicious assaults upon others as a Blitzkrieg, or “lightning war”. That war of the Devil’s representatives will avail nothing in the end. The scriptures which show the use and the meaning of the word “lightning” follow: “Bow thy heavens, 0 Lord, and come down; touch the mountains, and they shall smoke. Cast forth lightning, and scatter them; shoot out thine arrows, and destroy them. Send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great waters, from the hand of strange children.” (Ps. 144: 5-7) “Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them.” (Ps. 18:14) “And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and discomfited them.” (2 Sam. 22:15) ‘If I whet my glittering sword [the lightning of my sword (A.R.V., margin)], and mine hand take hold on judgment, I will render vengeance
355
356
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.” (Deut. 32: 41) “Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the Lord; Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished: it is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter [literally meaning: that it may have lightning]; should we then make mirth! it contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree. I have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that their heart may faint, and their ruins be multiplied. Ah! it is made bright, it is wrapped up for the slaughter. And thou, son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the Lord God concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their reproach; even say thou, The sword, the sword is drawn; for the slaughter it is furbished, to consume because of the glittering.” (Ezek. 21:9,10,15,28) “And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning; and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.”—Zech. 9:14.
4	As the prophetic drama unfolds it will be seen that Barak, whose name means “lightning’', played the part picturing Christ Jesus, who appears in two relations: (1) As the captain of God’s faithful witnesses upon the earth engaged in God’s “strange work”; and (2) as the Field Marshal of Jehovah leading the hosts of God in the battle of that great day of God Almighty in the accomplishment of his “strange act”. This the Greater Barak (“Lightning”) said: “For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.”—Matt. 24: 27.
5	When that mighty warrior leads the host of Jehovah in the final battle all the enemy will be completely in darkness and only the Lord “will cause the light to shine, and “his arrow shall go forth as the lightning” (Zech. 9:14), smiting the terrified enemy. At that time there will be no hide-out for the enemy, and none of the enemy shall in any wise find a way of escaping the death-dealing arrows of the Lord; and then before the arrows smite’them they will know that this is the battle of the Almighty, the great Jehovah.
6	The prophecy names the father of Barak, speaking of him as “the son of Abinoam”, which name means “father of pleasantness”. That describes Jehovah God, concerning whose ways of pleasantness it is written: “One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple.” (Ps. 27: 4) “Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.” (Ps. 90:16,17) Christ Jesus
and his faithful remnant on earth today find delight in the splendor, beauty of pleasantness and grace in Jehovah, their heavenly Father. The “other sheep” share in this joy because they are under Jehovah’s organization of which Christ Jesus is the Head and the Light.
T Barak was called “out of Kedesh-naphtali”, which was in the territory of Naphtali. That was a city of refuge convenient for the refugees from the north end of the land of Palestine, where the Levites resided, and which city the Lord directed Joshua to appoint: “The Lord also spake unto Joshua, saying, Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses. And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjath-arba, which is Hebron, in the mountain of Judah.”—Josh. 20:1, 2, 7.
8	The Scriptures clearly show that the city of refuge foreshadowed refuge to which the “other sheep” of the Lord, that is, the “great multitude”, flee and find protection and salvation at Armageddon. The calling of Barak front the city of refuge Kedesh locates the time of the fulfillment of this prophetic drama, which began with the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple in 1918. It is of interest to note that on the 24th day of February, 1918, for the first time the message “Millions Now Living Will Never Die” was delivered at a public assembly of Christian people, held in Los Angeles. The name Kedesh means “sanctuary”. The “great multitude” find their sanctuary under Jehovah’s organization, where God’s antitypical or spiritual Levites minister unto such refugees. (Num. 35: 6) It is at the city of refuge that those of the “great multitude” serve God day and night, that is, continuously.—Rev. 7: 15.
’ In assigning that territory to the tribe of Naphtali Joshua listed Kedesh next to Hazor. (Josh. 19:32,36,37) Thus the leading representatives of those two opposing organizations, the one represented by Barak and the other by Jabin the king, were like next-door neighbors; but there is no evidence that they were of the “good neighbor” class, as religionists now would have it. They were not friends, because Barak was on the side of the Lord and Jabin on the side of the Devil. This is what the Scriptures say about those who pretend to serve the Lord and who carry on the “good neighbor” policy of political religionists: “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God! whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.”—Jas. 4:4.
10	Barak was not of that class. The following scripture states the divine rule, which all true servants of God must obey: “Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the
December 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
357
world, the love of the Father is-not in him.” (1 John 2:15) “If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.” (John 15:19, 20) ‘SI have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.” (John 17:14) “Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of alj nations for my name’s, sake.” (Matt. 24: 9) There is a clear division, an impassable gulf, between the true servants of God and all who are not for The Theocracy.
11	Deborah’s messenger went to Barak and said unto him: “Hath not the Lord God of Israel commanded 1” That shows that the messenger came to Barak in God’s appointed way. He was there not as the messenger of Deborah, but as the messenger of the Lord. Likewise today Jehovah’s organization is the channel by which Jehovah God through Christ Jesus speaks and issues instructions to his people of “the body of Christ” yet on earth. The messenger is not man’s, but God’s, even though men are used. This shows that the servants of God now on the earth must recognize God’s organization, which was pictured by Deborah, as the Lord’s channel or means of communicating instruction to the servants of the Lord. The instructions are the Lord’s, and not man’s. In the drama it was not Deborah that was speaking to a man and directing or commanding him or attempting ‘to teach the man’, but it was the Lord speaking through her, who pictured his organization. There the Lord was using Deborah .3$ a picture representing his woman Zion, that is, his organization. She was merely playing her part as directed by the Most High.
12	Mark well the words which the messenger under command spoke to Barak: “Hath not the Lord God of Israel commanded, saying” what shall be done? Thus Deborah emphatically denies any authority over Jehovah’s servant Barak, but rather acts as a servant bringing to man the word of the Most High. Had it been a woman commanding, that command would have run afoul, even as in Eve’s case in Eden. The commands to Jehovah’s witnesses are not the commands of any earthly creature, but are orders or commands issued by the Lord through his organization under Christ Jesus. Persons who claim to be serving the Lord and who insist on doing their way and contrary to organization instructions show their inability to appreciate that the Lord is directing his own affairs.
prepared
18	The message brought to Barak said to him: “Go”; thus indicating that it was God’s due time for him to act. The command was to go and organize his fighters. Thus God foretold that a time would come when the faithful servants of God on earth must organize and prepare for the fight. Mark the events that followed the World War, indicating the beginning of the fulfillment: In September, 1919, the faithful servants of God assembled in convention at Cedar Point, Ohio. That marked the end of the time in which God’s servants had manifested fear of the worldly rulers and had suffered by reason thereof, and marked the beginning of greater faith in God and in Christ. The keynote address of that convention was “Blessed Are the Fearless”, particularly disclosing the distinction between the end of the Elijah work of the church and the beginning of the Elisha work of God’s organization. It was pointed out that the Kingdom work must go forward and that the work must be done without fear of man. The Lord’s people there present arose to the conditions and gladly began the organization for the fight, and that spirit of energy from the Lord reached throughout the earth, and everywhere the devoted ones began to prepare. It was at that convention that an auxiliary to The Watchtower, to carry on the work, was announced, the new magazine being The Golden Age, and which was afterwards and is now called Consolation, and which is used against the enemy in preparing God’s faithful people for the coming battle. Preparation has continued amongst the people of God on earth as they have gone forward in their work.
14	Barak was commanded: “Go, and draw toward mount Tabor.” It is significant that this emphatic direction was given, locating the exact place where he should go. Tabor means “height, or mountain”; that is, a mountain that rises high. Mount Tabor rises 1,300 feet above its base, and 1,865 feet above sea level. It stands isolated from the other mountains. About fifteen miles to the southwest of Tabor was Megiddo, near the river Kishon, and to the east of Tabor is the Sea of Galilee. Mount Tabor seems to correspond with the symbolic mountain, to which Christ Jesus, the Greater Barak, gathers the anointed members of “his body”, namely, Mount Zion, the place of the assembly of troops: “And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads.” (Rev. 14:1) “But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect.”-Heb. 12:22,23.
358
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
15	In preparing for the battle of Armageddon the great Jehovah causes the minute details to be mentioned picturing that battle. The faithful followers of Christ Jesus are now assembled with the Lord in the mountain of Jehovah’s capital organization and there under the command and leadership of Christ Jesus. The picture then continues to show the preparation.
16	The specific commandment to Barak was: “And take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali, and of the children of Zebulun.” The territory of Zebulun bordered on the southwest of the Naphtali territory. In the song of victory sung by Barak and Deborah following the battle these words prophetically appear: “Out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer. Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field.” (Judg. 5:14,18) Those who came regarded not their lives dear unto them, but were determined to obey the commandment of Jehovah that he had given them through Barak. Thus were foreshadowed the apostle Paul and others of like spirit expressed by that faithful apostle in these words: “But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.”—Acts 20: 24.
” Not all the tribes of Israel mustered out to fight for the overthrow of the oppressors of Jehovah’s people. The fighting men of Naphtali and Zebulun came, and were accompanied by volunteers from Ephraim, Benjamin, Manasseh and Issachar, who formed the remnant whom the Lord used. The prophetic song of Deborah and Barak identified them all as a remnant: “Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people; the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.” —Judg. 5:13.
18	The command was to 'take with you ten thousand men’. Ten thousand is the fourth power of ten (10 X 10 X 10 X 10 = 10,000). Therefore the fighters would picture all the remnant of spiritual Israel, the anointed witnesses now on the earth engaged in Jehovah’s “strange work” against religionists and allies of demonism. Since Naphtali and Zebulun were the two tribes first mentioned and first called, this may well picture the original part of the Lord’s servant class who survived the World War trials and continued faithful to the end of 1922, at the time of the anointing. The other tribes that later joined the ranks as mentioned in Deborah’s song may picture those who have been added to the original remnant from 1922 on and who voluntarily joined in the “strange work” of the Lord against religion, or demonism. Ruth and Esther pictured a like class. And
all of these, both the original remnant and the others added, together were foreshadowed and foretold as a “wise servant” class, to whom the Lord commits “his goods”, that is, his Kingdom interests, and lays upon them the responsibility as well as the great privilege of advertising the great Theocratic Government.
18	Those who study the prophecies with a real and sincere desire to understand and who rely upon Jehovah and Christ Jesus have no difficulty in now seeing that God is maneuvering his own forces and also maneuvering the forces of the enemy preparatory to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. To be sure, the enemy does not believe this and will not believe it, and therefore will give no heed to the statement, because the Devil, the Hierarchy, and all of that organization are blinded to the purposes of Jehovah, even as the demons are blind and were cast into darkness from the time of the flood. That same blindness has held the demons and their associates in religion in darkness ever since, and this darkness is particularly upon the leaders in religion and the rulers in politics who have joined hands with religionists. Therefore it is written in the Scriptures: ‘Blindness covers the earth [visible rulers], and gross blindness the people [that is, those people who follow the religious leaders or rulers].’ (Isa. 60:2) God foretold that such would be the condition at the present time. It is even so, as all those who are devoted to the great Theocrat observe. Therefore, mark the following: “And I will draw unto thee, to the river Kishon, Sisera, the captain of Jabin’s army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver him into thine hand.”—Judg. 4: 7.
20	That is a positive statement from Jehovah as to his purpose. Thus it appears that Jehovah was maneuvering the enemy forces under the command of Jabin’s captain or field marshal, Sisera. that the enemy forces might be put in a position for their destruction. The manifest purpose of Jeho\ah was to draw the enemy forces into the open and force them to fight. Likewise in the fulfillment of the prophetic drama Jehovah is drawing all the enemy into the open and there forcing them to don the garments of identification that they are his enemies, and openly show themselves as against The Theocracy, and thereby to admit that all are worthy to be destroyed by the Lord at the battle of Armageddon. These things strengthen the hope of God’s faithful people.
21	It was God who commanded Deborah to prophesy to Barak and to point out to him the location or place to which he would draw the enemy, to wit, to the river Kishon. One fork of that river rises in or near Mount Tabor; the other fork rises near Mount Gilboa. Its location and environment are of real interest to the Lord’s people at the present time.
December 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
359
Kishon means “curved, or winding”, and thereby being a suitable place or situation in which to trap the enemy and slow up his movement. The town of Megiddo was situated on the south of the river near the hills of Manasseh, and the “waters of Megiddo” emptied into the river Kishon. That river flows past Mount Carmel and empties into the Mediterranean sea. On the opposite side of Mount Gilboa the waters flow into the Jordan. It was in Mount Carmel where the prophet Elijah, by the direction of the Lord, performed the fire test, exposing the false prophets who represented the Devil, and where 450 of such prophets were executed at the river of Kishon. That occurred several hundred years after the prophecy of Deborah. (1 Ki. 18: 40) In the song of Deborah she is recorded as saying of that river, the “ancient river”: “The river of Kishon swept them away. . . . 0 my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.”— Judg. 5: 21.
22	That river was employed in the great drama of vengeance to carry out God’s fixed purpose. God used the waters of Kishon as one of his battle forces to execute the anti-theocratic enemies. Jehovah drew the enemy into the plain, through which the river Kishon flows, and there executed them. Thus Jehovah foretold that he will use his inanimate creation and forces of the earth to execute the anti-theocratic forces at Armageddon. This fact is also clearly shown by other prophecies. The Lord will clearly demonstrate that it is His battle, and not man’s, and he will make the enemy know that Jehovah is destroying them.
23	What God did toward the enemies of Israel, as shown in the prophetic drama, undoubtedly foreshadowed what he will do shortly to the conspirators against The Theocracy. Jehovah drew Sisera, the captain of Jabin’s army, with, his chariots and his multitudes, to the river Kishon. Even so now God is maneuvering the enemy into a position where he will accomplish his purpose against the enemy. The description is given by his prophet as applying to the present time, in the following text 1 “Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye nations, and gather yourselves together round about; thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, 0 Lord. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision ((margin) threshing ; or cutting to pieces]; for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.”—Joel 3:11,14.
24	In his own good way Jehovah now draws the enemy and is leading them to the position where they will be destroyed. He uses his witnesses in this connection. He commands his witnesses to take their positive and firm stand against religion, or demonism, and to declare that religion is the instrument of the Devil used to fight against The Theocracy and its servants. The political, commercial and military
forces have been induced by the Devil to adopt and advocate religion, or demonism, and all of these religious, political and commercial and military forces have joined in a conspiracy against The Theocracy, and therefore openly persecute Jehovah’s witnesses, who announce The Theocracy as the only hope of the human race. Because Jehovah’s witnesses are bold and fearless in declaring that the kingdom of God, for which Jesus taught his followers to pray, is the great Theocratic Government, which shall rule and bless the obedient of the human race, all of the demonized religionists and allied forces are against Jehovah’s witnesses. For this reason Jesus foretold exactly what would come to pass, when he said concerning Jehovah’s witnesses: “Ye shall be hated of all nations fox my name’s sake.”
25	Concerning the enemy forces under the command of Captain Sisera Jehovah said through his prophetess, that is, his organization: “And I will deliver him into thine hand.” Such was the message which Barak received; but first, before the delivery took place, Barak must organize his forces for battle and move into action against Sisera and, in doing so, fully trust in God to finish the work of destruction. Likewise when the Greater Barak, Christ Jesus, exactly in due time received the command from Jehovah to ‘take thy power and reign’ (Rev. 11:17), Christ Jesus must first then prepare for the great and final war. He must begin his reign while the enemy is still in possession of the things of the earth; and this is corroborated further by the texts: “The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion; rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” (Ps. 110: 2) The supporters of The Theocracy and its great Theocratic King must voluntarily take the side of The Theocracy and boldly and openly announce the same, and thus they show their willingness to be wholly obedient. “Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning; thou hast the dew of thy youth.”— Ps. 110:3.
™ That must be true of all who serve the Lord and receive his approval from the time of the beginning of the temple judgment when they were ‘born in Zion’ and thus made members of the temple and became the faithful and wise servants of the Lord. (Ps. 87:5) The Greater Barak is with the people of God today and leading them, and therefore they must know that the battle is God’s, and not man’s, and that God, through Christ Jesus, wiB do the fighting, and for the vindication of his name, which battle incidentally will result in the deliverance of all those who faithfully devote themselves to Jehovah. (2 Chron. 20:15; 1 Sam. 17:47) After the preparation is completed, then the battle by Jehovah’s invisible forces begins and progresses to a successful finality: “The Lord at thy
360
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the [nations], he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.”-Ps. 110: 5, 6.
27 “And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go; but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.” (Judg. 4: 8) Upon receiving the message Barak spoke unto Deborah as stated in this text. This does not mean that Barak, the man, was weak and was relying upon a woman. It is not subject to any such meaning except in the minds of those who look at matters entirely from a human viewpoint. It must be kept in mind that Barak there was playing his part in the prophetic drama as directed by Jehovah. At this point Barak pictured the rem'-nant of Jehovah’s witnesses who are members of God’s organization on earth. Such witnesses are diligent to receive the instructions from the Lord given to them by and through his organization and to faithfully carry out the same. It does not mean that Barak expected the woman Deborah to fight with him and that without her he would not fight. The drama or picture must show, and did show, the matter in a prophetic way in which God would carry it out in the final reality. The presence of Deborah with the army of Israel would be an evidence of Jehovah being present and directing his people; and this was shown by his representative Deborah, picturing his organization. The presence of the representative of the Lord would there stimulate the army of Israel to more trustful obedience to the commandments of Barak. The army would understand that Jehovah was leading them. So likewise today the Lord’s people recognize that God, through Christ Jesus, is carrying forward his purposes, but that he has his own means or channel for transmitting orders and direction to his people on earth.
22 When Barak said to Deborah, “If thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go,” such did not mean that he was stubborn or fearful. He was playing his part in the drama under Jehovah’s direction, in order to thus foreshadow that God’s remnant now on earth will not and can not engage in the “strange work” and battle against demonism unless Jehovah’s organization, under its Head, Christ Jesus, goes along with them, leads and directs them. The organization must work in full and complete harmony. That is the reason now that we observe Jehovah’s witnesses working exactly in harmony as a part of the Lord’s organization and under the direct supervision of Christ Jesus. This unity is shown in many of the scriptures and the prophecies, and which have heretofore been called to the attention of God’s people through the columns of The Watchtower.
22 Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions have seen and now continue to see that the Almighty God
and Christ Jesus have used and continue to use the Watch Tower Society, particularly since 1919, to make known the wickedness of religion, or demonism, and to point out the righteous God and his kingdom. This is done by the publication of truths as set forth in the Bible and revealed now by the Lord and made understandable.to those who love him and who walk in the light, and who thus have partnership with God and Christ Jesus in that great work. (1 John 1: 6, 7) The people of God now on the earth see that the Watch Tower Society is merely a visible channel, means or instrument of transmitting the message of Jehovah to his people. For this reason each one of God’s people keenly desires to be in complete harmony with his organization and work under the Lord’s supervision. Any work that is contrary to Jehovah and his great Theocratic organization is of the enemy, the Devil and in such work the remnant refuse to have any part whatsoever. They thus refuse because they know that God and Christ Jesus will not be with them if they depart in any manner whatsoever from the full and united support of the Theocratic Government. They firmly stand for The Theocracy, and this brings the remnant into great disrepute amongst the religionists; but these faithful servants of God care not for any worldly approval. They must be and are determined to be faithful to Jehovah and to his King. They are blind to everything else.
50 When we see the matter in its true light it is plain that Barak is not subject to any just criticism nor to be viewed as a weak person and depending upon a woman. Only the religionists would criticize him. It was not Barak that chose the woman to prophesy at that time; Jehovah God chose Deborah as his mouthpiece because he uses a woman to picture his organization through which he gives direction as to his work. Barak made the request of Deborah that she be present with him because God’s message and command had come to him through her. Barak did not ask for help from Egypt, nor that he be accompanied by anyone outside of God’s recognized instrument. The picture would not have been complete in this instance if a man had been acting in Deborah’s place; but, without any doubt, if a man had been used to bring the message to Barak from Jehovah a like request would have been made in order that the messenger of the Lord, and who represented the Lord, might be with him directing in full harmony. It was the presence of Jehovah, of his official representative, that Barak desiped. Moses was in a position similar thereto when God was displeased with the Israelites because of their worshiping the golden calf; and when he commanded Moses to lead his people on, Moses said to Jehovah: “If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. For wherein shall
December 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
361
it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? Is it not in that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I/and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth.” —Ex. 33:15,16.
81 Jehovah God is the God of peace and harmony. Everything that is pleasing to the Lord God must be like him in this respect. The approved servants of Jehovah must dwell together iri peace and act in exact harmony in carrying out the instructions from the Lord. Persons are not recognized because of their outward appearance, but God recognizes them because of their faithfulness to him and to his organization. God is no respecter of persons or individuals. Man looks upon the outward appearance, but God looks upon the heart, that is, that which indicates one’s righteous motive. Since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple and his putting the mark of approval upon those brought intd his organization, all of these must be at peace amongst themselves and in full unity move forward together in the performance of duties and obligations laid upon them. In no other way could they stand firm in God’s organization. (Ps. 122:1-8) Such was foreshadowed in the drama, as indicated by the reply of Deborah. “And she said, I will surely go with thee; notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh.”—Judg. 4:9.
12 Deborah’s readiness to go and her assurance to Barak show harmony and peace and confidence in the Lord. That would be the effect upon the warfare of Israel under the command of Barak. Full assurance that in doing the work assigned them they were doing so at the Lord’s direction gave them strength. Likewise today full assurance that the servants of the Lord are backed up by Jehovah and his organization and doing the work of God under his command through Christ Jesus results in great courage to them. In a similar way this was shown when the servant of Elisha was greatly disturbed by the appearance of the enemy at Dothan' and when Elisha assured his servant of the supreme strength of the Most High: “And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do? And he answered, Fear not; for they [Jehovah’s organization] that be with us are more than they that be with them. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.”—2 Ki. 6:15-17.
” Deborah’s assurance of standing firmly with Barak and supporting him was like a promise of the Lord given to all those that fear Him and who do not fear men and who therefore joyfully serve the Lord: “The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them.” (Ps. 34: 7) “For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.”—Ps. 91:11.
s‘ The Lord directed Deborah to inform Barak in these words: “The journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour.” That meant that personal ambition for honor is not pleasing to God, and hence every true follower of Christ Jesus must see to it that his heart is right and he says by his action: “Perish every desire for selfish honor amongst men.” Jehovah’s remnant must be entirely unselfish and wholly indifferent to the opinions of men, desiring only the approval of the Lord. They are to have in mind at all times that it is the honor and vindication of Jehovah’s name in which they are interested and which will be accomplished. Both the remnant and their companions must be unselfishly devoted to The Theocrat and his King and engaged in God’s “strange work” for the honor and glory of Jehovah. They are honored by the reflected glory that comes to them by reason of being under the headship and leadership of Christ Jesus, participating in the work as he commands; and thus, as it is written: “This honour have all his saints.” (Ps. 149: 9) This is aptly expressed by David: “Thine, 0 Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.”—1 Chron. 29:11.
” Had Barak been seeking self-glory he would have backed out and refused to embark on the expedition ; but that was not the purpose of this prophetic drama. In this connection Barak received the words from the mouth of God’s prophetess that God would give the victory to him through His organization; and that message was this: “For the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman.” These words constitute further evidence that Barak was playing a part in the drama without reference to his personal ambition or honor. By the word “Sisera” used in the foregoing text was meant not merely the captain of the enemy host, but all of the host of the enemy and all the enemy’s war equipment under the command of Sisera. “Into the hand of a woman” did not mean into Deborah’s.hand personally; but there she was the representative of Jehovah God, picturing his organization, and the meaning was that God’s organization would be successful. In strict harmony with this, Jehovah does not deliver the religious racketeers and their allies into the hand of Jehovah’s witnesses on earth to be destroyed by them, but Jeho
362
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
vah will deliver the enemies of The Theocracy into the hand of his organization, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, or Chief, and the Head of that great organization will execute them. The enemy shall be completely destroyed, but the honor of the slaughter will not be given to any of Jehovah’s witnesses now on the earth, but be given entirely to the Lord Jesus Christ himself. All the saints will participate in the honor, which is reflected to them by their being under and associated with Christ Jesus.
36 The time had come for God’s people to move into action. “And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh,” that is, to the city of refuge. She did not stay at home and rest under the palm tree, but she went into the field with the others who went into action. Likewise the invisible-organization of Jehovah and the visible part thereof are with Christ Jesus and go into active service and serve under him. The Lord Jesus is accompanied by all his holy angels, who are of his organization, and by the resurrected members of “his body” and by all of his remnant on the earth. The spirit of Jehovah God is with his organization, and all are at peace and work in exact harmony. “And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with ten thousand men at his feet; and Deborah went up with him.”— Judg. 4:10.
87 The Lord Jesus and his true followers likewise delight to be obedient to Jehovah’s commandments. In this prophetic drama Barak showed such willingness by immediately obeying Jehovah’s command received by him through Deborah as the mouthpiece of the Lord. Preparation for the battle proceeded with real cunning and sagacity. Kedesh being so near to Hazor, the residence of King Jabin, discretion on the part of Barak in making preparation was necessary. Corresponding to his action, a like call to action was given in A.D. 1922, from the time of the second Cedar Point convention and thereafter, for God’s people to go into action. At that convention of Jehovah’s servants the Slogan was raised: “Advertise the King and the Kingdom.” That slogan has been sounded since continuously, and God’s people know but one thing, and that is to move forward to the honor of the great Theocrat.
38 The tribes of Naphtali and Zebulun responded to the call, and others of the Israelites also came as volunteers and offered themselves freely. This corresponds with the statement of the Psalm that refers to the beginning of the reign and the work of Christ, to wit: “Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.”— Ps. 110:3.
" Following the battle Deborah sung out the same prophecy, to wit: “My heart is toward the governors
of Israel that offered themselves willingly among the people.” All who serve the great King with joy and hence receive God’s approval are necessarily volunteers, willingly offering themselves in the service and joyfully serving. They do not have to be drafted, nor do they complain or murmur concerning the hours they have to work after entering the field of action. They know where they are going, and they delight to do what is commanded of them. In this part of the drama the “great multitude” or “other sheep” are not shown. The refugees in the Levite city of Kedesh could not leave that city and go out and help in the fight, because the law required they must remain in the pity of refuge until the death of the high priest. (Num. 35: 25) To expose themselves outside of the city of refuge would subject them to execution by the avenger of blood. The “other sheep” of the Lord, those of good-will and who will form the “great multitude”, are shown in the drama, however, by another character, as appears from the unfolding of the prophecy.
40	The fulfillment of that part of the prophecy enacted at verse ten above quoted appears to have begun in 1937, when a special call went forth for action against the religious organizations, which carry on a racket. The yeartext for that year was taken from the prophecy of Obadiah, to wit: “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her [organized religion] in battle.” At the convention of God’s people that year, at Columbus, Ohio, that text was the theme of the entire convention and emphasized by all the speakers. Jeremiah’s prophecy, set forth at the twentyfifth chapter, was also used to emphasize and show that the wine cup of God’s wrath must be handed around to all the nations and that they would be obligated to drink thereof and die. That led up to the publication of the booklet Safety, dealing with the prophecy of Jeremiah. At that convention the magazine Consolation was brought forward and released for use, and also a Model Study booklet was provided showing the difference between religion and Christianity and how this should be used to instruct the people. Also the new book Enemies was released as an instrument of warfare. At the same time special pioneer service was inaugurated. Preparation for the war went forward, and the part performed by the visible servants of Jehovah God was entirely for the purpose of magnifying the name of the Most High. The Lord was preparing his people who were willing.
41	Barak and Deborah went up to Mount Tabor together; which pictures Christ Jesus in charge of Jehovah’s organization engaging in his “strange work” on the earth against demonism, or religion. Ten thousand soldiers went up with them, and this pictured completely a number of the remnant on the earth all enlisted for The Theocracy. Deborah went
December 1,1940
SEe WATCHTOWER.
363
right up to the battle front, thereby picturing Jehovah's organization of holyangels led by Christ Jesus and that these are followed by all the faithful remnant on earth. Complete harmony of action by the organization of Jehovah is here further shown.
41 Shortly after the convention above mentioned, in 1937, the Lord called special attention to his organization, which was foreshadowed by Deborah, and clearly revealed to his people that his organization is not democratic and is controlled by the Lord himself. Shortly there followed the reorganization amongst the witnesses of Jehovah into a more active and efficient service organization, and in complete harmony with Jehovah’s organization, ruled by the Head thereof, Christ JeSus. This was also pictured in the foregoing harmonious action of Barak and Deborah. It is seen that the organization of God, both invisible and visible, all are gathered together, that is, to the place of the assembly of troops under the commandment of the Lord.
45	Why has Jehovah thus led his people and later revealed to them the things that centuries ago he made to appear in the prophetic drama, the events which we now see in fulfillment thereof, and in which-fulfillment God’s people have a part? The answer to that question is found in the words uttered by the apostle of Jesus, to wit: “For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.”—Rom. 15:4.
44	Every one of the remnant, upon reading that text last above quoted, breathes a prayer of thanksgiving to Jehovah God for the manifestation of his boundless mercy and abundant loving-kindness, and, like the psalmist, they sing: “Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men! For he satisfieth the longing soul, and filleth the hungry soul with goodness.”—Ps. 107: 8, 9.
45	At this present time, when the people of Jehovah are beset on every side by the enemy, persecuted and oppressed, the revelation to them of the prophecies of Jehovah God bearing upon the present time brings to them great peace of mind and consolation. Thus by the Lord’s grace they are afforded a full opportunity to keep in mind that they are backed up by Jehovah God, who says to them: “The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.” (Deut. 33:27) Such full assurance gives great courage; and hence the people of God are very courageous. They feed upon the revelation of prophecy, realizing that it is life-sustaining food to their souls in this time of great importance to them. The drama progresses, and they rejoice.
(To be continued)
COMMERCE
GYPT was anciently a commercial world power. It is written concerning Egypt that, as a commercial rival of ancient Rome, its annual revenue amounted to ap
proximately $20,000,000 or what is equivalent to that sum today. Egypt was a great market for the commerce of the nations, including Tyre. To be compared with Tyre’s traffic with Egypt is the commercial traffic of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The Hierarchy has, and for a long while has had, dealings with Big Business or the mighty commerce of the world, pictured in ancient Egypt, and members of the Hierarchy are large investors in the commercial traffic of the world. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has been and is a market for all the world, dealing in and manipulating the people, and particularly the “Catholic population”, and doing this for its own selfish gain. Politicians of all nations find the Hierarchy both politically and financially advantageous to them. Dictators in particular find a strong ally in the Hierarchy, and it will generally be found that these dictators are backed up by and supported and put in power by the Hierarchy.
The nation of Egypt was, in the days of the prophet Moses, a powerful nation. It practiced the Devil religion. It was a great military as well as commercial nation and was ruled by a king the title of whom was “Pharaoh”. Looking to the deliverance of Moses’ oppressed people from the power of that commercial nation Jehovah God said to Moses: “Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out
DONE FOR
unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the [Nile] river’s brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.” (Ex. 7:15) The shepherd rod which Moses liad cast down before Pharaoh and which became a serpent, this same rod Moses was now told by Jehovah to take in his hand and to stand by the brink of the river Nile. That rod represented the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, Christ Jesus, carrying into operation the purpose of Jehovah by virtue of the power and authority which Jehovah had delegated to him.
Aaron, the brother of Moses, appeared with him before Pharaoh and acted under Moses’ instruction. This pictured the remnant of Jehovah’s anointed witnesses on earth proceeding under the direction of the great Prophet, Christ Jesus, the Head of Jehovah’s organization, to appear before the Devil and his organization and to serve notice of Jehovah God’s purpose. Jehovah instructed Moses to say to Pharaoh: “The Lord God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear. Thus saith the Lord, In this thou shalt know that I am the Lord: behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood. And the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall loathe to drink of the water of the river.” “And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch
364
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in vessels of stone. And Moses and Aaron did so, as the Lord commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood. And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.”— Ex. 7:16-21.
By Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, Jehovah now sends forth his witnesses on earth, the remnant, to bear his testimony before the peoples of the world and to serve notice upon the worldly rulers that the time has come for the covenant people of Jehovah to go to the mount of God, that is to say, to the Kingdom, the Theocratic Government, and to give their allegiance to Jehovah; and to tell them that The Theocratic Government is the only hope for the world, and that Satan and his organization must cease to hold the people in subjection and bondage. In the performance by Moses of this “sign” before Pharaoh Jehovah foretold that the loathsomeness of commercialism would be made to appear before the people and the rulers at the end of Satan’s world. Previous to this appearance before Pharaoh Moses had performed this sign before his own brethren, the Israelites, by pouring out water from the river upon the dry land, which water turned to blood, a symbol of death. The pouring of the water upon the dry ground shows to those who now have a hearing ear that commercialism, such as was carried on on the waters of the Nile, is death-dealing and is dead in God's sight, and it cannot lift the people out of the great depression which Satan has brought upon them. The land of Goshen, where the Israelites were domiciled in Egypt, was not spared from the plague of blood on the ground. This is significant and would seem to teach that Jehovah’s covenant people on earth are not spared from the material effects of the great commercial depression that has been upon the world and that has led to the present international situation. Such is exactly in accord with the facts as they now exist.
The fulfillment of the prophetic picture made by Moses and Aaron before Pharaoh has come; much evidence there is to show that the same has been fulfilled. When Jehovah turned the waters of the Nile into blood, that was notice to Pharaoh and hence notice to Pharaoh’s god, Satan, and his organization, that commerce is done for, and is as good as dead. This was the third of three signs which God gave Moses to perform. It corresponds with what is symbolically described as the effect of blowing the third trumpet of God and pouring out the third vial of his wrath according to his commandment through Christ to the angel; as it is written: “And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood. And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, 0 Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus. For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; for they are worthy. And I heard another out of the altar say, Even
so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.” (Rev. 16:4-7) “And the third angel sounded [the trumpet], and there fell a great star from heaven [to wit, Satan, cast out of heaven], burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; and the name of the star is called Wormwood [hence bitter] : and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and riiany men died of the waters, because they were made bitter.” (Rev. 8: 10,11) Note now that in A.D. 1924 the third of a series of seven annual general conventions of Jehovah’s witnesses was held at Columbus, Ohio, where there was issued an indictment specially against commercialized religion. There the foregoing prophecies began to have fulfillment. That was five years before the financial crash came upon the world, in 1929 Thus the foretold warning to Satan and his organization was given in the form of an “Indictment” and the declaration in a widely-advertised public lecture that “civilization is doomed”.—See Light, Book One, page 120.
Satan’s organization never contained life-giving waters, although the people have been induced to believe that commerce is essential to the sustaining of life and the welfare of the nations. The blood poured upon the dry ground m Egypt, and the result thereof, pictured how the policies and methods of commercialism have deluged the nations of the earth with blood, shed in violation of Jehovah's “everlasting covenant” concerning the sanctity of blood, and hence such have exercised a death-dealing influence upon the peoples (Gen. 9: 1-6) For this reason commercialism as a part of Satan’s organization is doomed to complete destruction What Jehovah has been doing thus far is to have his testimony declared to the rulers and to the people, to show them that commerce, as well as other parts of Satan’s organization, is without power to give life and blessings to the people. Jehovah’s witnesses are now doing their part in declaring this testimony, and later Jehovah, by his executive officer, Christ Jesus, will destroy the entire organization of the enemy.—See Light, Book Two, pages 26-2S.
Note that the express purpose of the fulfillment of this sign of the water turned to blood is, as stated to Pharaoh, that the rulers and the people may receive notice • “Thus saith Jehovah, In this thou shalt know that I am Jehovah ” (Ex. 7 : 17, Am. Rev. Ver.) This is further proof that Jehovah’s witnesses must continue to declare the testimony of Jehovah until every part of Satan’s organization shall go down. They have already shown their understanding and appreciation of this fact in a large degree. In these days seldom, if ever, does anyone of Jehovah’s witnesses now say: “How much longer must the witness work continue?” The witnesses of Jehovah that remain faithful are in his service for ever, and the present work is the bearing of testimony ; and when that is completed they will engage in other work.
Egypt’s Pharaoh, the Devil's representative, was supported by his demon-worshiping magicians. Even so now the Devil and his representatives on the earth, the religionists, attempt to counteract the effect of Jehovah’s witness or testimony. As recorded at Exodus 7:21-23: “And there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt. And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto
December 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
365
[Moses and Aaron] ; as the Lord had said. And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also.” Jehovah’s witnesses today have been inviting the peoples to drink freely Qf the water of life, the Kingdom truth. (Rev. 22:17) The clergy magicians of Satan’s organization make the waters of truth to appear bloody by teaching the rulers and their allies, and the people that will listen to them, that the business depression and suffering upon the people is punishment from God sent upon them because of their unfaithfulness in supporting religious systems and that, as a remedy,,we must have more religion. The pope has made public statement to this effect, and millions of people are induced to believe such false statement. The result is what Satan desires, namely, the turning of the people away from Jehovah God. The clergy and their allies in wrongdoing now display their hardness of heart by crying out that Jehovah’s witnesses are engaged in a commercial enterprise of selling books for pecuniary profit, and that by their going from house to house to give-the testimony and doing this without obtaining a license from worldly authority these witnesses have been violating the commercial laws of the land. In this manner the modern magicians attempt to turn the waters of Jehovah’s testimony as now delivered by His witnesses into that which is death-dealing. Jehovah’s witnesses serve the rulers with notice which is Jehovah’s testimony, that their commerce, as well as all other parts of the worldly organization, will shortly be destroyed by the Lord.
The political-religious magicians co-operating with their allies threaten the destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses and their work, and declare that it is a menace and hence deathdealing to the people. Big Business magicians have been desperately trying to work magic before the Devil. They have claimed that there are regular periods of depression and prosperity, and that business moves in cycles, and that within a regular cycle of time the depression will move on and great prosperity will come again; hence their once common expression: “Prosperity is just around the comer, and will soon be present.” The claim of Big Business is that these financial depressions are necessary evils (symbolized by blood) and will ultimately result in good. Every part of Satan’s organization discredits Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, while Jehovah’s witnesses continue to tell the people thaX The Theocracy is the only hope of mankind. The commercial, political and religious elements of Satan’s visible organization attempt to prove to the people that they have .power to rule and to remedy the present evil conditions, and they thus continue to cast reproach upon Jehovah’s name.
All the rulers of the earth, Big Business, politicians and clergy, and those that support them are now desperately digging for ways and means to sustain their organization and to pull them out of the hole. This was particularly foreshadowed by what the Egyptians did; as it is written, at Exodus 7:24: “And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.” The world is now full of unemployment and economic distress, and men in every commercial enterprise are desperately seeking if they can find the means to sustain life. Since the beginning of the financial depression in 1929, many makeshifts have been brought forward
by the wise or magicians of the world in their efforts to dispel the depression, which has resulted from the bloody waters of commerce. These schemes or plans have included moratoriums on international debts; reconstruction finance corporations, ostensibly organized to help the people, but in fact to keep the head of Big Business above the waves, that it may survive and not die; conferences frequently held by the representatives of the nations; coalition governments organized, and divers and numerous suggestions made as to how water that is now blood, or death-dealing, may be made pure and life-sustaining; also so-called “technocracy”, which offers a new system to replace the world's worn-out economic machinery, and according to which nobody works more than two hours a day and everybody would thereby be happy and comfortable, such being a pure delusion, as Jehovah’s witnesses well know; also a campaign of buying; tax-sales law; and, during Prohibition times, the repeal of the 18th Amendment of the Constitution, and the manufacture and sale of intoxicants such as beer; also the hypocritical scheme known as “The National Economy League”; and, more recently, the NRA, and the so-called “New Deal”, and the “Corporative State”, together with the regimentation of the people. All these things, of course, ignore Jehovah God and give no heed to the repeated proclamations of truth that the world depression is the result of the end of Satan’s world or uninterrupted rule, who has therefore forced this condition upon the world for the purpose of turning the people away from Jehovah, and that the only sure and adequate remedy for mankind is the kingdom of Jehovah under Christ Jesus, The Theocracy.
Jehovah is in no manner responsible for the trouble that the world is now experiencing. Long ago that turning of the waters of the Nile into blood was not Jehovah’s curse upon the waters, nor did it illustrate or picture his curse upon the nations now. Jehovah sent Moses and Aaron to Egypt for the express purpose of bearing his testimony before the rulers and the people to show them that he is the Almighty God, the Most High over all the. earth. The signs performed before Pharaoh were for that very purpose, that Pharaoh and his organization might know that Jehovah is God, and might let the people go to God’s mountain to worship. The testimony of Jehovah now being delivered by his witnesses is not God’s curse or expression of his wrath, but rather notice for the information and warning of the rulers and the people that Jehovah is God, that Satan’s time is at an end, and that Satan’s schemes are death-dealing, and that if Satan does not relinquish his power to rule, Jehovah will shortly destroy his organization. As Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and God permitted him to remain in power for a time, even so now Jehovah permits Satan’s wicked organization to continue for a short period that Jehovah may in due time show to all that he is the Almighty God, and that his witnesses may proclaim this great truth to the world. As expressed at Exodus 9:16: “And in very deed for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.” {Lesser}
The testimony given to the rulers of the world shows that Jehovah is against Satan and his organization and hence all the schemes of Satan spell death to mankind. The record, at Exodus 7:25, states: “And seven days were fulfilled,
366
THE WATCHTOWER.
Bbooklyn, N. Y.
after that the Lord had smitten the river.” Smiting the waters of Egypt was the first of ten plagues that came upon that land. The “seven days” of bloody waters seem to picture that the delivering of Jehovah’s testimony by his witnesses will continue steadily from that time forward until such work is completed, and that, when it is completed, then Jehovah will take a hand by sending his angelic army under Christ Jesus into the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”, and that such will result in the complete destruction of Satan’s world.
Jehovah’s witnesses have understood and believe this “sign” of the water turned to blood, and have wholly separated themselves from Satan’s organization and now refuse to “go down to Egypt for help”. They now see that Jehovah has sent Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, to the temple for judgment and to make a name for Jehovah. Corresponding to this, Jehovah long ago gave the prophet Isaiah a vision of His presence at the temple. Then he cleansed Isaiah from uncleanness of lip and sent him forth to bear His testimony. The prophet there pictured Jehovah’s witnesses serving notice upon the people of Satan’s world (pictured by Egypt), concerning whom Jehovah has said: “Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.” (Isa. 6:10) Then when Isaiah, picturing Jehovah’s witnesses, asked the Lord how long he (and Jehovah’s witnesses therefore) should continue to bear this testimony the answer of Jehovah was: “Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate.”—Vs. 11.
The witness work now in progress, and which is the delivering of the testimony of Jehovah, must continue and progress. It is for the purpose of vindicating Jehovah’s name. Satan’s forces continue to put hindrances in the way of Jehovah’s witnesses. The anointed remnant and their companions are now in unity with Christ Jesus, and under their victorious Leader they go into action with complete confidence as to the result. They expect opposition from the enemy, and the Lord has shown them how to meet that opposition. Organized and in full unity and moving en masse like locusts upon the enemy organization, they give the testimony to the great discomfort of Satan’s representatives. (Joel 2:2-11) This method of giving the witness has been greatly blessed by the Lord, thus showing his approval.
THEOCRATIC ORGANIZATION IN OPERATION
JEHOVAH’S organization is in no wise democratic. He is supreme, and his government or organization is strictly theocratic. The supreme power is Jehovah God, and he together with Christ Jesus constitutes the “Higher Powers”, to which all persons must be subject, as declared at Romans 13:1. In the prophecy at Isaiah 9:6 Jesus is designated as “The Mighty God”, meaning the mighty executive officer of Jehovah, The Almighty God.
In Scripture Jehovah’s capital organization is called “Zion”. In Zion Jesus Christ is “the Head of the church”, which is “His body”. (Col. 1:18) Jehovah is “the Head of Christ”, according to 1 Corinthians 11:3. Therefore Zion, God’s capital organization, is a theocratic government, a pure theocracy, and not a “people’s mandate” or a “government of the people, by the people”. The organization of Jehovah is a kingdom. It is not a limited or constitutional monarchy with restrictions put upon it by a creature or creatures. Jehovah has made Christ Jesus Lord and King, and Christ Jesus answers to no members of his body for his official acts. The ancient nation of Israel organized by Jehovah God was a typical theocracy. All official acts and service as foreshadowed in that typical nation of Israel are now fulfilled in Christ Jesus the King, the great High Priest of Jehovah God. In the official service of The Theocracy the members of “the body of Christ” share in a limited measure as underpriests and as servants called to the Kingdom. For this reason there are no individuals in the organization under Christ Jesus who hold a superior degree or rank of superiority. They “are all one in Christ Jesus” and under Christ Jesus, the Head. (Gal. 3:28) Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are “the Teachers”, and Christ Jesus at the temple of God is in immediate command of the organization invisible and visible. Separate and individual rights do not exist, but every member of the organization must of necessity be in complete subjection to the Head.
At no time in the history of the church of God does the Lord treat the church as a democracy. The idea of a democracy is entirely absent in the writings of the apostles concerning the church. There is no intimation that there is a confederacy or unity existing between the congregations, such as exists amongst the states of America, where each state has its own state’s rights. It must be concluded therefore that the democratic form of government is contrary to the Word of God; also that the religious Hierarchy form of government, so seductive to many religious minds, is clearly a product of the Devil. Such was the case with the priest-ridden Jerusalem of old, as shown by the prophecy of Jeremiah, when the self-constituted elect class, the clergy, ruled contrary to the will of God. Said Jeremiah: “A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land, the prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so and what will ye do in the end thereof?” (Jer 5:30,31) Likewise the “Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority”, and similar “authoritative” governments and religious organizations, are clearly of the Devil, being instituted and carried on for the purpose of turning men away from God and his King Christ Jesus, and bringing men under the control of the representatives of the Devil. Therefore the faithful apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ could not have started an organization which, for its method of operation, is a government by democratic methods or is a rule by “orders” of priests or hierarchy. Jehovah’s rule, both that formerly with his typical people Israel and that now with his anointed witnesses who are a “people for his name”, is purely a Theocratic rule. God’s kingdom or organization is a pure Theocracy, not subject to the whims or rules of any creature.
Smarting under the tyrannical rule by the clergy and Hierarchy, sincere men turned to the democratic government of religious organizations with a hope of a better con
December 1,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
3G7
dition, and that method has for years been followed in religious organizations. But is such in harmony with the Scriptures? Within the period from A.D. 1878 down to 1918, known as “the Elijah time of the church”, elders and deacons in the congregations of Jehovah’s people were selected by a vote of the members of the congregations expressed by the stretching forth of the hand. The intention or purpose of the Christians who adopted and followed this method was, no doubt, good, but that would not make it Scriptural. The authority for such action or voting, it was claimed, was found in Acts 14:23. Note now the words of this text: “And when they [the apostle Paul and his associate Barnabas, and not the congregation] had ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they [Paul and Barnabas, the apostles, and not the company] commended them [the chosen ones] to the Lord, on whom they believed.” In the Jame manner Paul commended the elders of Ephesus to God.—Acts 20: 32.
In the foregoing text at Acts 14:23- the original Greek word is rendered “ordained”. This Greek word cheirotonein means “to extend or stretch forth the hand”. But the question is: Was the stretching forth of the hand the act performed by the apostle? or by the congregation? Manifestly it was the apostles who stretched forth the hand, not as a means or sign of voting, but as an-act of confirming those men chosen for the office of service. The same Greek word cheirotonein is, at 2 Corinthians 8:19, rendered “chosen”. This latter text, however, does not show that the men were chosen by the company or congregation, but by those there upon whom the apostles had previously conferred authority by stretching forth of their hands as in the case at Acts 14:23.
The selection of officers or servants by the democratic method of voting by the congregations ignores the command concerning “the Higher Powers” as stated at Romans 13 :1. Only the Almighty God Jehovah and Christ Jesus constitute “the Higher Powers”, and the apostle Paul was a special representative of such higher powers, and Paul, acting by virtue of the authority conferred upon him, designated others to represent the Higher Powers. Hence the stretching forth of the hand was, Scripturally, an act of confirmation by the apostles. The sixth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles records that the apostles instructed the brethren to look out or nominate certain men to perform certain duties of service, and to bring these before or to the attention of the apostles: “whom they set before the apostles, and when they [the apostles] had prayed, they [the apostles] laid their hands on them.” (Vs. 6) Thus the congregation or company at Jerusalem recognized the Higher Powers acting through the apostles, and the apostles, after praying to the Higher Powers, laid their hands on these men, thus confirming their selection. Clearly, therefore, it was the apostles who stretched forth or put forth their hand. On this, note Acts 8: 17,18; Acts 19 : 5, 6; 1 Timothy 4:14.
(Continued from page 354)
Satisfied is now being mailed to all contributing 5c per copy. Date of its release for general distribution is announced elsewhere.
U41 CALENDAR
The 1941 Calendar is exceptionally beautiful and expressive. Under the yeartext, to wit, “Salvation unto our God . . . and unto
In giving instruction to Timothy as to what course he should take, the apostle Paul said: “Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men’s sins; keep thyself pure.” (1 Tim. 5:22) Mark that this instruction was not given to the congregation, but to Timothy alone, whom Paul had appointed to represent him and perform certain duties in the church. The apostle specifically instructed Timothy as to the required qualifications of the servants to be selected in the organization, and warned Timothy that he must act with caution after due and prayerful investigation and consideration. (See 1 Timothy 3:1-14.) Again, Paul said to Timothy: “Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.” (2 Tim. 1:6) This shows that it was the apostle who confirmed Timothy as his representative. The “laying on of hands” was not an annual ceremony or affair. (Heb. 6:1, 2) When a person was once selected to perform certain duties, there was no need to renew that selection so long as the person appointed anted in faith and faithfully.
The Lord Jesus Christ, as the Head of Jehovah’s organization Zion, has a visible part of his organization on the cart h and which represents the Lord and acts under the direct supervision of the Lord Jesus Christ. Otherwise the work of the Lord in the earth would be without order. Who is that visible representative standing in the place occupied formerly by Timothy and Titus, and which representative is clothed with certain authority to act? When, as the facts and the prophecies show, the Lord Jesus came to the spiritual temple in A.D. 1918, he did not select an individual on earth as his representative and servant, but did select a company of faithful men and women as his servants and formed them into an organization representing his Kingdom interests on earth and made that body his “faithful and wise servant”, to which he committed all his Kingdom interests on the earth, “all his goods.” (Matt. 24:45-47) That “faithful and wise servant” he, Christ Jesus, built up in Zion as a part of his capital organization —Pss 102:16 , 132:12,13.
Jehovah’s anointed remnant of witnesses on earth is, for convenience, designated as “The Society”. That does not mean the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society as a legal corporation, because that corporation is organized to meet certain legal requirements. “The Society” does mean God’s people on the earth at full unity, duly organized and carrying on the work of bearing testimony to Jehovah’s name The letters of the apostle Paul, addressed to Timothy and Titus, applying to the “last days”, where we now are, apply therefore to the Society. The things Paul committed to Timothy and Titus to do, and his special charge to them, are performed by the Society, acting under the direct supervision of the Lord Jesus Christ at the temple.
the Lamb” (Rev. 7:10, A.R.V.), the artist portrays with Scriptural symbolisms and modern details Jehovah’s “strange work” of judgment now fast reaching its climax among all nations. The Calendar date pads mark the special testimony periods for 1941, and also give field service suggestions for the intervening months. A contribution of 25c per copy is asked therefor, or $1.00 for five copies mailed to one address. Companies do weU to send in combination orders through the local company servant.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
DIVINE PROTECTION OF PIONEERS (ENGLAND)
“Pioneer home No. 4, in East London, houses eight pioneers (women). They were all sound asleep when, at 4 a.m. Wednesday morning, September 18, a bomb demolished the house second door from the pioneer home. The pioneers were buried under a blanket of plaster and glass and loose furniture. Not one of them was injured or scratched. With assistance of Air Raid Precaution wardens they were safely extracted from the ruins and took refuge at the home of a man of good-will and his wife around the corner. This Jona-dab and his wife just came into the truth three weeks before. They rendered every assistance, having fed and housed these eight pioneers in their small home for three days. The Jonadab stayed home from his secular work to assist in the care of them and also to rescue their belongings from the debris. Surely the Lord will remember him and his family for this great act of kindness. Picture (enclosed) shows the bomb crater and the demolished house second door from the pioneer home Several people were killed. The whole pioneer house has been cracked and twisted, making it beyond repair.”
AN “AMERICAN” LEGIONNAIRE (MISSOURI)
“As I was making a back-call on a farm tenant, the owner of the farm walked up, an officer of the local American Legion Post. Being acquainted with the man and knowing who he was, I expected a very cool reception, but, on the contrary, he showed interest. He said that, though he did not agree with our views entirely, he did not believe in compulsory flag-saluting and that anyone who read the Watchtower publications would know that we were not Nazis, Fascists or Communists. I showed him the booklet on ‘Fifth Column', which he leadily accepted and offered a contribution for its publication. The subject then came up regarding persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses and the part the American Legion had taken. I asked if he believed the Catholic Hierarchy had influenced them to take such action. He said ‘Yes’, that he believed that in several places it was due to Hierarchy influence and that even here in his local Post there were some Catholic members who would like to use the Legion to further Catholicism. He stated that his grandfather came to this country from England and had warned him years ago of the Hierarchy’s tactics and that there was no doubt in his mind that they would like to get their claws in this country. He ended up by saying he believed in upholding the Constitution of the United States and that as long as we were fearlessly exposing the Hierarchy he was 100-percent for us ”
TESTIMONY OF AN IRISH PIONEER (DUBLIN)
“I read with joy your circular letter of the 13th instant re the grand response to the call for pioneers. Being a pioneer for twelve years without a break, I can testify to the gracious provision Jehovah has made in fulfillment of his word. I have traveled all over Britain and Ireland, France and Switzerland, at Jehovah's expense, seeing the glory of God’s creation, which many of the rich men of the world have not seen. I've never been without a meal or lacked any of the necessaries of Efe. What more could a millionaire want? Yet we have the thing which they lack, the unspeakable joy of the Lord.”
AN OPPORTUNE AIR-RAID AND BLACKOUT
“Eight of Jehovah’s witnesses just managed to squeeze into the last bus home from the Edinburgh convention [September 13-15]. Capacity of bus was 38, and there were three standing. Twenty miles from the convention city the air raid alarm sounded. The bus was stopped, and the lights were put out, leaving us in total darkness. Remembering that one of the instructions we had just received was to take full advantage of all our opportunities, I took my speaking companion down from the rack. There was a general subdued hubbub in the bus, but I addressed them in the darkness and told them I would entertain them with a phonograph. I put on the record ‘Prayer’. It had just run for two minutes when the bus started away. I thought my opportunity had passed, but we had just been driven to an air raid shelter. I had started the phonograph again when the conductor said we must all get out to the shelter I kept the phonograph going, and nobody went to the shelter but the conductor; so by mutual consent we all listened to the record, and the confident tone of the speaker seemed to quiet the nervous tension, and as the record continued there was complete quiet. Right through the second recording. ‘Model Prayer’, there was real attention. When finished, I said if nobody objected I would now let them hear an extract of a talk by Judge Rutherford showing how the Bible foretold the destruction of all totalitarian governments. A voice from the back said, ‘Go ahead ’’ After the talk concluded I invited questions on the subject, telling them that one way to get a knowledge of God’s kingdom was to ask questions. I asked the first one on the difference between a political government and a theocratic government, as had been mentioned in the talk ‘Government and Peace’ ;record No. 2) just given; and, "knowing the answer in the Model Study booklet, I had no difficulty After that the people settled down to asking questions. One man asked about the ‘virgin Mary’, and gave me an opportunity I did not miss A man’s voice wanted to make an issue of the old question. Where did Cain get his wife? The whole bus had a good laugh. I said that they all enjoyed the joke as probably everybody knew the correct answer; but some shouted that I couldn’t answer that. I called the bus to order and said that, seeing that the answer was so simple, I would ask someone else to answer it. The answer was given by a young pioneer, aged 15J years, drawing their attention to what God had said in Genesis, that Adam lived 900 years and begat sons and daughters, and that it was obvious that Cain married one of his sisters I immediately drew to their attention that the voice they just heard was very young and the answer had been given by a child. There followed a great round of applause. After some more questions all the Jehovah’s witnesses sang song No. 65 with good volume and harmony. I advised all present that when Jehovah’s witnesses called at their homes with literature, to treat them kindly and examine the books they presented To show that we were not religionists we led in a short community singing of popular songs. After the ‘All clear’ signal sounded and the lights were put on I was able to see that one of our questioners was an army captain, or possibly someone beside him who was anxious to know why Jehovah’s witnesses were all C O’s. I had explained that we were all fighters, real fighters, and not by any means, at any time, pacifists.”
368
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE b TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S. A.
OWIOXBS
J. F. Rutherford, Prerident___W, E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven «od ds proceeding to the eetabtishmeift of God’s kingdom on uurth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can oome only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to "fill the earth” with a righteous race.
“COURAGE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This special Period which occupies the entire month of December is marked by the term “Courage”, a quality which Jehovah repeatedly exhorted Joshua to exercise in driving out the enemies of the theocracy, for an example to us today. December should shatter all previous records in booklet distribution, due to the almost unbelievable offer of seven of any of the Society’s booklets on a 10c contribution. If possible, every packet of seven should include the latest booklet, Conspiracy Against Democracy. A special wrapper, provided by the Society, helps make the 7-booklet combination all the more attractive. All this requires special advance work. Especially, attend the weekly service meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses, where the details of the work of “Courage” Testimony Period are being discussed. If you are not in touch with such, write this office for references, Keep accurate record of your activities and report same fully at close of December.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 19: “Persecution,”
fl 1-29 inclusive, The Watchtower December 15, 1940.
Week January 26: “Persecution,”
fl 30-55 inclusive, The Watehtoew December 15,1940.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and all people of good wili. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction In the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents In the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Pbice
United States, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, *1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Batik Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to -the napectlve branch offices. Remittances frost countries other than those mentioned -may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Ostkbs
British .................   84	Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian___________ 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African__________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Afrioa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this joemtul Appear in several languages.)
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once eadh year, stating the reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Bubeonbers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. ,A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered at eecond-claee matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of 11 ar ch S, 1879.
1941 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
In the face of an almost impossible year the publication of the 1941 Yearbook of Jehovah's witnesses represents an accomplishment made possible only by Jehovah’s power. Confirmation of this you will find when you read the comprehensive report, as written by the Society’s president, covering the world-wide activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, under continuous enemy fire, during the past service year. Besides this amazing report the Yearbook also offers the president’s comment on the 1941 yeartext and a text with a Watchtower comment thereon for each day of the new year. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thus enhancing the oosts involved; hence a contribution of 59c per copy is stipulated these-for. Organized companies should combine the orders of all mih-viduals therefor and send such through the company servant.
“SATISFIED"
In these days of increasing dissatisfaction with everything of the world, the title of this new booklet, “Satisfied,” strikes the reader with a strong appeal. The contents of this 32-page booklet show how and by whom the hearts desire of all men of good-will shall early be satisfied. The front-cover picture visualizes the setting of the story as related by the author, Judge Rutherford.
■fCtrntimretl vn page 382}
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXI	December. 15, 194Q	No. 24
PERSECUTION
"And you will be objects &f hatred to all the nations en account of my name." —Matt. 24:9, Weymouth; Diaglott.
TEHOVAH’S provision for man to gain life ever-I lasting is by and through Christ Jesus. Such is J God’s gracious gift to obedient men. (Rom. 6: 23) All such persons thus benefiting by the gift must bear the name of Christ Jesus. Those who will inherit the Kingdom with Christ Jesus will live as spirit creatures, and by the Lord these are designated as the “little flock”. (Luke 12:32) Those who will form the “great multitude” and live everlastingly on the earth Jesus speaks of as his “other sheep”, who are brought into his fold. (Rev. 7 : 9-17 ; John 16:10) It necessarily follows that those of both flocks and who are brought into one fold of the Lord Jesus must all bear his name.
2	All persons who are opposed to The Theocracy are under the influence of Jehovah’s great enemy, the Devil, who is the “god of this world” of wickedness. Therefore such persons under the wicked one’s influence are designated in the Scriptures as those “of the world”. There could be nothing in common between those who bear the name of Christ Jesus and those who oppose The Theocratic Government, of which he is King. There is an impassable gulf between those who are opposed to The Theocracy and those who bear the name of the Theocratic King. Every person who boldly declares himself for The Theocrat and his King, Christ Jesus, is a target against which the Devil and his subjects fire their many wicked missiles of persecution.
children persecuted
3	Parents who are devoted to God and Christ are specifically commanded by the Lord to teach their children of and concerning the kingdom of God under Christ, and to he obedient to his laws as the only means of obtaining life everlasting. (Gen. 18:19; Deut. 6: 6, 7 ; 2 Tim. 1: 5; 3:15) Children thus learning that the only way to life is by devotion to and obedience to The Theocbat and his King declare themselves for God and Christ and his kingdom. Such children individually thus choose the side of God and his kingdom. At once such children become the targets for the wicked darts of Satan and those
who are devoted to Satan’s world. Their persecution and suffering there begin.
4	All totalitarian nations are against Jehovah and his kingdom. Such nations compel the children to conform to the rules of the totalitarian or “corporate” state, and that is done without regard to the conscientious belief, teaching or training of the children. Although the United States claims to be a democracy, in which freedom of worship is guaranteed to all, that nation is now rapidly moving into the totalitarian class. Throughout the States children are expelled from school and denied the privileges thereof for the sole reason that such children refuse to disobey Almighty God’s commandment and therefore refuse to bow down to anything that is on earth, because they conscientiously believe that for them to do so is a violation of the express commandment of Almighty God and that the disobedience to such expressed commandment would deprive them of the privilege of life everlasting. (Deut. 5:8,9; 4: 15-19; 1 John 5: 21) Their devotion is to Almighty God and his King. In God they put their trust and hope. Because the parents refuse to compel their children to violate God’s law and their own conscience the children are then taken away from the parents by the state authorities upon the pretext that the parents are unfit to rear the children. The care and custody of these children is then by the state placed in the hands of those who are opposed to the great Theocracy. Necessarily this brings persecution and suffering upon both the parents and the children. Such suffering is for righteousness’ sake and because they bear the name of God and Christ his King.
5	In their distress parents thus suffering are seeking advice, aid and comfort. Their letters addressed to the Society ask, “What can we do, and what can the Society do for us and our children ?” What is here said, it is hoped, will answer to some extent such inquiries and be of some aid and comfort to both parents and children.
• The Society has, up to this time, employed every known legal remedy to safeguard the children and 371
372
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
(NOTE : Because of the perplexity of many of God’s covenant people who are now being put to grief by reason of the expulsion of their children from school, and in order to answer their questions and if possible give them some aid and comfort, it is deemed proper and necessary that The Watchtower should now publish this article. It takes the place in this Watchtower of the Part 3 of “Drama of Vengeance”, which Part 3 will follow in the next issue.)
their parents from such wrongs thus heaped upon them. the Society has put forth its efforts to get these questions squarely before the courts and to have the decisions in harmony with the guarantees of the Federal Constitution and the Constitutions of the many states. Although the Constitution of
the United States guarantees freedom of conscience in belief and worship and service of Almighty God, the highest court in the land has side-stepped this Constitutional guarantee and put the responsibility upon boards of education or school boards to fix and to enforce its own rules according to its own ideas. The conscience of the believer is ignored. While there is no law in the land compelling adults to salute any flag, the school boards have made rules requiring the children, regardless of their conscientious belief, to salute the flag; and, upon remaining silent and refusing to participate in such religious ceremonies, the child is usually expelled from the school and denied the privilege of an education in the public school. Having gone to the very limit in the courts the Society is therefore precluded from taking any further action in behalf of such parents and children in this matter of flag saluting. The Watchtower can give advice and point out why the children and parents thus suffer for righteousness’ sake, and it is hoped that by this means aid and comfort may be given" to those in distress.
COMFORT
7	Jehovah God is “the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort”. (2 Cor. 1: 3, 4) Those persons who have covenanted to do the will of God are within the special care of Almighty God. To all such he says: “Lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him [God], and he shall direct thy paths.” (Prov. 3:5,6) The consecrated must therefore seek knowledge from God’s Word and then follow the advice given in the Word of God, and not depend upon the opinion of man, nor lean to human reasoning that is out of line with the Word of God.
8	Reproaches, persecution and suffering cannot come to the consecrated without the knowledge and permission of Jehovah God. All such have the promise that no sparrow can fall without having God’s notice, and every child of the Lord and every child devoted to God is of far greater importance than sparrows. (Matt. 10:29,31) Why, then, should the children and the parents, both consecrated to do the will of God, be subjected to persecution and suffering at the hands of others because the children and parents obey the commandments of Almighty God?
To appreciate the answer to this question will bring real comfort to everyone who is in a covenant to do God’s will and wholly devoted to The Theocracy and the King thereof.
8 The adversary of Jehovah God is the Devil, who has continuously reproached the name of God since the time of Eden. The challenge of the Devil to Almighty God then was that God could not put men on the earth who would remain faithful and true to Jehovah when subjected to severe persecution. (Job 2: 5) In acknowledging that wicked challenge God said to the Devil: ‘For this cause have I permitted thee to remain [in existence], that I might show thee my power and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.’—Ex. 9: 16, Leeser.
10	Two specific things, then, must come to pass : the name of Jehovah must be declared throughout the earth by his servants, and then he will exercise his supreme power against the Devil. Those persons who have voluntarily taken their stand on the side of God must therefore declare his name throughout the earth. This must be done before God exhibits his supreme power against all the wicked. The chief duty of the covenant people of God, therefore, is to bear testimony or witness to his name.
WITNESSES
11	Every person who maintains his integrity toward Jehovah God must be a witness to the name of Jehovah and his government, The Theocracy. Every such person, therefore, is opposed by the Devil, the adversary of God and The Theocratic Government. and that wicked one sees to it that they are severely persecuted.
12	The hour has come in which every person must now declare himself either for or against Jehovah’s kingdom, because now is the day when all the nations are before the great Judge of Jehovah, Christ Jesus, who is separating the people, putting the approved on one side and those disapproved on the other. This is therefore the time of great crisis of the nations. If a person has taken his stand on the side of The Theocracy and declared himself for Jehovah and Christ, he must from that time forward expect to be persecuted by those who are of the world and who are therefore on the side of the Devil. The persecutors, therefore, compose the great mass of the people, because it is written: ‘The whole world lieth in the wicked one.’ (1 John 5:19, Am. Rev. Ver.; Diaglott) The wicked do not persecute one another who are wicked, but they do persecute those who de
December 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER,
373
clare the name of the righteous One, Jehovah, and his King. Which side of the great controversy between the wicked Satan and the righteous Almighty God have you taken? and on which side do you desire to remain ? If you are on the side of The Theocracy, then know for a certainty you will receive persecution at the hands of those who are against The Theocracy.
PROOF
” All persons who have taken and who declare the name of Jehovah God are witnesses for Jehovah. All witnesses for Jehovah are hated by the Devil and his agents. Take note of the unbroken line of proof: Abel was the first man who declared himself for Almighty God. Abel was persecuted by the Devil and murdered by the Devil’s agent. From the time of Abel to the last of God’s prophets, every one of his witnesses suffered violence at the hands of Satan and his agents. For the information of those who in this day are persecuted God caused a record of the persecution and life of those faithful men to be set out in the Bible at Hebrews the eleventh chapter, and, among other things, it is there recorded: “And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets; who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens.’’—Heb. 11: 32-34.
14	Those faithful men suffered all manner of persecution because they were for God’s kingdom and were diligent at all times to obey his commandments. Further concerning them it is written: “And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth/’—Vss. 36-38.
15	All those faithful men died for the cause of righteousness. They were martyrs or witnesses to the name and kingdom of Almighty God. They were witnesses for Jehovah and consistently declared his name.
16	Then came Jesus, the beloved Son of God. He is the one designated by the Lord Jehovah as “the faithful and true Witness” of Jehovah and whom God sent into the earth for the express purpose of proclaiming the truth of Jehovah’s name and his kingdom. (Rev. 1:5; 3:14; John 18:36,37) From the beginning of his earthly ministry until the end there
of he was reproached and cruelly persecuted by the Devil and his agents. For many centuries prior to the coming of Jesus the Devil had reproached the name of Jehovah, and therefore Jesus said: “For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.”—Ps. 69: 9.
1T Jesus, “the faithful and true Witness,” suffered for righteousness’ sake, and of him it is written: “He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.”—Isa. 53: 3.
18	Why should Jehovah God permit his beloved Son, who did no wrong, to be put to such great suffering? Jesus must prove his integrity toward God, and that under the most severe conditions, and thereby prove the Devil a liar; and thus he did by willingly and obediently suffering the greatest reproaches and indignities, and concerning the Lord Jesus it is written : “Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto, all them that obey him.”—Heb. 5: 8, 9.
18	Mark now how closely the sufferings of the faithful prophets of old are related to the sufferings of Christ Jesus, and which establishes the rule that all who live godly must suffer persecution. (2 Tim. 3:12) Those faithful prophets specifically named at the eleventh chapter of Hebrews constitute a “cloud of witnesses” for Jehovah’s name, and these are held forth as proper examples of all persons who take their stand on the side of Jehovah. For the encouragement and comfort of all who have entered into a covenant to do the will of God these words are recorded, to wit: “Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.”—Heb. 12:1-3.
10	If one declares himself as having taken the side of The Theocracy and then attempts to escape persecution by declining or failing to bear testimony to the name of the great Theocrat and his King, that is further evidence that such a person is not a child of God but that he is on the side of the enemy and designated in the Scriptures as a ‘"bastard”. God cannot be deceived. He knows the secret intent and purpose in the mind of each and every creature.
374
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
11	Today Jehovah’s witnesses are hated by all who are in opposition to the Theocratic Government of righteousness. They are hated because they declare the name of Jehovah God and of his King and kingdom. These facts are exactly in fulfillment of the prophecy uttered by the great Prophet, Christ Jesus. We are at the end of the world, and the words of that prophecy now specifically apply to all who are on the side of God and Christ, to wit: “Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.’’— Matt. 24:9.
32	Persecution of children and their parents by the enemies of The Theocracy is an endeavor to force both children and parents to violate their conscience and thus to fail to prove their integrity toward God, which would lead to their destruction. It is an effort on the part of the Devil and his agents to bring about the destruction of those who have declared themselves for Jehovah. The covenant people of God, therefore, must choose either to remain steadfast on the side of Jehovah and trust in him or to withdraw from their covenant and suffer destruction.—Josh. 24:15; Rom. 1: 31, 32; Heb. 10: 38, 39.
21	The anointed “remnant” are the willing servants of the Lord and joyfully declare the name of Jehovah, of Christ, and of the Kingdom. The Jonadabs, who will form the “great multitude”, have put themselves under the command of the Lord and are therefore his servants, and they join with the “remnant” in declaring the name of Jehovah and his King. Both the remnant and the Jonadabs, therefore, have taken the name of Jehovah and Christ. To all such the words of Jesus now apply, to wit: “Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name’s sake, because they know not him that sent me.”—John 15: 20, 21.
24	Otherwise stated, if a person is on the side of the Lord and firmly remains there and maintains his integrity, he must openly and boldly declare the name of the great Theocrat and his King and must expect to suffer as Christ Jesus suffered. In thus proving his integrity he is certain to be the object of attack by Satan and by all those who are blindly doing the bidding of Satan, and that includes all the totalitarian states and those who are moved by the totalitarian or arbitrary spirit.
23	The present is the day of tribulation upon the world. It is the time when the Devil continuously brings one woe after another woe upon the peoples of earth and when he is desperately fighting to destroy all who are on the side of the great Theocrat. (Rev. 12:12,17) Jesus specifically prophesied con
cerning this day of tribulation upon earth, and this tribulation he declares will reach a climax in “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”, which battle of Armageddon is now very near. Did Jesus have in mind the present-day persecution of parents and their children! Without a doubt he did, because he prophesied furthermore in these words: “And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!” (Matt. 24:19) That prophecy has served as a warning to parents that both they and their children would suffer many woes at the hands of Satan and his agents in this day of tribulation. Probably many persons have overlooked this prophecy of the Lord and, although consecrated to do the will of God, they have expected some special favor to be shown to them and to their children by means of which they would be enabled to escape reproaches and persecution. This was an erroneous expectation.
20	But bear this in mind: that when a child reaches the age of understanding and intelligence, and intelligently takes his stand on the side of Jehovah and his kingdom, that child must prove his integrity toward Jehovah if he gains life everlasting. Therefore the child must be subjected to reproach and persecution and the parents also must likewise be subjected to reproach and persecution, because Satan will see to it that they get it, and the Lord permits it in order to afford an opportunity for such consecrated persons to prove their integrity toward him and thus prove Satan a liar.
27	It is a cruel thing to take a child from the care and custody of its parents and put that child in the custody and control of a godless and religious institution. Such is directly contrary to the fundamental law of the land; but in this day laws are disregarded by those in power. It must be kept in mind that these are perilous times, when freedom has fallen to the earth and worldly governments are ruled by extremely vicious and cruel dictators. Such is true whether that nation be called “a republic” or “a Fascist government”. There is no means provided in this world to escape such cruel treatment unless the courts would sustain the fundamental law of the land, that which is guaranteed by the Constitution. When the courts fail to do this, the citizen has reached the end of his worldly remedy.
28	Even though the child is forcibly and wrongfully taken from the parents because of the faithfulness of that child to keep its agreement to do the will of God, and the child is then placed in the custody of a religious institution, God can cause even that to operate for the good of the child and for the honor of His name. Little children are forceful witnesses to the name of God and to the Kingdom, and their testimony given before their custodians may well result
December 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
375
to the honor of Jehovah’s name and enable the child to prove its integrity toward Jehovah God, resulting in everlasting life to the child and being a bright and shining light exposing the wickedness of this world and making manifest the goodness of Jehovah and the King. (See Daniel 1: 3-21.) There are many instances recorded in the Scriptures of children being witnesses for Jehovah, and in the present day children devoted to God can be more effective witnesses for the name and kingdom, of Jehovah than at any time past. (1 Sam. 3:1-18; Ps. 8: 2; Matt. 21:15,16; 2 Ki. 5:1-4; 2 Chron. 24:1-4; 34:1-4) The parents, therefore, have reason to rejoice with the children that they thus have the opportunity of bearing testimony to the name of God and Christ.
29	The all-important thing to do is to give the testimony to the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. The perfect wisdom of the Lord directs the best way for his covenant people to take. Both the parents and the children must likewise keep in mind that the witnessing to the name of Jehovah and to the King and the Kingdom is the all-important thing and the great obligation laid upon them. When such faithful testimony brings upon the children and the parents reproaches and persecutions, then joyfully bear the same with the determination to remain true and steadfast to your covenant and prove faithful to Jehovah and to his King, and do this under all conditions.
30	Each one must decide as to which side of the controversy he will take. On which side do you desire to be1 On which side would you have your children to be put and remain ? Of course, you will say, My desire for myself and my children is to be always on the side of Jehovah God and Christ his King. To have that desire, therefore, means that the ones receiving it must suffer reproaches and persecutions, by which reproaches and persecutions they advance into the Kingdom. Such reproaches and persecutions are therefore not worthy to be compared with the blessings that shall come to those who maintain their integrity toward God and his kingdom.
31	Everlasting life is the gift of Jehovah God through Christ Jesus, and that gift will be made only to those who maintain their integrity toward Jehovah God and his kingdom when put to the test Everlasting destruction is the result to all persons who are unfaithful to God and his King or who refuse to believe on and obey Jehovah and his King: “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”—John 3: 36.
32	Every one of the remnant and all of the Jona-dabs have chosen the side of Jehovah and his King, and in order to receive the approval of the great King and the blessings of life everlasting, such per
sons, both parents and children, must remain true and faithful to God and to his King. If the parents are separated from the children for a time, that will be only for a short time. If both parents and children remain true to Jehovah and to his King, then within a short time both parents and children will for ever have the blessings of living in peace and joy upon the earth together. The parents, therefore, should teach their children to remain true and faithful to God and to his King.
33	Remember, then, that the words of Jesus specifically apply in this present hour to all who have taken their stand on the side of Jehovah and his King, to wit: “But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.” (Matt. 24:13) These words apply now, beyond any question, and show that one must expect to be persecuted and must endure the same and remain faithful and true to God unto the very end. Be strong and very courageous, therefore, firmly and steadfastly remain on the side of the Lord, and give heed to these words of instruction, to wit: “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.”— Prov. 3: 5, 6.
summary
34	The following, therefore, is a summary of the advice given to parents who inquire concerning what they shall do when their children are persecuted, as hereinbefore stated, to wit: If your child has voluntarily taken his or her stand on the side of Jehovah and his King, Christ Jesus, and conscientiously believes that, by indulging in the formal and religious salute of any flag, such is an act of idolatry committed in defiance and in violation of God’s law, then the child should be permitted to take the course that will prove its faithfulness to Jehovah and his King. If, because of this firm stand for its conscientious belief, the child is expelled from school, then let the parents and the children ask for an opportunity to take advantage of it and give a clear and emphatic testimony before the school board as to why the child takes that position, making it clear that both the children and the parents have the highest respect for the law of the land and for the flag, and the law for which it stands as a symbol, and will fully obey all laws of the land for which the flag stands and all laws that are not in violation of God’s law. Make it clear that the stand of the child is not stubbornness or any disposition to violate rules, but is faithfulness to God and to a covenant made with God to obey his will. At this testimony present the booklet named Loyalty and ask the school board to carefully peruse its pages. Submit other similar publications showing why one in a covenant with God must be faithful and true to the terms of that covenant. Then if the board decides
376
THE WATCHTOWER
against you, you have done your duty in bearing the testimony to the name of God and his kingdom and you can trust in the Lord for the final results.
” In taking this course both parents and children will be bearing testimony to the name of Almighty God and his kingdom, and that is the principal obligation laid upon such now. For many centuries faithful men and women have suffered because of their loyalty to Jehovah and his King. Follow their example and prove your integrity toward God and his King. If further punishment is inflicted upon the children because of their conscientious devotion to Jehovah God and his kingdom, then -the ones inflicting that punishment must bear the responsibility and answer to Almighty God and to his Executioner, Christ Jesus.
86	Let the school board be informed that the child is perfectly willing to stand mute and respectful while the religious ceremony of flag saluting proceeds or is willing to withdraw from the room for the time being; that there is no desire to oppose any rules; but where there is a conflict between the rules made by men and the emphatic rules made by Almighty God, then everyone in a covenant to do God’s will must follow the lead of the faithful apostles of Jesus Christ who said: ^Ve must obey God rather than men.’—Acts 5: 29.
” If the children are denied the benefits of the school for the reasons above assigned there is nothing more that can be done to compel their admission. If the parents are summoned into court to answer the charge that they are not fit persons to care for the children, then ask permission to there give testimony before the court, and show that the parents are devoted to righteousness, that they are endeavoring to obey the injunction of the Bible to bring up their child in the nurture and admonition of God; and then, if the court decides against you, wait on the Lord. The day of deliverance is near at hand, and that in the near future. Jehovah God has promised to avenge his own people, and that he is certain to do. “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them! I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth!” (Luke 18: 7, 8) Do you have such faith in God, that he will avenge those who are devoted to him! Not many will have such faith, as Jesus here indicates. Only those who are subjected to reproaches and persecution can prove that they have such faith. Prove it now by relying on the Lord, and know for a certainty that he will deliver you and your children in his due time and own good way.
88	If legal proceedings are instituted to deprive the parents of the custody of the children and to put them in the custody of some religious institution,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
immediately notify the Society, addressing the Legal Desk, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, New York, and if there is anything possible that can be done we will attempt to do it in your behalf.
88	Bear in mind always that your chief obligation, which is laid upon you by the Lord, is to give a witness to the name of Jehovah and his kingdom. Do so faithfully and trust in the Lord for protection, and his blessings will result. Be of good faith and be very courageous!
40	What is the first or paramount obligation of the parents who are consecrated and in a covenant to do the will of God! Must they first obey every rule of law of the land, even laws which are made and enforced in violation of God’s law, or is their first and paramount obligation to obey the law of Almighty God! Each person must choose for himself, and ii he is really in a covenant to do God’s will he will be guided solely by the law of God; because it is written . “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path."—Ps. 119:105.
41	All the faithful prophets of old chose to obe\ God rather than men, and all therefore willingly suffered death at the hands of men rather than to disobey God’s law. Christ Jesus, the only great man ever on earth, said to Jehovah: T delight to do thy will, 0 my God; thy law is written in my heart.’ (Ps. 40: 8) And again he said: “I came . . . , not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.’’ (John 6:38) Christ Jesus suffered the most ignominious death at the hands of religionists because he was faithful to Jehovah, always being obedient to His will.
42	The apostles of Jesus Christ strictly followed the lead of their Master, refusing to violate their covenant by obeying the laws of men; and when they were haled before the courts because of their obedience to God their reply was: “We ought to obey God rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) They too suffered persecution and martyrdom because of their faithfulness to their covenant and their obedience to God’s law After enduring all manner of persecution the faith ful and inspired apostle wrote: “Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.” (2 Tim. 3:12) That announced rule is unchangeable. Do you as a parent who is in a covenant to do God’s will, and whose children are likewise in a covenant to do his will, expect to receive for yourself and children blessings which God has provided for those who love him, and that without being subjected to persecution and suffering! “God is no respecter of persons” (Acts 10: 34), and makes no rules for any individuals or classes. His rules are unchangeable, and all who receive his approval must be obedient to his law, even though such obedience brings persecution and suffering to them. If perse
December 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
377
cutions and sufferings are conditions precedent to you and your children entering into life everlasting, because such is God’s fixed rule, then do not expect that the pathway that leads to life will be strewn with flowers and conditions of ease. The greatest gift that can come to man is life, and for that gift everyone must willingly meet the conditions which God has provided.
41 One who has made a covenant with Jehovah God, thereby agreeing to do Jehovah’s will and to obey his law, must obey God’s law regardless of what men or nations may think or do about it. You may suffer much severe punishment because of that strict obedience to God’s law. You may be imprisoned and even put to death because of your full devotion and obedience to the law of Jehovah God. But do not fear such punishment. Men can only kill the body, but the Almighty God can destroy even the right to life and all possibility of life, which men cannot do. Those who because of their faithful devotion to God are put to death by men God will grant a full and complete resurrection to life, because he alone is the fountain of life and has the power of salvation and deliverance. (Pss. 36:9; 3:8) Therefore Jesus says to all who have made a covenant to do God’s will: “And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.”—Matt. 10: 28.
44	Democratic nations have for centuries recognized that the law of God is supreme and that no human law is of value that is contrary to God’s law. Recognized legal authorities have repeatedly written upon this matter, and which rule is summed up in the following words by legal writers: “The law of God is binding over all the globe, in all countries, at all times. No human laws are of any validity if contrary to this; and such of them as are valid derive all their force and all their authority, mediately or immediately, from the original.” (Blackstone) “No external authority is to place itself between the finite being and the Infinite.”—Cooley’s Constitutional Limitations.
45	The Supreme Court of the United States, on former occasions, has held that the law of God is supreme. The Constitution of almost every state has so held. But, above all, we know that Jehovah God is supreme and that his law cannot be called in question by men.
40	But now a great change has come because we are at the end of the world, when Satan’s rule shall shortly cease for ever. Now cruel dictators, the agents of Satan, have completely supplanted democracies, because totalitarian rule is the instrument of the Devil. Now the Devil employs such to destroy all who are on the side of Jehovah and his King, because all the totalitarian rulers are against The
Theocracy. Now all the nations are before the great Judge, Christ Jesus, where they are being judged. (Matt. 25:31-46) Now all persons may choose whom they will serve and to whom they will render full obedience. Obey Almighty God and live.
*' Are the parents obligated to teach their children God’s Word of truth? God’s Word must be their guide and answers the question. (Ps. 119:105) To that question, in the scriptures as related to the governing of covenant people of God the emphatic answer is given: “And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart; and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.”—Deut. 6: 5-7.
48 The covenant people of Jehovah dare not turn away from their covenant and practice religion, because such is the product of Satan and the other demons and will result in their destruction: “Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.”—Deut. 11: 16,18,19.
*’ Furthermore God’s Word specifically commands his covenant people: “And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” (Eph. 6:4) “Children, obey your parents in all things; for this is wellpleasing unto the Lord.” (Col. 3: 20) “Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old he will not depart from it.”—Prov. 22: 6.
50 God’s law is the law of life. No one can gain life who willingly violates God’s law. The most blessed heritage the parent can give his child is a knowledge of God’s Word, which shows that child the way to life. The parent who thus does his duty toward his children can fully trust the Lord to do for his children what the parent can not do. If, then, your children are taken away from you by cruel rules enforced against them because of the childrens' faithfulness to God, then rest content in the Lord, knowing full well that he will cause the same to work ultimately to the good of all such faithful ones. May it not be that the Lord will use your child or children to bear witness to his name before others who think themselves of great importance and possessing great authority? May not your children be used to put such
378
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
men to shame or to confound them when the crucial test comes!
“ The child Jesus, when only twelve years of age, sat with the doctors or mighty religious leaders and by his expressed wisdom confounded them and put them to shame. (Luke 2:46-48) Other children have been named in the Bible as serving God with his approval. When the man Jesus was on earth conditions were exactly similar to those of the present time. Then the “wise and prudent” men, wise in their own eyes, were the great religious leaders, but were in fact in darkness as to God’s purposes. Likewise today the great religious leaders are in the dark as to Jehovah’s purposes, while the truth of his purpose is revealed to little children. Now are appropriate the words of the Psalm, which Jesus repeated and which apply both to the ancient and to the present time, to wit: “0 Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy glory above the heavens. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies; that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.” (Ps. 8:1,2) “In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.”—Luke 10: 21.
52 Today the child of ten years or less which has been instructed in the Word of God can readily teach and easily confound the religious “wise men” of this world, because such children are taught according to God’s Word. Have faith that God will see to it that your child, if faithful to him, will be protected from harm and will be used by him to witness to his name and to his kingdom.
“ The religious institutions of the world, which claim to be Christian but which are not, are desig
nated in the prophecies under the symbol “Jerusalem”, which Jerusalem was and is unfaithful to God. The prophet of Jehovah, at God’s command, makes the following record: “For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water, the mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, the captain of fifty, and the honourable man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator. And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them.”—Isa. 3:1-4.
M Today God has taken away from all “Christendom”, which is modern Jerusalem, all true bread and water, that is, all life-giving and life-sustaining food of truth. Instead of these religionists being fed and now being aides to the people, God has given the bread and water of life to little children that stand firm for God and his government, that the children may aid others. If such children continue faithful until and through Armageddon, they shall be forever with the faithful prophets of old, who shall be “princes in all the earth”. (Ps. 45:16; Isa. 32:1) Now your child stands above the mighty ones of earth because God’s favor is to those who love and serve him faithfully and truly.
M If your children should be torn from your parental care and love, bid them as they go to always remain true, faithful and steadfast unto Jehovah God and Christ his King; to continuously pray to God and Christ to give them protection and use them in the service of the great Theocracy and to cause them at all times to do the will of the Almighty God. Then rest in the Lord and wait for his complete deliverance. (Ps. 44:4) That blessed day is near at hand! —Luke 21: 28, Diaglott.
ON "GOING
HEAVEN is the habitation of the great Creator of the universe, Jehovah God, the Most High. He caused to be written in his Word: “The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool.” (Isa. 66:1) That means that heaven is more lofty and exalted than the earth. Jehovah God is the self-existing and immortal One. Concerning him it is written, at 1 Timothy 6:16, that Tie only hath immortality, dwelling in the light, whom no man hath seen, nor ever can see’. The reason is that God is the great spirit Being and man is a human creature. By his prophet Isaiah Jehovah declares that he made the earth for man and He made man for the earth. (Read Isaiah 45:12,18.) God formed man out of the elements of the earth, and hence it is written that man is of the earth, and earthy. An earthly creature, therefore, could not inhabit heaven. If he ever goes to heaven he must be changed from a human to a spirit creature.
TO HEAVEN”
The organism or body of man is flesh, and the life of man is in the blood, according to God’s declaration at Genesis 9: 4 and Leviticus 17:11. “Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God.” It is so stated at 1 Corinthians 15: 50. The doctrine universally taught to the people by so-called “organized Christianity” is that all good men, women and children do at death go to heaven. There being so many branches and divisions of so-called “organized Christianity”, the religious clergy in their desire to keep the people in the proper attitude say to them: ‘It matters not to which one of the churches you belong, just so you belong to one. We are all traveling different roads, but to the same goal, and that is heaven.’ This conclusion of theirs is based upon the false doctrine of the inherent immortality of the human soul and of all souls, including the Devil. The teaching is in substance this: That death does not mean cessation of living existence, but merely the transition from
December 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER
379
one condition of life on earth to a condition of life either in heaven or in hell. So far as “orthodox” religion is concerned, earth is merely a breeding place or an incubator to produce and nourish creatures for one or the other of two places, hell or heaven.
To illustrate: A man of a community who has been successful in business and been a member of some church organization and who has rendered public service to the people and contributed large sums of money to the poor, ends his earthly course in death. At his funeral the clergyman unhesitatingly tells those who hear that this man was a good man and that he is not dead but that he has passed immediately into heaven. The listening people are induced to believe his statement, and many do believe it. The statement of the clergyman, however, is wholly unsupported by the Word of God, and therefore is untrue. If the man just described is classed as a “good man” and, according to the clergy, goes immediately to heaven, then it follows that heaven must be full of like men who have lived and died. However, the man thus described is not “good” within the meaning of the Holy Scriptures.
The Bible shows that Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac and all of God’s prophets received his approval. (Read Hebrews 11:1-39.) They died faithful to God. Concerning King David of Jerusalem, one of these prophets, it is even written that he was a man after God’s own heart. (Acts 13:22) Those men not only did good to the people, but were faithfully devoted to God and to his righteous cause. They all died, but not one of them went to heaven or ever can be in heaven. Some of them died practically three thousand years before Jesus was on earth. According to the teachings of the orthodox clergy, all those men must have gone to heaven, and they cite you for proof to the scene of Jesus’ transfiguration on the mountaintop, when Moses and Elijah appeared, but which Jesus plainly said was but a “vision”. (Matt. 17:9) According to the testimony of Jesus, who spoke with authority, not one of those faithful men went to heaven. You must choose whom you will believe, clergymen or the Bible. In his conversation with the Jewish ruler Nicodemus Jesus said: “No man hath ascended up to heaven.” (John 3:13) This is conclusive proof that not one of them went to heaven. Even though David was a man after God’s own heart, and had God’s approval, yet the inspired apostle Peter, on the day of Pentecost, ten days after the ascension of Jesus to heaven, declared, at Acts 2:34: “David is not ascended into the heavens.”
Jesus named John the Baptist as a prophet than whom none greater had risen of all them that be born of women. God selected John to be the announcer of The Messiah, The Christ, and John was faithful and true to his commission and suffered martyrdom because of his faithfulness to Jehovah God. Concerning John, Jesus said: “He that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he [John].” (Matt. 11:11) The reason that these good and faithful men did not go to heaven and never can be in heaven is plainly set forth in the Bible and enables one to see clearly what is required to take place before one of the human race can be taken to heaven.
The Bible is consistent: every part thereof is in harmony with every other part. The proper understanding of the Bible makes clear the purpose of Jehovah God. Man is a
human creature; and since no human creature can enter heaven, which is the habitation of the spirit creatures, then it follows that a man could not enter heaven without being changed from human to spirit. Jesus spoke with authority and he said to Nicodemus: “Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. . . . Except a man be born of water and of the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the spirit is spirit.” (John 3:3, 5, 6) In other words, in order for a man to go to heaven he must be born of the spirit and become a spirit creature. The faithful men of old, from Abel to John the Baptist, died before the day of Pentecost, when the spirit was poured out upon those devoted to Jehovah God and his kingdom under Christ. Prior to that, “the holy spirit was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified.” —John 7:39; A.R.V.
The statement by the clergy and other orthodox supporters that there are many roads leading to heaven is utterly false and is not supported by any scripture in the Bible. God has pointed out in his Word one way, and just one, by which the man may in due course enter the heavenly realm. This is so important that we cannot afford to accept the opinions of any man upon the question. The Bible alone is the authority upon which we must rely.
When Adam, the first man, was sentenced to death because of turning to religion and breaking the law of God, Jehovah announced then and there His purpose to bring forth from his universal organization (symbolized by “the woman”) a “seed”, which would be used as God’s chief instrument for the establishment of righteousness on earth and to bring believing man back into harmony with Himself. (Gen. 3:15) That seed is Christ Jesus, and those who become the faithful members of “the body of Christ” are by adoption made a part of that seed and all together constitute the heavenly kingdom, “the kingdom of heaven.” The seventh and fourteenth chapters of The Revelation are authority for the statement that there will be only 144,000 and One of that specially favored and elect Kingdom class. The One is Christ Jesus and the 144,000 are his associates and members of “his body”, “the church.” These will be of the Kingdom, while at the same time there will be visible princes on the earth, to wit, the resurrected faithful men of old, who will be the visible human representatives of that invisible Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus the King. All those of the invisible heavenly kingdom “must be born again”, as Jesus told Nicodemus.—Read Revelation 7:1-8; 14:1-4; John 3:7; also Isaiah 32:1; Psalm 45:16.
Jesus became a man that he might bear witness to Jehovah’s name and His Theocratic Government and also that he might be qualified to pay the ransom price and redeem from death all men that believe and obey. It was the will of God that Jesus should take this course, and Jesus gladly and faithfully complied with God’s will. In Philippians, the second chapter, it is recorded that because of his faithfulness to God in the performance of the covenant to do the will of God, Jehovah raised up Jesus out of death and made him the Head of the heavenly kingdom class and appointed him to the position of Jehovah’s Chief Executive Officer for ever. Never before that time was it possible for any man to go to heaven. The man Christ Jesus was the first
380
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
one to be changed from human to a spirit creature. Hence it is written of him, at Colossians 1:18,19: “He is the head of the body, the church; who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell.” Christ Jesus was the first creature ever to get immortality, and this he was given by Jehovah at his resurrection. As Jesus stated: “For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself.” (John 5:26) After his resurrection he said: “I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore.”—Rev. 1:18.
Concerning Jesus and his resurrection and appearing in heaven it is written, at 2 Timothy 1: 9,10: “Grace . . . was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began; but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality [{Douay Version) life and ineorrup-tion] to light through the gospel.” Before that there was no way open for man to have everlasting life, and no possibility for any man ever to have immortality or ever get to heaven. These facts are set forth so plainly in the Scriptures that there is no excuse for any real student of the Bible to be misled concerning the truth thereof.
After Jesus’ resurrection and ascension into heaven the way was opened for man to enter that way to heaven, and then God began to take out from amongst men those who shall be associated with Christ Jesus in the kingdom of heaven. Only those living on earth at that time, or who would live on earth thereafter, could possibly be of the heavenly class, and these must meet the conditions or requirements of God before they could be taken to heaven. To these 144,000 Jesus says: “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” —Luke 12: 32.
A rich ruler came to Jesus and asked him what he should do to inherit eternal life. He told Jesus that he had been obedient to the law of God in every respect. Jesus then said to the ruler: 'What you lack now-is this: You must sell all that you have and give to the poor, and you shall have treasure in heaven; and come and follow me.’ What Jesus really meant was that the affection of this man should cease to be attached to things earthly, and his devotion and allegiance should be to God, because that was the course that Jesus took.—Read the record at Luke 18:18-23.
To his disciples Jesus said: “If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.” (Matt. 16:24, 25) No man would do what Jesus here says unless he believes in God and in Christ as the great Redeemer. These scriptures therefore prove that in order to make even a start to go to heaven a man must first believe that God is the Rewarder of those that diligently seek Him and serve Him, and that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer and Savior of man. Then the man must commit himself to the will of God by agreeing to do God’s will as he learns it. Before he could do these things he must have some faith, and faith comes only by having a knowledge of God’s purposes and then by relying upon God’s Word. To say that a man can believe anything he wants to and reach heaven is worse than error. It is clearly misleading, and destructive of faith.
The individual’s agreement to do God’s will is not made with man, but each one .must make it with the Lord God This agreement is made only by those who have and who exercise faith in God and in Christ. If God is pleased to do so, He makes a covenant with the one thus showing his faith; and this is called a “covenant by sacrifice”. (Ps 50:5), because it is an agreement to do God’s will and it leads to the sacrifice of everything that is earthly, and this particularly includes the right of the man to live on earth. No one can decide to go to heaven without sacrificing for ever his right to live as a human creature.
God then gives his word of promise that such a one shall have the right to live as a spirit creature and, if faithful to his covenant, shall live forever in heaven. In James 1:18 it is written. “Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.” The word “begat” used here means to bring forth and to acknowledge as a son, that is, the Father acknowledges that the one so brought forth is the son of God. The one thus brought forth is just now starting in the heavenly way. If he faithfully performs his part of the covenant he will receive a complete change in the resurrection from human to spirit life. (See 1 Corinthians 15:35-54.) God considers the consecrated, spirit-begotten one a spirit creature from the time he is brought forth, because he must live, if at all, as a spirit creature. Since no human creature can ever be of the heavenly kingdom, it follows, then, that God would not call any human creature to heaven or offer him a place in heaven. All those who are “called” or invited by Jehovah to heaven are called after they become the sons of God, being brought forth, as just stated. All those brought forth receive the call, but the Scriptures show that only a few are chosen for the heavenly kingdom. “Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus.” (Heb. 3:1) Many do not respond to the call. “For many are called, but few are chosen.” (Matt. 22:14) Those who do not respond to the call by seeking the Kingdom and proving themselves faithful and trug witnesses of Jehovah even unto death are never chosen.
Those who do respond to the call for the Kingdom, and who thereafter become unfaithful or lawless, iniquitous, suffer everlasting destruction. At his coming to the temple, “the Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.” (Matt. 13:41,42) Concerning those found to be unfaithful, evil servants, at his coming to the temple, Jesus prophesied: “That evil servant . . . the lord of that servant shall . . . cut him asunder [from His organization], and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”—Matt. 24: 48-51.
Those who respond to the call for the kingdom of heaven and who devote themselves unequivocally and wholly to God and to his Theocratic Government under Christ, and who continue faithful and are found faithful by the great Judge Christ Jesus, are chosen and anointed to perform a special work while on earth, and if this work as a witness of Jehovah is done faithfully to the end, such ones shall be members of the heavenly kingdom. In this connection Jesus
December 15,1940
THE WATCHTOWER.
3S1
said: “Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.” (Matt. 7:21) But how may a man know what is God’s will!
The will of God man learns from the Bible. Among other things it is written that the will of God is that all who have a part in the heavenly kingdom must overcome the world. To his followers Jesus said (John 16:33): “Be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.” He told his disciples that they must do likewise; they must “overcome the world”. “The world" means the organization of peoples of the earth which rule over the earth and which organization is under the supervision and direct influence and control of the invisible overlord, Satan the Devil.-John 12:31; 2 Cor. 4:3,4.
To “overcome the world” means that one must take his stand on the side of Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government under Christ, be obedient to God’s will, and refuse to have any part in the affairs of the world. At James 4: 4 it is written: “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God! whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.” Here “adultery” is used in a symbolic manner, and means the illicit or wrongful co-operation with the rulers of this world by one who professes to be a Christian. It means
that the man who participates in the politics or rulership of this world, whether he be a clergyman or a financier, and who shows he is a friend to the world by upholding its schemes, cannot be pleasing to God, but is classed as God’s enemy. He might be a very moral man and have a good name and reputation amongst his neighbors; but that is not sufficient. Mere morality, chastity and honesty, and doing good deeds to one’s neighbor, are not a passport into heaven, by any means. The real Christian must be all of this and much more. He must be entirely for God and his Theocratic cause, must seek to know God’s will as found in His Word, and then must faithfully do it. This he accomplishes by faith in Christ Jesus as his Redeemer, and in God as his great Benefactor. Therefore it is written concerning the Christian : “This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.” (1 John 5:4) No man will take this course and go on to victory unless he has absolute faith in Jehovah God and demonstrates that faith by works of obedience. No man can have this faith without some knowledge of God’s way and purpose; and God has but one way, not many, and that way is not found in any part of the so-called “organized Christianity” on earth, with its many forms of religion, which is demonism.
’’ACT OF GOD”
REPORTS the New York Daily News, of November 11: “Sunday’s catastrophic earthquake in Rumania achieved more for the cause of British arms than any military action thus far in the war. The ‘act of God’ crippled seriously Rumania’s already inadequate transport, razed bridges which it would have taken an army to destroy, and wrought havoc in oil fields upon which Germany is now almost wholly dependent.”
Courts of law and law writers define an “act of God” as “an inevitable accident against which ordinary care and prudence could not guard; the interruption of the ordinary course of events such as is not to be looked for in advance”. Are such things as the above the result of God’s acts ? No, they are not; and the claim that such thing constitutes the act of God is entirely without Scriptural authority. God is therefore wrongfully charged with such calamities. Such are properly chargeable against Satan the Devil. That Satan has power to produce storms and like unusual things cannot be doubted, and is proved by the Scriptures. (Eph. 2:2; 2 Cor. 4:4; Heb. 2:14; Luke 8: 23-25) But why should Satan bring storms and like disasters upon the people and cause them to charge the responsibility up to God! The reason is that Satan has always tried to induce men to curse Jehovah God. If the people could be made to understand that Jehovah God is responsible for these disasters they would hate rather than love him, and this Satan well knows; hence his course of action. —Job 1: 6-22: 2:1-6.
To appreciate the above we must get the proper understanding of the great question at issue. When Satan rebelled against God he induced man to sin by introducing religion to man and telling man that God is a liar. Satan then defied Jehovah God, saying that no man could be put
on the earth who under great stress would be faithful to God. In order that all creation might in due time be fully convinced that Jehovah is the only true God, from whom blessings come, Jehovah permitted Satan to go his full limit in wickedness. In due time Jehovah will destroy Satan and all his power, and this by means of his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus. For this reason the book of Job is written in the Bible. The record is that Job was a very rich man who served God faithfully amidst great prosperity. Satan declared he could compel Job to curse God, and so he was permitted to try it. Satan brought a great windstorm which destroyed Job’s house and killed all his children and most of his servants. Then Satan brought other calamities upon Job. He afflicted Job with boils and then brought three pious-faced religionists who claimed to be Job’s friends and who by false accusations tormented Job for days. Satan also induced Job’s wife to call upon him to curse God and die. Amidst all this Job remained true and faithful to God, and Satan failed in his efforts.
For the same purpose Satan has caused the people to be taught for many centuries that all the storms, the bugs, and insects, and like things that bring disaster upon the people, come because the people have not contributed to the religious organization and been faithful to it, and hence God is displeased with them and sends calamities. Thereby many persons have been induced to curse God and turn away from him. In due time Jehovah God will bring to pass events that will surely convince all creation that Satan is the wicked deceiver and that Jehovah God is the Giver of life and happiness to those that serve him.
What, then, is the proper explanation of the words “act of God”! The Bible truly says that all the works of Jehovah are perfect, and that all his ways are good and
382
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
just, right and true. (Deut. 32:4) “God is love”; which means he is entirely unselfish. He does punish wickedness and declares he will completely destroy the willfully wicked. This he has done, and will do, for the honor of his name and for the good of those who love righteousness.
Because of Adam’s willing disobedience Jehovah God sentenced him to death, expelled him from Eden and put him to death. Adam’s children, acting with the host of Nephilim or demons under Satan, filled the earth with violence. (Gen. 6: 4, 5, II, Am. Rev. Ver.) God sent a great deluge and destroyed all flesh upon the earth except Noah and his. immediate family, who were faithful to God. That great deluge was an act of God; but before God performed it he gave full notice, so that it could not be said that it was an “inevitable accident against which ordinary care and prudence could not guard”.
Under the rulership of Pharaoh and his associates the Devil-worshiping Egyptians greatly oppressed God’s chosen people, the Israelites. These cried unto Jehovah and He led them out of Egypt by the hand of Moses. When the Egyptian army pursued the Israelites for the purpose of destroying them, God destroyed the Egyptians in the Red sea. That was an act of Ged. It was not, however, an inevitable accident against which the Egyptians could not guard and about which they could not know, because God had previously by Moses given full notice to the Egyptians of his purpose to punish them if his people were further persecuted.
The Jews, once God’s chosen people, turned away from his law and worship and to religion, the snare of the Devil. They were unfaithful to their covenant with Jehovah God and became idolatrous. In due time Jehovah God permitted the armies of Babylon to lay siege to Jerusalem and to cause millions of the religious people to die by the sword, by famine and pestilence, and the city and its temple to be completely destroyed in 606 B.C. That was an act of God, but it was not an inevitable accident that could not be looked for in advance and against which prudent men could not guard themselves. On the contrary, Jehovah God did, over a period of 150 years, send his prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel and others to the Jews and gave them full warning of his purpose to punish them for their wickedness; and in due time he did punish them. Therefore, an “act of God” is not, as defined by worldly wise men, ‘an inevitable accident that cannot be looked for in advance.’
The Scriptures conclusively prove that God never takes advantage of his enemies by bringing upon them a disaster which they could not know of in advance. This is further proof that all such calamities not forewarned of are from Satan, the enemy of God. Satan causes these to be charged against God for the very purpose of turning the people away from Jehovah God.
Now the Scriptures make it dear that another great and mighty act of God shall soon come to pass, which act
was prefigured by the great deluge. The Scriptures describe it as “his strange act”, and add that in the progress thereof the wisdom of the worldly wise men shall perish. “For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act. Now, therefore, be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong.” (Isa. 28:21,22) By the words of his prophets Jeremiah and Ezekiel God declares He will completely wreck “Christendom” and all of Satan’s organization and that there will be so many dead persons as the result of his “strange act” that the living will not be able to Miry them. By his prophet Habakkuk the Lord tells of how he will march his heavenly hosts through the land and desolate it and that he will thresh the nations in his anger and that so terrible will be the spectacle and power of Jehovah God exhibited that the sun and the moon shall stand still, and then all shall know it is the act of God.
That great act of Jehovah God at Armageddon, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty,” will not be as the worldly wise men have defined it: ‘an inevitable accident against which prudent persons cannot guard.’ Particularly since A.D. 1918 Jehovah God has been sending his witnesses throughout the land with his message of warning to “Christendom”, telling of the great and terrible “strange act” that is just ahead. That message of warning he has caused to be printed in millions of books, in many languages, and to date these have been given a distribution of more than 335 millions of copies throughout the earth, not including the hundreds of millions of copies of free tracts and of magazines, such as The Watchtower. God is causing notice now to be served upon the rulers, and particularly upon the religious clergy, in order that their mouths may be for ever estopped from saying that ‘there came upon us an inevitable disaster which we as prudent men could not know about in advance’.
Responsibility is upon Jehovah’s witnesses to now take this message of warning to the people, and then the responsibility is upon those to whom it is brought to give due and proper consideration to that message. Refusing to hear it and destroying the books that contain the message will furnish no excuse to anyone to ever say he did not know that this great “act of God” was about to be performed. Armageddon is rapidly approaching, and Jesus described it as the greatest trouble that ever came upon the world or ever will come. Both Jesus and other prophets of God declared that people of good-will and honest heart who hear and heed the warning and take their stand on the side of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ will be preserved and taken through the trouble. So, be wise and give a hearing ear. May it please you to do so and receive the protection find blessings of Jehovah God.
(Continued from pa$a 37(?)
Satisfied is now being mailed to alt oontributing 5e per copy. Date of its release for general distribution is announced elsewhere.
1941 CALENDAR
The 1941 Calendar is exceptionally beautiful and expressive.
Under the yeartext, to wit, “Salvation unto our God . . . and unto
the Lamb” (Rev. 7:10, A.B.U.), the artist portrays with Scriptural symbolisms and modern details Jehovah’s “strange work” of judgment now fast reaching its climax among all nations. The Calendar date pads mark the special testimony periods foivl941, and also give field service suggestions for the intervening months. A contribution of 25c per copy is asked therefor, or $1.00 for five copies mailed to one address. Companies do well to send in combination orders through the local company servant.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEER SHOWS COPS HOW IT’S DONE
“A police car drove up with two officers and a town official. The officers were very courteous, but not so the town official. One officer asked what we were doing. I replied we were preaching the gospel of Jehovah’s kingdom as commanded, and handed him my identification card, also explaining to him the manner in which our work was carried on from door to door. One officer then said to the town official that if we were selling the books he would bring us in. At my suggestion the officers were invited to come along with us and see just how the work was being done; to which they agreed. The three then left. About half an hour later the two officers returned, with a third one, on a motorcycle; this last officer being the one assigned to accompany me in my work. For more than an hour this officer and I went from house to house and door to door, climbing the stairs. At one place a lady became enraged at the Kingdom message and the officer explained to her that I was within my legal rights in doing this work and there was nothing wrong with it. She quickly calmed down and thanked the officer for his explanation. This officer also was very friendly. When he left he asked for my name and address, stating he would have to make some kind of report that our work was all right. One week later, while returning to my car after making a back-call, an officer (not one of the three mentioned above) stopped his car next to mine and said, ‘You’ve got my mother now,’ and smiled. I said, ‘Yes, how’s that?’ He replied: ‘A few weeks ago she got some pamphlets and read them; now all you can hear is Jehovah'; and with a friendly smile he drove off.”
WARTIME INTEREST, SALOP CO., ENGLAND
“She read the testimony card, and without asking to see the book she dashed inside and brought the shilling and took the book. Said she: ‘We had the book Prophecy some years ago and read it, and when the war broke out my husband and I turned up this book and realized that its contents were true.’ Of course, we had a good talk together and in course of conversation I told her of the lecture recordings, which resulted in an appointment for Sunday a week in the evening. On arrival at call we found twenty persons assembled, mostly young folk. Recordings were put on, and we had question after question. All expressed their appreciation after meeting, and a further appointment was made. We went again last night (Sunday evening). Twenty-one present! More recordings, more questions, very pointed ones, and pointed answers. One asked what we thought of spiritualism, and we pointed out that this was demonism, referring to the Scriptures. There was a chorus of approval to the answer. After meeting, a man from a neighboring city, who had been present, said he was very interested and had we been spiritists he would have walked out. He is very keen and gave us his address and wants to get in touch with the loeal organization where he is living. I have written the company servant at Stoke, so that he can get in touch with him. All expressed their appreciation, and we are arranging for a further meeting. The lady of the house says she would sooner have these meetings in her home than go to church, and they are discerning the difference between religion and Christianity.”
AT THE THEOCRATIC CONVENTION (ENGLAND)
“A smiling young man approached me inside the Free Trade Hall, Manchester, and said, ‘Do you come from Newcastle {Staffs.)?’ I nodded. He asked if I recognized him-, which I did not, although the face was recalled. Then he reminded me that two years ago I called at his house in Birmingham and left a book Enemies. At the time he refused to contribute for the book and was critical and skeptical. Because he seemed to be of good-will and intelligent the book was left with him on this understanding: that if he found the message valuable and true he would post one shilling to my address (which was left with him, but subsequently lost). On reading the book he found, to his great surprise, the answers to his problems, and immediately got in touch with the local friends at the Kingdom Hall For over a year he has been a publisher of Jehovah’s kingdom and is now the territory servant for Birmingham Central Unit. He always regretted losing my name and address and inquired often the identity of the witness who originally called on him. Nobody could tell him, but at Manchester convention he at once recognized me and we both rejoiced together. What a thrill!”
WITNESSING AFTER MOB ACTION {ELSINORE, CALIF.)
“I asked God’s guidance. I parked car in the middle of the block near where mob action occurred. Two of the children watched our whereabouts. I took the third, wife took the fourth child. Soon I saw the police car driving up and down the street. They stopped to examine my car, which has a sign on the back ‘Give Praise to Jehovah’. We carried right on, from house to house. The cop questioned the children, then drove up to me, asked my name, and, ‘Where is your permit?’ ‘I do not need a permit.’ ‘You are selling books; your boy offered to sell me one for 25c.’ I told him we receive contribution for literature. Officer next to driver: ‘Why do you carry carnal weapons ?’ I said, ‘That is a lie!’ Cop: ‘A short time ago when they had a mob here, some of Jehovah’s witnesses carried carnal weapons.’ ‘Did you see them yourself?’ ‘Someone told me so.’ ‘And you believed him? If I tell you the truth, you do not believe me.’ I asked him if he ever read the Bible. ‘I have several Bibles. I believe the Bible, but that crap you are peddling I do not care for. Why don’t you salute the flag and be a good citizen ?’ I referred him to Exodus 20: 3-5 and other scriptures; and, ‘as being a good citizen, I raised eight children and paid over $400 taxes last year. That might be more than you did for the country.’ Cop at wheel: ‘What is your age? [52] Where were you born?’ Tn Rumania.’ ‘Have you your citizenship papers?’ ‘I have my first papers.’ ‘When did you get them?’ ‘A few years ago.’ Officer next to driver again referred to that crap I was peddling. I told him it was not crap; it is announcing Jehovah’s kingdom. ‘Who is Jehovah?’ ‘He is the Most High over all the earth.’ Cop: ‘Rutherford’s name is on that booklet; what is that for?’ I replied: ‘Suppose you were accused of being a thief or “fifth columnist”, you would want to clear yourself of that charge.’ The cop at the wheel looked all through the booklet: ‘Can I have this booklet!’ ‘Yes, if you read it.’ I offered one to eop next to him; he had no use for it. I asked him for his nazae, but he must have been ashamed of it. They drove off, and we went right on, placing 13 bound books Religion and 23 booklets, in four hours.”
383
INDEX FOR 1940
JANUARY 1
Rejoice In His Salvation  3 Enemies ...........................—.. 6
Inheritance .......................   11
Letters ..............................14
Field Experiences......................—IB
“Salvation" Testimony Period ..........   2
Memorial ................................. 2
Yearbook tor 1940 ........................2
Model Study No. 2 .....................16
1040 Calendar..........................16
Watchtower Studies ....................16
MAY 1
Instruction (Part 3) .............  -....131
Kingdom Work	.........................140
First Defeat of	Totalitarianism .........140
Earth Made Fit	to	Live	On .............142
Letters .................................143
Field Experiences .......................144
“Locust Army” Testimony Period ..........130
Theocratic Convention of
Jehovah’s witnesses ................130
Watchtower Studies ......................130
Correction .............................—	130
SEPTEMBER 1
‘Times and Seasons' (Part 3) ......... 259
“They Shall Know”....................260
Boasters ............................260
"The Sign” Near .................... 265
Desire ot All Nations Comes .......... 267
Soon Peace Without End ............... 270
Field Experiences .................... 272
“Challenge" Testimony Period ......... 258
Notice of Annual Meeting.............. 258
Religion ..............................258
Watchtower Studies ................... 25s
JANUARY 15
Reproach of Men ........................10
Theocracy ........................... 22
"Christian Religion" .................26
Letters ............................    30
Field Experiences ....................—32
‘ Salvation" Testimony Period ......... 18
Memorial ...............................18
Yearbook tor 1040 ........-............ 18
Model Study No. 2 ......................31
1040 Calendar ..........................31
Watchtower Studies .....................31
MAY 15
Instruction (Part 4) ...................147
The Meek .............................140
Enemies ..............................153
First Refugee for Theocracy..............156
Mother Religion in May ................  168
Letters ...........................-.....160
Field Experiences .......................160
"Locust Army" Testimony Period ..........146
Theocratic Convention of
Jehovah’s witnesses ................140
Watchtower Studies ......................146
SEPTEMBER 15
Ehud (Part 1)	  275
Escape from Death ..................... 282
Trumpet Seven ..........................284
Field Experiences ..................... 288
"Challenge" Testimony Period .......... 274
Watchtower Studies .................... 274
Religion .............................. 274
Conepiracy Against Democracy ...........274
FEBRUARY 1 Power of the Demons (Parti) ......  —..35
"Christendom” Is	“Babylon” ..........38
When Jehovah Was	Alone ............44
Letters ...............................46
Field Experiences .....................48
"Salvation" Testimony Period ........  34
Memo: ial ...........................  34
Yearbook for 1040 ...................  34
Model Study No. 2 .....................47
1040 Calendar .......................  47
Watchtower Studies	.............  47
FEBRUARY 15
Power of the Demons (Part 2) ...........
"What Is His Name?” ....................
Resolution (Letter) ....................
Field Experiences ......................
Refugees ...............................
Memorial ...............................
"Battle Siege" Testimony Period ........
“Salvation" Testimony Period .............
Yearbook tor 1040 ......................
1040 Calendar ..........................
Watchtower Studies ......................
61 60 03 64 60 60 60 03 03 03
63
MARCH 1
Power of the Demons (Part 3) ......... 67
Further Evidence of Demon Power......73
Will Man Die off the Earth? ...........74
The Pay-off ...........................77
Appreciation and Assurance (Letter) ...70
Field Experiences .....................80
"Battle Siege” Testimony Period .....  66
Refugee*...............................66
Memorial ..............................66
Model Study No. 2 .................... 70
Watchtower Studies ................... 70
MARCH 15
Refuge ................................83
After Death .........................86
“Purgatory” and Hell ................86
Paradise Destroyed and Restored .......02
How Often and When to Celebrate ...... 04
Field Experiences .....................06
"Battle Siege” Testimony Period .......82
Refugee*...............................82
Model Study No. 2 .....................82
Memorial ...........................   05
Watchtower Studies ..................  06
APRIL 1 Instruction (Part 1) ................... 00
Meaning of Names .....................100
Comparison ...........................102
Wrong Attempt to "Fill	the	Elarth" ....108
"Count the Number of the Beast”.........Ill
Field Experiences....................... 112
Theocratic Convention of Jehovah’s witnesses ................ 08
Watchtower Studies ......................08
“Battle Siege” Testimony Period .......  08
APRIL 15 Instruction (Part 2) ...................115
"Leapers" ........................... 120
How Sacred Is Human Life?.............—.123
Is "Christendom” Worse than Sodom?______126
Field Experiences ..................... 128
Theocratic Convention of Jehovah's witnesses ________________114
Watchtower Studies .............—____—___114
“Battle Siege” Testimony Period --------114
JUNE 1
Instruction (Part 6) ...................163
Ammonites .........................   164
Ethiopians ...........................168
Assyria ..............................108
Modern Nineveh .......................160
Convention .....-.......................172
Field Experiences ......................176
“Locust Army” Testimony Period .........162
Vacation ...............................162
False Reports ........................162
Watchtower Studies ...................102
JUNE 15
Instruction (Part 6) ...................170
Oppressors .......................... 181
Correction Refused ...................182
Acts of Warning ......................186
The Priest at Armageddon ...............180
Field Experiences ......................102
“Locust Army" Testimony Period .........178
Watchtower Studies .....................178
Vacation ...............................178
Theocratic Convention of Jehovah’s witnesses ................178
JULY 1 Instruction (Part 7) .....................196
Escape from "Christendom’s"	Conflagration 203
Activity ................................ 206
Letters ................................. 207
Field Experiences ........................208
"Religion's Doom” Testimony	Period .194
Watchtower Studies .......................104
Vacation .................................104
Theocratic Convention of Jehovah's witnesses .................194
JULY 15
Instruction (Part 8) .....................211
Temple Service ........................217
Be Instructed .........................218
Was the Hunter “Gypped"? .................210
Dead Witnesses Revived ...................221
Field Experiences ........................224
“Religion’s Doom” Testimony Period .......210
Watchtower Studies .......................210
Vacation .................................210
Theocratic Convention of Jehovah's witnesses ................ 210
AUGUST 1
'Times and Seasons’ (Part	1) ..........227
Fixed Time ...........................228
“Jacob’s Trouble" ....................220
“That Day" ...........................231
World-Famine Relief .....................235
“Time No Longer” ........................238
Field Experiences .......................240
“Religion's Doom" Testimony	Period ......226
Notice of Annual Meeting ................226
Use Renewal Subscription Blank ..........226
Watchtower Studies r ................... 226
AUGUST 15
Times and Seasons’ (Part 2) ...........  243
When? ..............................  243
Sign ...............................  246
Delusion .............................248
How Messiah Comes ..........—...........—	251
Bitterness Against Religion .............264
Field Experiences .......................266
“Religion’s Doom” Testimony Period.......242
Notice of Annual Meeting ................242
Religion ...................-............242
Watchtower Studies ......................242
OCTOBER 1
Ehud (Part 2) .........................201
The Prophet of Today...................208
Theocratic Nation Born................ 301
Field Experiences..................... 304
"Challenge” Testimony Period.......... 290
Watchtower Studies ....................200
Opportunities of Service...............290
The Ueeeenger ...................... -	290
Conspiracy Against Democracy ......... 303
OCTOBER 15
Ehud (Part 3) .........................307
The Rod upon the Nations ..............313
End of War in Heaven ................. 310
Letters .............................. 319
Field Experiences .................... 320
“Challenge" Testimony Period.......... 300
Watchtower Studies ................... 306
Opportunities of Service ............. 3oo
The1 Messenger ....................... 306
Conspiracy Against Democracy...........319
Religion ............................. 319
NOVEMBER 1
Salvation .............................323
What to Do.......................... 331
"Christendom’s" Malady Fatal.......... 333
Field Experiences . .	.	330
“Courage” Testimony Period.............322
1941 Calendar ............. . 322
Opportunities of Service .	.	322
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses .	322
The Messenger ............. .	335
Conspiracy Againtt Democracy...........335
Watchtower Studies ....................335
NOVEMBER 15
Drama of Vengeance (Part 1)	..	339
I'iajers ......................... ..341
After 1260 Days ..	. 347
Failure of Commercialism .	350
Jehovah’s Loving-kindness (Letter)	352
Field Experiences ..	352
"Courage’’ Testimony Period....	333
Watchtower Studies ................... 338
Satisfied............................. 338
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses	338
1941 Calendar ...................... .	• 351
DECEMBER 1
Drama of Vengeance (Part 2)	...	. 355
Prepared .................... ...	357
Commerce Done For ...	.... 363
Theocratic Organisation in Operation	366
Field Experiences.......................308
“Courage" Testimony Period .............354
Watchtower Studies . ..’ .. ..	.... 354
1941 Yearbook of Jehovah’e witneeeee .... 354
Satisfied............................ .	354
1941 Calendar ......................... 307
DECEMBER 15
Persecution ......................... 371
Children Persecuted ............... 371
Comfort ........................... 372
Witnesses ......................... 372
Proof ...........................   373
Summary ........................... 375
On "Going to Heaven” .................378
“Act of God" ........................ 381
Field Experiences ....................383
Index for 1040	  384
Watchtower Studies	  370
"Courage" Testimony Period .......... 370
384