“Young People Ask”​—A Series With Bible Answers
THE researchers took 18 years to prove it. Namely: Today’s young people have much more anxiety and unresolved fears than did their counterparts 20 years ago.
Between 1962 and 1980, questionnaires sent to thousands of teenagers in four countries were returned and analyzed. The results? Nearly 30 percent of today’s youth admitted that they had many fears that they could not understand. (Only 20 percent of those polled during the 1960’s felt that way.) In their book The Adolescent​—A Psychological Self-Portrait (1981) these researchers, Offer, Ostrov and Howard, concluded: “Teenagers in the 1960s had less fear of being overwhelmed. . . . [They] reported higher self-confidence than those of the 1970s.”
But no wonder young people today have apprehensions and serious questions! They are barraged with conflicting messages from their peers, parents, teachers and society in general about such concerns as life goals, sex, friendship, values, religion and the like. Many feel as did 13-year-old Judy who admitted: “I can feel it inside me, just disagreeing a lot. I state my opinions and somebody will come up with theirs and change mine completely. I wish I could keep hold of mine for a little bit longer. I’m not very sure of myself.”
Helpful Feature in Awake!
The publishers of Awake! realized the need to provide specific material that would deal in depth with the special problems of today’s youth. Starting in January 1982 every issue except one dealing with youth has had the feature Young People Ask. . . . It has been designed to provide truthful, practical answers.
“The series is evidence of your continued interest in the plight of young people today,” wrote one appreciative reader. This concern reflects the regard true Christianity has for young people. Jesus, despite negative comments from others, appreciated the religious efforts of youths and made time to encourage them. (Matthew 19:13-15; 21:15, 16) The Bible has much specific advice for young people. (See Proverbs chapters 1-7; Ephesians 6:1-3.) Certainly these Bible writers were not trying to take over the responsibilities of the parents, but they saw the need to help children to cope with “the desires incidental to youth.”​—2 Timothy 2:20-22.
“A Depth of Understanding”
“I hope and pray that these articles never end,” wrote a young woman, Daphne. “They show a depth of understanding we need in dealing with our sometimes confusing and disturbing emotions.” Another letter from a young reader agreed: “I share many of the feelings in those articles.”
To achieve this understanding the following Bible caution was heeded: “To answer a question before you have heard it out is both stupid and insulting.” (Proverbs 18:13, The New English Bible) Consequently, numerous interviews have been conducted with young people in various countries to “hear out” their feelings. Also, research studies involving thousands of young people have been considered. Real effort has been made to understand the problems, apprehensions and thinking of today’s youth.
This feature tries to imitate Jehovah God who stated: “I will give [you] advice with my eye upon you.” (Psalm 32:8) By careful observation God offers wise guidance suited to the person’s individual case. He understands the causes. Likewise, upon hearing the report from the house of Chloe, the apostle Paul was able to give specific counsel that addressed the problems peculiar to that first-century Corinthian congregation. (1 Corinthians 1:11) So, too, concerning this new series, a youth in Mexico wrote: “The articles deal with reality. They give not only the cause but also the remedy.” But what remedy is stressed?
Bible Answers
“How will a young man [or woman] cleanse his [or her] path?” asked the psalmist. (Ps 119:9) “By keeping on guard according to your [God’s] word.” So the answers given are not a collection of human ideas or experiences. The feature stresses the eternal truths in the Bible.
Scriptures are marshaled that come to grips with the problems. Object lessons from the Bible are tied in with the perplexities of modern youth. Experiences and comments from young people are used to illustrate the value of such lofty principles and show how some are applying them. “This sound advice is practical and in harmony with the Bible,” wrote one young reader.
Does It Help?
A number of letters and reports highlight the value of the series. An 18-year-old, Cristina, writes: “Though this feature is new, already it has helped me extremely in making personal decisions.”
“The articles on making friends helped me the most,” stated Georgia. “I learned not to be so sensitive and to overlook the little irritating things others might do.” Adding to this a young man wrote: “Sometimes I’m afraid to show my true feelings, but I liked how you pointed to Jesus as a model to follow. The article showed that he even cried in front of others.”
“I used to date regularly just because I thought it was the thing to do,” wrote a young man, Paul. “I thought nothing of marriage. Then I read your Awake! magazine. It changed my values for the better. I have stopped dating until I am ready to marry.” Josephine, a youth in New Jersey, adds: “I could see the logical and clear truth in the article on dating. I am able to understand some of my own feelings more clearly.”
A Valuable Tool for All
It is hoped that parents especially will use this series to increase the dialogue with their teenage children. These articles bring up some delicate subjects that parents may not know just how to discuss with their children. A practical format is provided for a balanced conversation. Many parents already are using each issue as a part of a weekly family Bible discussion. A mother in the U.S. wrote: “As a parent of three teenagers you can well imagine how grateful I am for the articles. I wish I had the words to tell you how much I value the article ‘Love or Infatuation.’ It helped our 18-year-old to make the wise decision to marry ‘only in the Lord.’” However, much effort by parents is still needed. Sixteen-year-old Roxana said of the article “Getting Ahead​—Is That All There Is to Life?”: “The information, along with many talks with my parents, helped me make a wise decision as to my choice of a job.”
The feature’s value is not limited to teenagers or those in their twenties. “The recent article on ‘Love and Infatuation’ opened my eyes although I am 61 years old,” wrote one woman in Australia. Since the articles probe below the surface of a subject, they provide specific insight that can be very helpful. They are intended to help you to understand yourself and others better, as well as to see the wisdom of Bible counsel.
BE SURE TO READ THEM! They will help you to deal with your unique pressures. They have a solid Scriptural basis. So if you are a young person make the effort to read each one. Because of their Bible basis, see for yourself that they will help give “to a young man [or woman] knowledge and thinking ability.”​—Proverbs 1:4.
[Box on page 23]
Some Future Topics
● How Can I Get a Job?
● Do My Clothes Reveal the Real Me?
● How Can I Build My Self-Respect?
● Why Don’t My Parents Understand Me?
● How Do I Cope With Disappointment?
● What Is a Balanced View of Sports?
● How Wise Are Teenage Marriages?
● Can Sexual Morality Be Practiced?
● Is Prayer That Important?
● How Can I Get Along With Others?
● Physical Appearance​—How Important?
● Singleness​—A Curse or a Blessing?

