From Our Readers
Eating Disorders  How I wish that my family years ago could have read “Helping Those With Eating Disorders.” (February 22, 1992) I have been struggling with anorexia for 35 years, since age 9. The article accurately and concisely discussed the most important issues. Indeed, you stated things that my loved ones have come to understand only after years of counseling! I know the article will help many concerned friends and families of sufferers.
C. S., United States
Unborn Children  I have enjoyed your science and nature articles for many years now. I found the article “Learning Begins in the Womb” of particular interest. (January 22, 1992) It is truly amazing how wonderful and complex the brain is. And the photo of the eight-​week-​old embryo was breathtakingly beautiful. The article made my heart swell with appreciation at how wonderfully I am made!
J. J., United States
Motorcycles  In your article “Motorcycles​—How Dangerous Are They?” (April 8, 1992), you advise riders to apply reflective tape to their helmets. This advice is a potential killer if the helmet is made of polycarbonate or similar materials, as many are. Adhesives and paint attack this material, causing it to become brittle. In an accident, the helmet could just shatter, affording no protection to the rider. Better advice would be to purchase a helmet that is already brightly colored.
S. J. H., England
We appreciate this safety tip. It would be wise to read the manufacturer’s instructions before making any such alterations.​—ED.
I appreciated the article. The father of my three children was recently killed when a part broke on his motorcycle, spilling oil onto the rear tire. He was in a coma for three weeks following extensive brain surgery. Needless to say, I will remember this article for future reference should my son ever desire to ride a motorcycle.
M. G., United States
Cockroaches  I have been a reader of your magazine for eight years, and I would like to commend you for the variety of articles you publish related to domestic chores. I refer in particular to the article “The Enduring Cockroach.” (January 22, 1992) Besides being very well written, it also teaches us how to get rid of this bug. Following the instructions, I will soon free my home of their annoying visits.
A. F. A. A., Brazil
Electronic Eavesdropping  I read with interest the article “Is Eavesdropping Here to Stay?” (December 8, 1991) I found it disturbing, though, to learn of the abuse of scanner radios. It really is disgusting to think that people would listen in on other people’s conversations. I am an amateur radio operator and often use a scanner to listen to transmissions from ships and small boats. Someone with a scanner could be a lifesaver to someone at sea calling for help. So please explain to your readers that not all people who own scanners are eavesdroppers.
R. P., England
Crossword Puzzle  As your issue of February 8, 1992, contained the first crossword puzzle you have published in quite some time, I would like to explain why the puzzles are so worthwhile. My son suffers from a disorder that makes reading and writing difficult. However, he is able to work your crossword puzzles. This gives him a feeling of achievement and has helped him to learn the order of the books of the Bible. As you can see, your hard work is of much benefit.
C. G., Germany

