VOL. XXII. AUGUST 1, 1901. No. 15. 
CONTENTS. 



Balancing Earthly Good with Divine 
Favor 243 

"My Lips Shall Praise Thee" 245 

God's Promises to Abraham 

Reiterated 247 

Abraham's Age on Entering Canaan 250 

Questions on the Resurrection Hope 250 

What is Guaranteed by the Ransom? 250 

The Fervent Prayer of Abraham 253 

Saved So as by Fire 255 

Public Ministries of the Truth 256 

Items:— Those Prophetic Charts, Etc 242 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WHEN ordering tracts mention quantity. This applies also 
to the orders for Volunteer matter. Say how many more you 
will need with each order, and give full address to which you 
wish them sent;— separate from the letter. 

R2853 : page 242 

THE MESSENGER OF THE COVENANT. 



Our issue of July 15 contained an article on this subject 
which should be put into the hands of all of "Rev." John 
Alex. Dowie's followers, who give evidence of sincerity;— peradventure 
they might be recovered out of one of Satan's snares. 
Remember the words of the Apostle.— James 5:20. 

We printed an extra edition of that issue in order to give 
you this opportunity for service. Order free, as many as you 
will promise to use judiciously. Or send us the addresses and 
we will mail them direct. 

page 242 

THOSE PROPHETIC CHARTS. 



We now have a good supply of the Prophetic Charts— very 
neat, 35 inches long, with hangers. Price 25 cents, including 
postage. One of these and one of the "Silent Sermons" should 
be on the walls of every WATCH TOWER reader's home. 

We have a number of these charts very slightly soiled 
which we will send free to any on our list who cannot afford to 
purchase, and who will send a postal card request. We will 
include one of "Silent Sermons," and prepay the postage, 
which will be 10 cents each. Order at once. We are anxious 
that all should have them. 



R2850 : page 243 
BALANCING EARTHLY GOOD WITH DIVINE FAVOR. 



"Because thy loving kindness is better than 
life, my lips shall praise thee."— Psa. 63:3. 

LOVING -KINDNESS, in our text, has the signification 
of favor. The Prophet, in speaking, 
represents the Church— the Christ, Head and 
body. The words are applicable to no others. None 
but the saints esteem divine favor more precious, 
more valuable, than the present life— than earthly 
good things. If we ask the world to balance this 
matter, to weigh on one side of the balances earthly 
interests, earthly pleasures, family ties, social position, 
pride, worldly aspirations, and to put on the other 
side of the balance divine favor, the reply would be 
that the earthly good things have all the weight; and 
that divine favor has none, for the worldly know little 
or nothing respecting divine favor. They have indeed 
heard that some people believe in a God, believe 
in his providential care, believe in his love, believe in 



a future life, etc., but as for themselves they conclude 
that such things may be, while the earthly things are 
certainties; and they would not think for a moment of 
exchanging present certainties for unknown and intangible 
matters, called divine favor. 

R2851 : page 243 

If we even ask the average nominal Christian to 
weigh this matter, and tell us if willing to exchange, 
—putting in the one side of the balance all the good 
things, hopes, ambitions, family ties, social position, 
churchianity, petty office and esteem of men, and putting 
into the other side of the scale God's favor,— he 
will hesitate and eventually decide that he will do 
nothing of the kind. The reason with many is that 
they do not appreciate divine favor. They have heard 
and believed certain things respecting the Almighty, 
some of them true and some of them false; and the 
misrepresentations of God's character have so neutralized 
and offset and made non-effective the truths 
which they have learned, that they lack confidence in 
the unseen: with such, worldly interests outweigh appreciation 
of divine favor ten to one. The truths they 
learned were respecting God's love and his gracious 
provision for his fallen creatures through the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; and that he 
willeth not the death of him that dieth, but would 
that all should turn unto him and live, in the enjoyment 
of endless blessing. 

These truths are found in the sure Word of God; 
the untruths which they have learned came from a 
human source, or rather more remotely, from the great 
Adversary himself, Satan, "the god of this world," 
as the Apostle calls him. As he tells us, "The god 
of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not"— blinded them to the real character and 
plan of Jehovah, and deluded them into thinking of 
him most unkindly, most disreputably, we might almost 
say most blasphemously. He has blinded them 
into thinking that the Almighty, while declaring that 
he has all power, has declared also that he will exercise 
this power beneficially only over a mere handful 
of earth's teeming millions— that he will take out this 
sample to show his power and what he could have 
done for all if he had wanted to, and exercise his power in 
hurling the great mass of his creation into eternal 
torment;— that he made provision to this end before 
the creation of mankind,— prepared a great and awful 
place of torture,— prepared the fuel for eternity,— and 
prepared the devils to see that nothing was lacking in 
the worst form of torture. 

Is it any wonder that those who have thus received 
human traditions instead of the Word of God, 
those who believe such terrible things respecting the 



R2851 : page 244 

Creator and his plans, things which outrank in cruelty 
the doctrines of the heathen, received from the same 
Satanic source, should doubt the love of such a God? 
It is no wonder that such find themselves unable to 
reconcile such human theories with the plain Scriptural 
declaration that God is love, very pitiful, very 
merciful, and that his mercy endureth forever; and 
that he doth not willingly afflict the children of men. 
The two thoughts are in violent conflict; the one represents 
God as loving and kind; the other represents 
him as a demon of the worst imaginable character; 
and it is no wonder that those who have in their minds 
this mixture of human traditions which make void the 
Word of God, are unable to see God from the right 
standpoint implied in our text— unable to see his loving 
kindness, so great, so good, so beneficent, toward 
all of his creatures,— unable to reconcile such human 
theory with the Scriptural declaration, that Jesus 
Christ by the grace of God tasted death for every 
man, and that this grace of God in Christ is yet to be 
testified in due time to every creature, and that thus 
all are eventually to come to a knowledge of the truth, 
and thus all eventually to have an opportunity for life 
everlasting.— 1 Tim. 2:4. 

Is it any wonder that those who entertain so 
mixed a conception of the Almighty's character, when 
they attempt to balance the loving favor of God with 
earthly good things, find that the scale weighs down 
toward the earthly things, because, altho they appreciate 
some features of the divine character, these are 
practically neutralized by such misrepresentations of 
the Adversary through false theories. Well does the 
Apostle explain the object of this blindness on the 
part of Satan, saying, "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the 
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image 
of God, should shine unto them." (2 Cor. 4:4.) 
Ah yes, here it is! The goodness of God, the loving 
kindness of God, God's favor, does not shine into the 
hearts of many, and while it does shine a little into 
some hearts, thick darkness of error hinders their 
hearts from receiving the full benefit of the light, and 
its blessing and joy. Such as are in this position find 
it impossible to love the Lord with all their heart, 
with all their mind, with all their being, with all their 
strength; because from all that they know of him, 
through this false representation of his character, he 
is not worthy of much love. The fear of the Lord 
might operate upon them under such circumstances, 
and might be balanced against the world and its 
good things, but his "loving kindness" has comparatively 
little weight in their lives. 

Are we to suppose, then, that there were no saints 
in the past, because in the past these false ideas of 



God held full sway amongst his professed children? 
Are we to suppose that Luther, Melanchthon, Zwingli, 
Calvin, Knox, the Wesleys and others, were not saints, 
and not joint-inheritors with Christ in the Kingdom? 
No; on the contrary, we presume that these were 
saints, and that they laid down their lives in the Lord's 
service; and we merely mention these prominent 
names as illustrations, and not by way of saying that 
they were the only saints of their times, and not disputing 
either that there were saints before them, all 
through the dark ages, as well as in the primitive 
Church. 

What we do claim, however, is that the mixed 
theology, which represents God as half love and half 
devil, never produced the sanctifying effect which we 
see in the lives of the class we have mentioned. We 
hold that all those who reached the point of saintship 
described in our text, and who were able to balance 
the present life and its earthly good things with the 
loving favor of God, and to prefer God's favor rather 
than life, so that they were willing to sacrifice earthly 
interests, that they might have the divine favor, both 
as respects the life which now is, and that which is to 
come,— these never reached this position through their 
mixed theology, but attained this grand position only 
in proportion as they were able to forget or ignore the 
human and Satanic blasphemies respecting the divine 
character, and to think of God from the standpoint of 
pure justice and love. Some of them have told us in 
their writings how terribly this devil-inspired theology 
weighed upon them; how they found the theory 
so antagonistic to all their conceptions of divine justice, 
mercy and love, that the only thing they could 
do under the circumstances was to shut the eyes of 
their minds to the nightmare of hell and devils and 
torments, and to say to the Lord, O Lord, I cannot 
understand this, but I accept thee as a very God of 
love and of justice, and I know that when I shall see 
thee as thou art, and when I shall see all the works of 
thy great and wonderful plan, then I shall realize, as 
I cannot now realize, wherein divine justice and love 
are compatible with this awful theory of eternal torment 
for all except the little flock, the elect. 

Thus by shutting their eyes to the error, and 
opening their eyes by faith to the real character of 
God, substantiated by so many declarations of his 
Word, the class we refer to, through all the darkness 
of the dark ages, was indeed enabled to love God supremely, 
so that they counted not their lives dear unto 
them, that they might have his favor; they were 
willing to lay down life and earthly advantages and 
hopes and favors, that they might have the divine 
favor now and everlastingly. And if God's people in 
the past were enabled to triumph in spite of blindness, 

R2851 : page 245 



what shall we say respecting our position today, now 
that the due time has come for this vail that was 
spread over all nations to be taken away, so that the 
true light of the knowledge of God, shining in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord, should shine into our 
hearts and give us to see through his Word, and freed 
from human tradition and Satanic misrepresentation, 
the justice and the loving kindness of our God! 

How shall we today balance this question of 
earthly life and its advantages and privileges and 
hopes and aims with the favor of God? Well, it will 
be a test to us, as it has been a test all through the 
ages. Those who are merely glad to find out that there 
is no eternal torment, and whose hearts are not 
touched with the "loving kindness" of God, will go 
on in the world, rejoicing that they have been delivered 
from a bondage of error, but not returning to 
give glory to God and to offer themselves in his service. 
And these, alas! are the majority; like the ten 
lepers who were cleansed by our Lord, of whom only 
one returned to give thanks and to become a follower 
of Jesus. Thus the test goes on today, as ever; for 
the Lord is now seeking only the Kingdom class, only 
the little flock, and he wishes to have in it only such 
as love him supremely— only such as, having tasted 
that the Lord is gracious, desire to and do feast upon 
his favor, enjoying it, relishing it, appreciating it far 
beyond any earthly pleasure, any earthly hope, any 
earthly ambition, any earthly love. 

This class today and at all times has been the 
same,— of one spirit with their Head. The Apostle 
Paul voices their sentiments; speaking on this very 
subject, and weighing the earthly life with the divine 
favor, he says: "What things were gain to me, those 
I counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, I count all 
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of 
Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the 
loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I 
may win Christ and be found in him. ...That I 
may know him and the power of his resurrection, and 

R2852 : page 245 

the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable 

unto his death; if by any means I might attain to 

the resurrection of the dead." (Phil. 3:7-1 1.) The 

Apostle's sentiment is that of all the saints; it is that 

of all who will be accounted "overcomers," and who 

will be accounted inheritors of the promise of joint-heirship 

with Jesus. Nothing short of this will do. 

We must appreciate the loving favor of God as better 

than earthly life, else we are not worthy of him and 

not of the kind he is seeking. And it is with all who 

have the Lord's spirit just as it was with the Apostle; 

the moment they begin to weigh and contrast fellowship 



with God and the eternal hopes associated therewith, 
in contrast with earthly loves and family ties 
and earthly ambitions and pleasures, the latter all 
seem to be quite insignificant in comparison, dross as 
compared to pure gold. And from this standpoint 
they gladly renounce all, giving up life itself for the 
favor of God. 

ATTAINING CHRISTIAN MATURITY. 



But this full development is not at the beginning 
of the Christian experience with us, nor was it at the beginning 
of Paul's experience. It is development attained 
by growth. At the very beginning, however, it was 
necessary, before either Paul or we could be accepted 
at all of the Lord, as begotten of the new nature, that 
we should first balance the loving favor of God with 
the earthly good things, and the balance must be 
settled on the side of divine favor, so that we would 
give up the other,— earthly life, earthly hopes, earthly 
aims, earthly pleasures, consecrating them to sacrifice, 
in such measure as may be necessary in order to maintain 
divine favor and blessing. From the time the 
scale was thus turned to the Lord's side, and our 
hearts were consecrated to him, earthly things began to 
lose their weight and to lose their value, to lose appreciation 
in our eyes, as our eyes began to open the 
wider to the heavenly things; and the latter became 
more and more weighty with us, more and more real, 
until we could see with the eye of faith him who is 
invisible to the natural sight, and the crown of glory, 
and the exceeding great and precious things which 
God has in reservation for them that love him, and be 
more and more strengthened thereby. And so with 
some it may have been after weeks or months or years 
that they reached the position attained by the Apostle 
when he wrote, as above, that all earthly things were 
henceforth but as loss and dross when weighed in 
comparison with Christ and God's loving kindness or 
favor toward us in him. 

This loving favor of God, so much appreciated 
by the saints that they consecrate their earthly all to 
obtain it, is not merely a favor as respects future 
prospects and hopes— not merely as respects the Kingdom 
to come and the glory and the honor and immortality 
then to be granted to such as are in divine favor, 
but it extends to the present life. Gradually we come 
to appreciate fellowship and communion with the 
Father to such a degree as to produce misery of soul 
if this communion is interrupted. And this sentiment 
is beautifully expressed in the hymn which we 
sometimes sing:— 

"Sun of my soul, my Father dear, 
I know no night when thou art near; 



O let no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 
The true child of God will be in such close fellowship 
with the Father, and with the spirit of truth 

R2852 : page 246 

and righteousness and love, that anything which 
would interrupt or hinder this fellowship would be 
esteemed a calamity, however sweet or precious it 
might be to the natural man. The new creature is 
willing rather to cut it off, if it were dear as a right 
hand; to pluck it out, if it were precious as a right 
eye; than to allow any earthly thing to intervene between 
him and the divine loving-favor which he has 
learned so to enjoy that he considers it better than all 
the rest of life. 

"THEREFORE WILL MY LIPS PRAISE THEE." 



Many Christians, confused with the Babylonian 
din of false, contradictory theories, have felt that they 
would desire to show forth the Lord's praise; but then 
to offset this there arises in their minds the terrible 
errors which, as a great nightmare, darken their souls 
and hush their lips, so that as a rule few are 
found ready to speak of the Lord and his matters except 
those who speak either from a sense of duty or 
from a love of money and worldly position. And so 
it is that today, were the emoluments of honor and 
salary taken away, and were it necessary in order to 
be a minister of Christ to follow the example of the 
Apostle Paul, and to labor, working with their hands, 
in some sort of tent-making, nearly all of the ministers 
of Babylon would cease preaching. As it is, the 
ablest and most intelligent of them can only be retained 
in the service by making it pay them better in 
money and honor of men than any other occupation 
which they know of. 

On the other hand, those who have tasted of the 
Lord's grace, those who have come to realize his favor 
as better than life, and who have joyfully laid upon his 
altar every earthly good thing, and hope and ambition, 
rejoice to tell the good tidings to others; they 
rejoice to tell forth the praises of him who called them 
out of darkness into his marvelous light. The message 
is too good to keep; they not only do not require 
to be hired to tell it, but they are willing that the telling 
of it, and the enjoying of God's favor in connection 
with the telling, shall cost them something— cost 
them trouble, cost them money, cost them the loss of 
earthly friendships, cost the straining if not the breaking 
of some of home ties, cost the frown of the world 
and of churchianity;— yes, they rejoice, saying, in the 



language of the Prophet, "He hath put a new song 
into my mouth, even the loving-kindness of our God!" 

Some one, perhaps, will say this is exaggeration; 
it will not cost earthly friendships nor home ties; it 
will bring with it respect and honor of men, and a salary. 
We answer, No! The Lord's Word is still true; 
he is still the example to all who will walk in his footsteps. 
For what did the Master suffer the loss of 
social position? Why did the Doctors of Divinity of 
his day, and the notables of the religious people, hide 
as it were their faces from him? Why did they finally 
become so embittered against him, and so hate him, 
that they crucified him? Was it because of evil-doing 
on his part? Nay, but "he went about doing good." 
It was because he told the truth— truths which they 
believed in great measure, but with which they had 
mixed "traditions of the elders," which blinded them 
and made them children of darkness. Our Lord gives 
us the key to the situation when he says, "The darkness 
hateth the light." The darkness does not hate 
the light so that it will not wear a garment of light to 
deceive, and so the Adversary, in inculcating the darkness 
of misrepresentation of the divine character, 
takes care that this false doctrine shall always have 
associated with it, to some extent, as a sugar-coating, 
a garment of love and charity also. He associates a 
blasphemous misrepresentation of the divine character, 
which teaches that God is hurrying the masses of 
poor, frail humanity into the hands of demons for 
eternal torture, with moral platitudes and church-work, 
and on the other hand satisfies the human 
cravings for better lives by instituting hospitals, asylums, 
orphanages, etc., thus giving mankind the suggestion 
that they are really better than God, for they 
would care for and assist the poor and the weak and 
the fallen, while the Almighty would deliver them 
over to demons and torment, and foreknew and purposed 
it so from the beginning— this is their theory. 

Those who were deluded by Satan at our Lord's 
first advent so hated the glorious message which he 
brought, and so hated his purity and truthfulness, that 
they called him the prince of devils, Beelzebub, and 
he told his followers that if he was thus treated they 
must not marvel if they shared a somewhat similar experience. 
And as his persecutions and oppositions 
came not from the world, the Gentiles, the heathen, 
but from the professed holiness people of his time, so 
all through the dark ages, and at the present time, 
those opposing the Lord and the truth are not worldly 
people, but sectarians whom Satan has more than half 
blinded with his false doctrines and misrepresentations. 
We are not, therefore, to be surprised that we find it 
as the Lord declares, that wherever his truth goes it 
will be like a sword to separate, and that especially in 
the home and the family. And as he declared, "Ye 
shall be hated of all men for my sake."— Matt. 10:22. 



These experiences are for the very purpose of 
testing us, as the Lord's experiences were for the purpose 
of testing him. He consecrated his life fully and 
completely at the beginning of his ministry, when he 
reached thirty years of age, and symbolized his consecration 
in baptism. So fully did he appreciate the 

R2853 : page 247 

Heavenly Father's loving kindness and favor that it 
required not a moment's hesitation for him to decide 
that it was better than life— to decide to sacrifice the 
earthly life; and immediately he began to proclaim 
the truths respecting the divine love and provision. 
And well he understood from the beginning how this 
would bring the hatred of nominal professors of Judaism, 
and that in thus letting his lips praise the Lord 
he was doing so at the cost of his earthly life, and all 
the blessings and privileges associated therewith. 

Likewise with those who walk in Jesus' footsteps 
in the narrow way; however much it may surprise 
them, they find that the proclamation of good tidings 
of great joy which shall be unto all people— the loving 
favor of our God, manifested in Jesus Christ our 
Lord— told in its fulness, brings the hate, the scorn, 
the persecution of nominal Christendom of today. 
Those who love the present life close their lips and refrain 
from speaking his loving kindness; but those 
faithful to their covenant, and appreciative of the 
Lord's favor as "better than life," will show forth his 
praise at any and every cost of an earthly kind. 

The "harvest" message of good tidings which is 
now revealed to the Lord's consecrated people, by 
which they discern the loving kindness of God, which 
they feel they must tell forth to others, not for money, 
nor for reputation, but at the cost of worldly reputation, 
at the cost of financial loss, at the cost of home 
trials and difficulties— this message is the "new song" 
mentioned by the Prophet, that the Lord has put into 
the mouths of his consecrated ones. It is the same 
new song that is mentioned by our Lord in Revelation, 
which none others might sing except the elect 
144,000, who have the Father's name in their foreheads 
—publicly professed. If others hear of the song 
they cannot sing it, because it costs something to sing 
this song. "Because thy loving favor is better than 
life [more esteemed by us, more than all of earthly 
life and its good things] therefore will my lips praise 
thee." 



R2853 : page 247 

GOD'S PROMISE TO ABRAHAM REITERATED. 



-GEN. 15:1-18.-AUG. 11.- 

"I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward." 

LOT had not lived a great while in Sodom when 
king Chedorlaomer descended upon the 
Sodomites with an army and took away many persons 
and great spoils of flocks, herds, etc., including Lot 
and his family and possessions. Word of this affair 
reached Abraham, who armed his own servants, 318, and 
with two associates pursued the victors, who, doubtless 
expecting no army or night attack, were careless as to 
their defenses, and being surprised by a night attack 
were routed; and Lot and his family and goods, and 
the Sodomites and their goods were released. The conduct 
of Abraham in connection with this matter was 
most noble and unselfish. Not only did he inconvenience 
himself and all his affairs for the sake of others, 
but subsequently he refused any share of the booty 
which he had saved. Would that the children of God 
could fully appreciate such benevolence and copy it 
more in the little affairs of life! Much of the distress 
prevailing in the world is the direct or indirect result 
of selfishness, and all of the Lord's people should be 
on the alert to practice and to exemplify the opposite 
spirit of benevolence in the little things as well as in 
the great things of life; and should remember that 
selfishness is a depravity, which needs to be fought 
against, and to be, so far as possible, overcome by the 
new nature. 

One would have supposed that Lot's vexatious experience 
in Sodom, and after experience in his capture 
and subsequent deliverance by his uncle, would have 
led him to desire a reunion with his uncle, with a 
keener appreciation than ever of the fact that God was 
with his uncle, blessing him and guiding his affairs 
and interests. But this does not seem to have been the 
case: he was still willing to cast his lot with the ungodly. 
He reminds us of the words of the Psalmist, 
"Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel 
of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, 
nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." (Psa. 1:1) 
Lot did not pursue this course, and hence failed of a 
blessing. It was not sufficient that his righteous soul 
should be "vexed" continually by the misconduct of 
those about him; his love for righteousness should 
have been such as to lead him to the sacrifice of temporal 
interests on behalf of his own heart and on behalf 
of the interests of his family. Let all of the Lord's 
people who may find themselves in a similar position 
remember the Apostle's words, "Make straight paths 
for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of 
the way; but let it rather be healed."— Heb. 12:13. 

It was directly after his experience in the delivery 
of Lot and the defeat of Chedorlaomer, and while Abraham 
was evidently feeling somewhat disheartened or 



discouraged, that the Lord again manifested himself to 
him. We do not know the cause of the discouragement, 
but may infer that he realized that in his 
attack upon, and defeat of the army and the military 

R2853 : page 248 

forces behind it, he had probably incurred a displeasure 
which could not be wiped out by anything short of 
the destruction of his own camp. As ever, Abraham 
was peaceably disposed; and the battle he had just won 
implied the straining of his whole nature. He had 
done what he considered to be his duty in the interest 
of justice, and especially in the defense of his own 
ward, Lot; but now that the excitement was past the 
reaction set in, and with it certain gloomy feelings and 
forebodings. So also some of the Lord's people today 
have moments in which for various reasons the flame 
of faith and hope smokes, and darkens the eyes of 
their understanding and the clearness of their perception 
of the divine character and plan; but if they still 
hold firmly by faith to the hands of divine providence 
they will find, as Abraham did, that even the trials and 
difficulties and discouragements of life will be overruled 
for good to them. 

It was while Abraham was downcast that the Lord 
appeared to him in vision and said to him, in the language 
of our Golden Text, "Fear not Abraham: I am 
thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward." Apparently 
this was the great lesson that God was teaching 
him and which he was learning by the experience permitted, 
much better than had the Lord not delayed 
some of the promised favors. Abraham was now 84 
years old; and, altho wealthy and highly favored of the 
Lord, he was a pilgrim and a stranger, away from kindred 
and home through his respect to the divine call and 
promise. He had no children to cheer and enliven and 
comfort his home, and even his nephew, Lot, whom he 
had not detained unwillingly, had preferred the companionship 
of the wicked and had left him, and even 
when rescued from his enemies, at the cost of danger 
and sacrifice, he had not appreciated the matter fully, 
and still preferred the strangers. 

No wonder poor Abraham felt as tho his life, passing 
quickly by, was a comparative failure— no wonder 
he felt discouraged. How the words of the vision 
must have brought new thoughts, new sentiments to 
his heart; God was his shield— to protect him, to guard 
him from the anger and power of all the kings of earth 
and their armies, and able and willing to make all 
things work together for his good. What a comfort 
was in this thought. How it reminds us that God is 
our shield also; our protector from every evil thing 
and power. The thought is beautifully expressed in 
one of our hymns:— 

"Shield of my soul, tho tempests rage, 



And 'gainst me hosts of foes engage, 

My refuge and my fortress thou; 

Before thee every foe must bow." 
The latter part of the message is no less striking: 
the fact that, nor flocks nor herds nor servants nor children 
nor friends, were to be the prize upon which his 
heart should be set; but that God himself was to be 
his reward;— the having of God for a friend and counselor 
and guide was to be esteemed far beyond every 
earthly interest and blessing. And so it is also with the 
Church of the Gospel age. We may have blessings or 
adversities or both, as respects the present life. We 
have promises which pertain to the life that now is and 
also to that which is to come; but all of these together 
are inferior, subordinate to the one great thought that 
God, the great Creator is ours,— our Father, our God, 
our Friend. 

Undoubtedly Abraham's heart was comforted by 
this message; and yet his reason was still operative, 
and hence his inquiry of the Lord, How can you bless 
me and fulfil to me your gracious promises, seeing that 
I go childless— seeing that my servant Eliezer and his 
children are the only heirs apparent for my estate? Is 

R2854 : page 248 

it wonderful, Lord, that I should feel discouraged, seeing 
that apparently the most indispensable part of your 
promise is unfulfilled for now fourteen years, and that 
Sarah and myself are growing old; and that even my 
nephew, Lot, who might have perpetuated the family 
and been the heir of my estate, cares not for me and 
has gone from me? The Lord was not displeased to 
have Abraham use his reason in this manner, for it 
was not a reasoning of skepticism or doubt as respected 
the divine power, but merely the proper questioning of 
faith as to how the promises on which he had left his 
home could be fulfilled; and a request for guidance in 
understanding. And so may we inquire of the Lord 
respecting his gracious promises. Indeed, he invites 
us to reason, saying, "Come, let us reason together." 
In Abraham's case the Lord merely repeated and 
amplified previous statements to the effect that he 
should have a child of his own who should be his heir; 
and leading him out from his dwelling in the starry 
night, he assured him that his children would yet be 
multitudinous as the stars of heaven. This feature of 
the promise evidently applies to the spiritual Seed— 
the Christ, the elect of God, Head and body, as explained 
by the Apostle. (Gal. 3:29; 1 Pet. 1:2.) 
The other expressions,— "as the dust of the earth," 
and "as the sands of the sea," represent, not the natural 
children of Abraham, but the whole number of the 
human family who, under the blessing of the spiritual 
Seed, during the Millennium, shall ultimately attain 
to the faith and obedience of Abraham, and full human 



restitution and the Lord's reward for these— life everlasting. 
-Rom. 11:12,15,32. 

The record is that Abraham believed on the Lord 
—his faith in God triumphed over every obstacle and 
rested securely, confidently;— his doubts and fears fleeing 
away. The faith of Abraham is the particular point 

R2854 : page 249 

of his character prominently set before us in the Scriptures 

for the encouragement of our faith, for our example. 

Abraham was not perfect, even as others of 

our race are imperfect,— "There is none righteous, no, 

not one." (Rom. 3:10.) But we are told that God 

so highly esteemed Abraham's faith that he counted it 

as making up for his natural blemishes and imperfections. 

"It was counted [reckoned] to him for righteousness." 

(Rom. 4:3.) He had faith in what God 

had told him, and, as James (2:22) points out, he manifested 

his faith by his general conduct. We of the 

Gospel age are also justified by faith— righteousness is 

reckoned to us through the exercise of faith— but not 

faith in the same promises. 

God does not promise us earthly children nor an 
earthly inheritance in the land of Palestine as he did 
promise to Abraham; hence we are not to have faith in 
the same things. As the Apostle says, God has given 
unto us "exceeding great and precious promises"— 
promises much greater than those given to Abraham: 
heavenly, instead of earthly promises. We are to believe 
the promises given to us and to act upon them as 
implicitly as Abraham believed the promises given to 
him and acted upon them. The promises made to 
Abraham were attested by the Lord's word and by his 
oath, and similarly, tho on a still higher plane, the 
Lord has made known to us, has attested to us, his 
love and power, and his willingness to perform for us 
all the good things promised. 

In answer to Abraham's request the Lord attested 
his promise in connection with sacrifices, after a manner 
that was probably customary at that time, as described 
in our lesson. The sacrificed animals, part 
over against part, were separated by a narrow path along 
which between the parts passed a small furnace enveloped 
in smoke, out of which shot a flame of fire. In connection 
with the weird scene the Lord revealed to Abraham 
that his posterity would not come into the land of 
promise for some four hundred years after his son 
should be born, but would have affliction as a people, 
even as Israel experienced this in Egypt. The four 
hundred years being a statement in round numbers, 
otherwise more explicitly stated as four hundred and 
thirty years, included the wanderings of Isaac and 
Jacob before going down into Egypt, as well as the 
captivity in Egypt. The revelation further pointed out 
the fact that the deliverance of Israel from Egypt would 



be with great wealth, and that in connection with it 

judgments of the Lord would come upon Egypt, and 

that meantime the Amorites, who then resided in 

Canaan, would fill to the full the measure of their iniquity, 

and fully deserve to lose the land of promise; 

and at that time Israel would be brought in to inherit 

it. 

As God's favor and faithfulness toward Abraham 
were attested by the sacrifices and revelations of the 
divine plan, so do they testify to his faithfulness in this 
Gospel age, that we also may have strong consolation, 
and full assurance of faith. He testifies to us the fulness 
of his favor and love by showing us the better 
sacrifices for sins, through which the New Covenant is 
sealed, ratified, made operative. He has shown us 
through his Word that darkness must prevail for a 
time, and that the Christ (Head and body) must be 
brought in contact with the fiery furnace of trial and 
affliction, the smoke of which might well represent the 
incidental confusion and darkness that necessitates our 
walk by faith and not by sight, while the flame of light 
would represent our guidance by the holy Spirit. Being 
thus assured by the Lord of his love for us, and of 
the bountiful provision made for our welfare, and of 
the necessity for trials, persecutions and difficulties 
during the time of the great darkness, we are strengthened 
in our faith and enabled to endure as seeing him 
who is invisible, and to follow in the footsteps of 
Jesus. 

It was at this time that the Lord revealed to Abraham 
that the great blessings already promised him were 
to have a far distant fulfilment— for it was here indicated 
that he should die and his children not inherit 
the land for some four hundred years: and that he 
would not see the fulfilment of the promises, altho a 
part of the promise was that he, as well as his seed, 
should inherit the land, and join in the work of universal 
blessing and uplifting of humanity. Abraham 
was thus indirectly taught to hope in the resurrection, 
for this last revelation clearly implied that he could 
have neither part nor lot in it except God would raise 
him from the dead. And this was in full accord with 
the subsequent words of Stephen. (Acts 7:5.) It was 
no doubt for Abraham's good that the Lord did not tell 
him that it would be about four thousand years before 
the full blessing would begin;— did not reveal to him 
that the natural seed could not inherit all of the great 
promises;— that the likeness of his seed to the stars of 
heaven and to the sands of the sea were two different 
figures;— the first representing the spiritual and heavenly 
seed, and the other an earthly or human seed. It 
was to his advantage not to know that so long a time 
would elapse before the completion of the spiritual 
seed, of which Christ is the Head and the Gospel Church 
the body; and that through this Seed, glorified, must 
come the blessings upon the earthly seed, and through 



the latter to all the families of the earth during the 
Millennial age. 

But God has revealed these things to us, and we 
may well feel that we have more advantage every way 
in connection with the divine promises and plan than 

R2854 : page 250 

even faithful Abraham, whose trustfulness under very 
adverse conditions is a stimulus to all of God's children. 
We have not only his example, but many other 
noble examples, including that of our Lord and his 
apostles; and we can see, under the guidance of the 
Word, as revealed by the spirit, that all things have 
been and are yet working together harmoniously for the 
development of the Lord's great plan for man's salvation, 
briefly summarized in his promise to Abraham, 
"In thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed." 

Nothing is more evident than that God's promises 
to Abraham have not yet been fulfilled. Abraham reasoned 
that they would not be fulfilled in his day; Isaac 
and Jacob and all the prophets reasoned that they had 
not been fulfilled during the Jewish age; and the Apostle 
declares that the whole twelve tribes of Israel were 
still waiting for the fulfilment of those promises in his 
day. (Acts 26:6,7.) Those promises have surely not 
been fulfilled during this Gospel age, as we all are witnesses 
—the natural seed of Abraham has been outcast, 
persecuted and without divine favor, while the true 
ones of spiritual Israel, though possessed of divine 
favor and rejoicing therein, have been persecuted and 
caused to suffer for righteousness' sake, and thereby to 
learn lessons of patience and experience to prepare 
them for the great work they are yet to do in fulfilment 
of the divine promises to Abraham. 

The Apostle Paul clearly sets this matter forth in 
Gal. 3:16-29. He tells us that Christ is the Seed of 
Abraham— the spiritual Seed; and are not we "members 
of the body of Christ," over whom, as the Scriptures 
declare, Jesus Christ is the head forever under God's 
blessing? (Eph. 1:22,23.) And so the Apostle declares 
(vs. 29), "If ye be Christ's [members], then are ye 
Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the promise." 

And if the Lord's saints are still heirs of that Abrahamic 
promise, assuredly it proves that the promise has 
not yet reached fulfilment. Thank God that we are still 
privileged to be heirs of that wonderful promise, "heirs 
of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, if so be 
that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified 
together." Let our faith be strong, trusting in the 
promise and in him who made it, who is able to do for 
us, and for all who trust in him, exceedingly abundantly 
more and better things than we know how to ask or 

R2855 : page 250 



expect. Let us through patient perseverance, based 
upon an undimmed faith, complete our sojourning 
here; and by the Lord's grace make our calling and 
election sure to a share in the promised glory, honor 
and immortality, and in the opportunity to bless, which 
the Lord purposes to give to the faithful in Christ Jesus. 



R2855 : page 250 

ABRAHAM'S AGE ON ENTERING CANAAN. 



We are in receipt of a number of letters, calling 
attention to what seems to the writers an error in the 
Chronology given in the MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., 
relative to the date of Abraham's birth, his entrance 
into Canaan, etc. For the sake of these, as well as others 
who may have the same difficulty, we here enlarge upon 
what is stated in VOL. II., pages 44-47. 

Gen. 1 1:32, says that at his death Terah's age was 
two hundred and five years; Acts 7:4 says that then 
Abraham removed into Canaan; and Gen. 12:4 states 
that Abraham was seventy-five years old when he left 
Haran. Hence Terah's age at Abraham's birth must 
have been one hundred and thirty years. 

But is not this out of harmony with Gen. 1 1:26, 
which says: "And Terah lived seventy years and begat 
Abram, Nahor and Haran?" We answer, No. The 
point of confusion is in the fact that Haran, the eldest, 
is mentioned last, while Abram, the youngest, is mentioned 
first— possibly because of his greater prominence 
in the narrative, or possibly, as a little stumbling-block 
to hinder us from seeing the facts except as guided by 
the Lord, in his due time. 

That Haran was the eldest of the sons of Terah is 
quite evident from the recorded facts. His son Lot was 
old enough to be the companion of his uncle Abraham. 
Lot and Abraham were probably nearly of the same age, 
as each had his own flocks and herds and herdsmen. 
When Sodom was destroyed Lot had two daughters of 
marriageable age and others already married. This was 
before Isaac was born, Abraham being then ninety-nine 
years old.-Gen. 17:24; 18:1,16; 19:8,14. 

Again, notice the likelihood of Haran's being much 
the oldest of Terah's sons, and Nahor the second, thus, 
—Nahor married one of his brother Haran's daughters 
(Milcah— See Gen. 24:15), whose grand-daughter, Rebekah, 
became the wife of Abraham's son, Isaac— 
Gen. 24:67. 

Our reckoning as given in the DAWN is, therefore, 
sustained by all the known facts, as well as by the exact 
statements of Scripture. 



R2855 : page 250 

QUESTIONS ON THE RESURRECTION HOPE. 



WHAT IS GUARANTEED BY THE RANSOM? 



Question.— Would it be correct for us to say that 
our Lord Jesus by his death canceled the sins of the 
entire human family, so that there is now no condemnation 
to any? 

Answer.— No; this would not be a correct statement. 
The Scriptural declaration is, "There is now 
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus." 
There is still condemnation upon all who have not yet 
come into Jesus through faith in the precious blood 
and through a reformation of life in harmony with 
that faith. This is directly implied by the Apostle's 
words. Again, he says, "We were children of wrath, 
even as others [are], but we who believe [who have 
accepted Jesus] have escaped the condemnation that 
is on the world." These Scriptures imply that the 
condemnation was still on the world at the time of 

R2855 : page 251 

these letters, after our Lord's death and resurrection. 

Consequently the death of Jesus did not cancel 
the condemnation, it did not remove the sins, and all 
the world of mankind not only have continued under 
the condemnation, but also under its sentence of 
death, and have died, the same since Jesus died as before 
—except in the case of the Church, whose death 
is reckoned as being no longer Adamic death, as a 
penalty for sin, but as "being dead with him," as 
joint-sacrifices, participators in the sin-offerings. 

That our Lord's death did not cancel sin is again 
attested by the Apostle Peter's declaration to some at 
Pentecost (after our Lord's death and resurrection, 
ascension, etc.): "Repent and be converted, that your 
sins may be blotted out when times of refreshing shall 
come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send 
Jesus Christ [at the Second Advent]." This Scripture 
shows that the blotting out is a future work, just 
as the Apostle elsewhere shows that the sins of those 
who are in Christ Jesus are now covered from God's 
sight, to permit us to have present blessings and privileges, 
prior to the time when the sins shall be blotted 
out. The sins of the Church will be blotted out, and 
no more record will appear of them forever, as soon 



as the first resurrection shall have taken place, for all 
who have part in it will have perfect bodies, without 
a trace of sin, blemish or imperfection in them. And 
as for the world of mankind in general, the blotting 
out of the world's sins will be during the "times of 
restitution"— a gradual work, as implied in the word 
"blotting." Every one who accepts Christ and the 
Kingdom, and endeavors to live in harmony with the 
Lord under the terms of the New Covenant, will, during 
the thousand years of Christ's reign, find his sins, 
his blemishes, mental, moral and physical, gradually 
giving way, yielding to perfection, and they will thus 
be in process of blotting out until, at the close of the 
Millennial age, there shall no sin remain unblotted 
out for any one who has desired to have them blotted 
out, and who shall have availed himself of the abundant 
privileges of that time. 

Thus we see, by two lines of demonstration, 
either of which would be sufficient, that Christ has 
not canceled the sins of the whole world, nor the sins 
of any, and that he has merely covered the sins of the 
Church, preparatory to the cleansing time, while the 
world's sins are not even covered. To make these two 
proofs the more conspicuous we will state them thus: 

(1) The fact that God's Word speaks of the world as 
being still under condemnation, and children of wrath, 
is a conclusive proof that their sins are not blotted out. 

(2) The fact that sin, and its wages of death, including 
pain, sickness, etc., are still inflicted upon humanity, 
is a second and indisputable proof that the sins 

are not blotted out, for if they had been blotted out 
it would be wrong on God's part to punish for sins 
no longer recognized. 

Question.— If Christ's death did not effect the 
cancellation of man's sins, wherein lies the fault? 
Does it imply that the sacrifice was not sufficient to 
cancel the sins, or does it imply that God has not 
been just toward the sinners, but has accepted a payment 
from Jesus and is also requiring a payment directly 
from the individual sinner, as tho he had not 
accepted Christ's ransom sacrifice? 

Answer.— Neither of these is implied by the fact 
that the world's sins are not yet blotted out. The 
Scriptural statement of the matter is that our Lord 
bought the whole world with his own precious blood. 
(1 Pet. 1:19.) There is no statement anywhere in 
the Scriptures to the effect that the sins of the whole 
world were canceled by Christ's death, nor that God 
ever purposed to cancel the sins of the world as an offset 
to the sacrifice of our dear Redeemer. On the 
contrary, the Scriptures everywhere hold out the 
thought that neither the blotting out of sins nor even 
their covering, is possible, except as the sinner 
shall first of all accept of Jesus through faith. Thus 
we read that God arranged the plan as he did arrange 
it, in order that "he might be just, and yet be the justifier 



of him that believeth in Jesus." There is no 
proposition in this text, or in any other, to justify 
any others than believers— no proposition to justify 
the world in sin, but merely to justify those who desire 
to escape from sin and its penalty, accepting of 
Christ as the Savior. 

The statement of 2 Cor. 5:19 is in full accord 
with this. It represents a work begun by God in 
Christ, but not yet concluded. The ministry of reconciliation, 
committed to the Church, will not be finished 
until the close of the Millennium; and whoever of 
mankind shall by that time have failed to accept the 
reconciliation, proffered by God in Christ, will "be 
destroyed from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

The statement that our Lord Jesus was a propitiation 
(satisfaction) for our sins, and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world, implies that 
his death was sufficient in merit to meet the penalty 
against every individual and to satisfy the claims of 
divine justice against each individual. However, the 
canceling of the sentence which Justice had decreed 
against Adam and his progeny would include and imply 
nothing of restitution whatever. It was merely a 
sentence that Adam could not live, having forfeited 
his right to life. The fact that after this sentence 
came upon Adam, and while under it, he and his 
race decayed mentally and physically, and became 
morally leprous, has nothing whatever to do with the 

R2856 : page 252 

original sentence— the degeneracy of the race is a side 
issue. It resulted from the sentence of death, but 
was not a part of it, and the removal of the sentence of 
death need not mean a recovery from the fall. 

The sentence of the divine law against Adam and 
his race, prohibiting them from the privileges of life, 
having been paid by the Lord Jesus' sacrifice, and the 
payment having been accepted by the Father, there 
can be no objection now raised on the part of Justice 
to hinder the sinner and his race from having eternal 
life if they can now demonstrate their worthiness of 
it. Had such an offer been made to father Adam the 
day after his transgression and expulsion from Eden, 
he would doubtless have gladly reentered Paradise 
and stood a fresh trial, and with better hopes of 
success, having learned something, at least, by his experience. 
But after six thousand years of falling and 
degradation under the dominion of sin, Adam and his 
race are in no condition to profit by the removal of 
the sentence of Justice which was against them, being 
unable, in their fallen condition, to comply with 
the divine requirements, if granted a new trial by the 
Father. Hence this proposition is set aside at once as 
infeasible, and instead God turns over the entire race 
to his only begotten Son, their Redeemer, that the 



Son may institute amongst those whom he redeemed 
processes of restitution, which will be helpful to them 
in bringing them up again to the grand perfection 
originally enjoyed by father Adam. And when this 
work of restitution shall have been accomplished, the 
world, furnished with a large experience both in the 
fall and their restitution from it, will be ready for 
final testings or judgments preparatory to acceptance 
of those who stand the tests to eternal life which were 
set before father Adam, but which he failed to attain 
through disobedience. 

In order to make this restitution process of the 
largest advantage possible to mankind, the divine plan 
is that step after step of the journey upward from degradation 
to perfection shall be attained only through 
the cooperation of the restored ones with their Redeemer 
and Restorer. To this end it is called a period 
of judgments or discipline, under which every effort 
for righteousness will bring its meed of blessing, and 
every dereliction bring its stripes or punishments. 
Thus day by day and year by year during these 
"times of restitution" the lesson on the desirability of 
righteousness and heinousness of sin will be given to 
the world of mankind, with every encouragement to 
those who will to do right; but with the rod, and 
eventually "everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord," to all those who, under those favorable 
conditions, love iniquity and serve it rather than 
righteousness. 

Thus seen, Christ's death became the offset and 
cancellation of the legal sentence against man, but it 
did not and was not intended to remove his degradation. 
Man's sentence, recorded in the race, mentally, 
morally and physically, is still in evidence all about 
us, and will continue in evidence even after the Millennial 
reign has begun, and until the gradual processes 
of "blotting out" these sins shall, by the close 
of the Millennium, have completely obliterated them. 
The record of sin is in every human being, and the 
blotting out of those sins will mean the full restoration 
of that being to the image and likeness of God. 
This blotting out of sins, therefore, was not accomplished 
by the satisfying of the claims of justice and 
the removal of the sentence of death, but must be accomplished, 
if at all, in the divinely arranged manner, 
by processes of restitution to the image and likeness 
of God— to which none will attain except as they cooperate 
with the great Restorer— the life-giver, Christ. 

Suppose an illustration of this matter of the canceling 
of the sentence in respect to an earthly criminal 
sentence by an earthly court. Suppose a criminal 
had been sentenced for life, and that fifteen years after 
sentence he was pardoned and set at liberty. In those 
years he might have changed quite considerably, 
might have contracted disease and have become bald-headed 
and crippled with rheumatism. But no one 



would suppose for an instant that in pardoning him 
the court would undertake additionally to give him 
back his hair, his strength, his health, and the fifteen 
years of life which he had lost in prison. Neither 
does the remission of the original sentence by the 
heavenly court in any sense of the word promise or 
imply restitution of the things which man lost while 
under the sentence of death. The promises of restitution 
through Christ, while all based upon the ransom, 
are separate and distinct from it— the operation 
of love and mercy, and not in any sense of the word 
the operation of Justice, on man's behalf. 

In regard to Rom. 5:18,19. The world could 
not be on trial before a court which had already condemned 
it, unless the condemnation were lifted; but 
in the case of man there is a transference of the case 
to a new court, of which not the Father, but the Son, 
is the Judge; as it is written, God "hath committed 
all judgment unto the Son." In one sense man starts 
in his new trial, under the new Judge, free from condemnation, 
that is, free from the judicial feature of 
his condemnation; but not free from the actual degradation 
which, in another sense of the word, is the 
curse or condemnation which rests upon our race. 
Justice will have nothing against the culprit, and 
makes no objection to his being awakened and assisted 
back to perfection by the new Judge; but neither 

R2856 : page 253 

Justice nor the new Judge will release the culprit from 
the difficulties under which he labors, called the curse, 
the fall, etc., except as he exercises both trust and 
obedience in the new Judge under the terms of the 
New Covenant; and the new Judge will only release 
him from this curse or condemnation little by little, 
as he shall, by obedience, give evidence of transformation 
of his character from that of a servant of sin to 
that of a servant of righteousness. 

In a word, the sentence or degree of death which 
came upon Adam, and through him upon us, was 
merely the judicial sentence, not the degradation 
which followed it as a consequence; and the removal 
of the judicial sentence by the payment of a price and 
the transfer of a sinner to the jurisdiction of Christ, 
for a fresh judgment or trial, secures merely the release 
of the original judicial sentence, but secures no 
release from the fall and degradation which followed 
the original sentence. The ruined sinner, whom justice 
would not permit to live, and who has degraded 
himself since, may now know that through Christ the 
demands of justice have been met for him, and that if 
he were back again to the condition in which father 
Adam was when he fell he would now be able to keep 
the divine Law perfectly. However, having fallen into 
degradation, and sin, he is now on so low a plane mentally, 



morally and physically, that altho the sentence 

be lifted, he is quite powerless to accomplish anything 

of consequence for himself. He first needed a Redeemer 

to ransom him, to pay the redemption price 

for him; he now needs a Savior, a Life-giver, to deliver 

him from the death-conditions, mental, moral 

and physical, into which he fell while under the divine 

sentence, and this will be the gracious work of 

the Kingdom, of which Christ will be the Head and 

King, and the elect Church his joint-heirs in the 

Kingdom, and under-representatives in the work of 

judging and uplifting the race. 



R2856 : page 253 

THE FERVENT PRAYER OF ABRAHAM. 

-GEN. 18:23-32.-AUG. 18.- 

Golden Text:— "The effectual fervent prayer of 
a righteous man availeth much."— Jas. 5:16. 

ABRAHAM at the time of this lesson was ninety-nine 
years old. He was camping at Mamre 
with his family and household, servants, herdsmen, 
etc., over 1,000 persons. His faith still rested in the 
Lord's promise, which he evidently believed would be 
fulfilled through his son Ishmael, at this time thirteen 
years old. As he rested in the door of his tent three 
men approached him, and, after the manner of the 
sheiks of that country today, he arose to meet them 
most hospitably, and provided for their entertainment 
tho they were strangers to him. By and by he ascertained 
that his visitors were heavenly beings, who for 
the occasion had assumed human form— one of them 
being a special representative of Jehovah himself, 
either one of the chief angels, or, we think still more 
likely, the Lord Jesus in his pre-human condition. 
How glad Abraham must have felt when he learned 
who his visitors were, that he had entertained them so 
kindly and hospitably. The Apostle calls this matter 
to the attention of the Church and urges that the Lord's 
people always be on the alert to show hospitality, and 
citing this case he says, "Thus some have entertained 
angels unawares."— Heb. 13:2. 

True, circumstances are in many respects different 
today from what they were in olden times, in that now 
we have hotels and boarding houses for the accommodation 
of travelers; hence our responsibilities are lessened; 
this very fact, we fear, inclines us to be more selfish, 
less hospitable, than would be to our profit. The 
Lord's consecrated people will do well to cultivate hospitality, 
and that of the kind which Abraham showed, 
—without waiting for it to be requested. A Scripture 



statement is, "There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; 
and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, 

R2857 : page 253 

but it tendeth to poverty." (Prov. 11:24.) Another 
declaration is, "The liberal soul shall be made fat." 
(Prov. 11:25.) In practicing liberality we are developing 
God-likeness, for is not God benevolent; is he 
not continually giving to his creatures? The greatest 
of all his gifts was the gift of his own dear Son to die 
for us— to ransom us. True, all cannot exercise liberality 
alike— those who are in debt or in poverty are 
properly to consider themselves hindered, limited in 
this direction by justice to their creditors, their families, 
etc. Nevertheless, the spirit of benevolence and hospitality 
should always abound in our hearts, whether 
we have much or little opportunity to manifest it; and 
rarely do those who exercise themselves in this respect 
fail to profit by this course, even in temporal matters. 
Where we cannot give all the succor needed, we can at 
least dispense words of consolation and cheer, which 
may prove of much greater value than money. Many 
need the spiritual counsel and advice and encouragement, 
which every true Christian should be able to 
give, far more than they need temporal assistance. To 
have Christ-likeness implies not only a desire to be 
helpful to the groaning creation and "especially to the 
household of faith," but it means more,— it means the 
effort to assist them, even at the cost of our earthly 
comforts and pleasures. 

R2857 : page 254 

It was while partaking of the hospitality of Abraham 
and Sarah that the Lord and his two companions 
were made known to Abraham— that they were not ordinary 
men, and at this time a further promise was 
made respecting the long-expected son Isaac. "Let 
patience have her perfect work," says the Apostle, and 
surely it would seem that this was the case with Abraham, 
who had waited twenty-five years indefinitely, 
and now for the first time received a definite assurance 
of a prompt fulfilment of this part of the promise. 
Isaac was born within a year, when Abraham was one 
hundred years old. Abraham's faith and patient waiting 
on the Lord are instructive to us. The Gospel 
Church likewise was called to inherit a promise and to 
perform a pilgrimage while waiting for its fulfilment. 
The promise to us is our deliverance as sharers in the 
Kingdom, and ultimately in the work of blessing all 
the families of the earth, to be accomplished at the 
second coming of Jesus, who was typified in Isaac, 
even as Jehovah, his Father, was typified in Abraham. 
The Gospel Church has had great need of patience and 
endurance, of trust in God, during the nearly nineteen 



centuries since Jesus suffered in the flesh and was 
quickened in spirit, and going away, promised to come 
again to receive us unto himself, and to fulfil all the 
exceeding great and precious promises foretold respecting 
him and us. The faith of many has cooled so that 
they are hoping for the long promised Millennial blessings 
through other channels,— hoping that earthly 
churches, human organizations, begotten not of the 
Lord's instruction, but unauthorizedly, like Ishmael, 
may convert and bless the world without the second 
coming of Jesus and the establishment of his Kingdom. 
But all those who have the faith of Abraham 
will also have the Lord's testimony that the blessing 
can come only through Isaac— Rom. 9:7; Gal. 4:28. 

At the same time that faithful Abraham and Sarah 
were consoled and refreshed, at the same time Isaac was 
begotten, the iniquity of the Sodomites had become 
great,— the cry of its wickedness calling upon Justice 
for repression. The Lord and the two angels took their 
departure from Abraham's tent, going in the direction 
of Sodom, Abraham accompanying them through courtesy 
and through a desire to continue in heavenly company. 
And because he was a faithful servant of the 
Lord it was revealed to him that the destruction of 
Sodom and her sister villages was imminent. Thus we 
see the principles upon which the Lord deals with his 
creatures— to those who are in heart-harmony with 
him, full of faith and trust and loving obedience, and 
yet willing to wait patiently for the various features of 
his plan,— he reveals his plans not only as respects the 
coming blessing of all the families of the earth, but 
also as respects the punishment of the ungodly. 

We do not find Abraham rejoicing in the calamities 
about to come upon his neighbors; on the contrary, 
we find him generous; and so we should expect to find 
all who are the Lord's true people, full of generosity, 
kindness and good wishes toward their neighbors- 
even toward such as they could in no degree recognize 
or fellowship. Instead of glorying in the adversities 
coming upon the Sodomites, Abraham instinctively 
prayed for them divine compassion. And we are to 
remember in this connection that he had no thought of 
their calamity extending beyond the loss of the present 
life. He knew nothing about an "orthodox hell" with 
its corps of devils to receive and everlastingly torture 
them. He merely understood the Lord that the destruction 
of the people and of their cities impended. If 
he thought at all of their future, it would doubtless be 
in connection with God's promise, that by and by all 
the families of the earth should be blessed through his 
promised heir. 

We notice with pleasure the modesty of Abraham 
as he petitioned the Lord to have mercy upon his 
neighbors: "Wilt thou consume the righteous with 
the wicked? Peradventure there be fifty righteous 
within the city, wilt thou consume and spare not the 



place for the fifty righteous that are therein?" He was 
not attempting to charge or condemn the Lord by applying 
his standards; rather he was wishing to ascertain 
what would be the divine standard in the matter 
—how much compassion the Lord could justly exercise 
in behalf of such as sought at all to walk in his ways. 
Abraham must have known well the unsavory reputation 
of the Sodomites;— no doubt being in communication 
with Lot frequently. It is to his credit, therefore, 
that he was unwilling to think of those people as badly 
as they deserved. Actually there were only three worthy 
of being delivered; yet Abraham, with generosity of 
heart, assumed that there might be fifty. Benevolent 
people generally are pretty sure to err in their judgment 
on the favorable side, when they think of the 
weaknesses and villainies of their neighbors. 

The Lord assented to Abraham's proposition, and 
the latter's faith thus encouraged, he ventured to lessen 
the number in his inquiry to forty-five, forty, thirty, 
twenty, ten, and with all his earnest desire he could 
not think of petitioning the Lord to save those cities 
from destruction if wickedness had gotten such a hold 
that only ten could be found loving righteousness. We 
rejoice in Abraham's mercifulness, as well as in his 
faith. Had mercy not been a part of his character 
we may doubt if the Lord would have called him to be 
the starting point of his plan of salvation. "Blessed are 
the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." Such the 
Lord is seeking, to be his agents and the channels of 
the mercies he has provided for mankind, to be dispensed 
during the Millennial age. Only the merciful 
will be acceptable to the Lord as joint-heirs with Jesus 
in the Kingdom, and only the merciful of the ancient 
worthies will share with Abraham in dispensing divine 
favors to mankind as "princes in all the earth;" representatives 
of the spiritual Kingdom.— Psa. 45:16. 

We contrast Abraham's modest and reverent petition 
with some which we have heard uttered by those 
who suppose themselves to be members of the Gospel 
Church, the body of Christ,— and the contrast is immensely 
in Abraham's favor. "O let not the Lord be 
angry, and I will speak but this once [more]; peradventure 
ten be found there [will you have mercy upon 
the cities for their sake]?" How some can go to the 
Lord in prayer in rude and dictatorial manner, telling 
him what they want to have done— how many they 
wish to have converted, how he shall manage the 
various features of his work, whom he shall bless 
and how, etc.,— we cannot tell. Let not such persons 
think that they shall receive anything of the Lord; 
let them not think that such praying is either fervent 
or effectual in any good sense. Let us, on the contrary, 

R2857 : page 255 

as the Lord's people, reason how great he is, and how 



insignificant we are; how just and true are his ways, 
and how imperfect are our best conceptions; and let us 
approach him with reverence to ascertain what are his 
purposes, rather than to amend or alter them to alignment 
with our imperfect judgments. 

SAVED SO AS BY FIRE. 



Evidently Lot's decision to reside in Sodom was 
for business reasons: he evidently had some children 
twenty-five years before, when he started out with 
Abraham, his uncle, and probably his interests in business 
and his desire for prosperity leading him to reside 
among the Sodomites was chiefly for the prosperity of 
his children. Alas, how great was his mistake! Yet 
he did not seem to fully realize it until, urged by the 
angel, he fled from Sodom accompanied by his two unmarried 
daughters, losing all else he had in the world 
—his wife and married children and grand-children, 
his flocks and herds and servants and all his personal 
belongings. He was indeed saved, preserved, from the 
destruction which there came upon the ungodly; but 
it was a bare rescue, not an abundant deliverance; he 
was, so to speak, pulled out of the fire. 

We may consider ourselves justified in considering 
Lot and his daughters who escaped to be illustrations, 
samples, whose antitypical lessons would apply in this 
present day. For as Abraham and his patient waiting 
represented the faithful, the overcomers, so Lot seems 
to represent a class in the end of the present age, who 
do not walk sufficiently by faith and who seek not 
chiefly the Kingdom and its righteousness; but who 
for the sake of earthly advantage are quite willing to 
risk their spiritual interests and the highest interests of 
their children, by choosing fellowship with the world; 

R2858 : page 255 

—by commingling to some extent with the world, the 
flesh and the devil, even tho, like Lot, disapproving 
their surroundings which vex their righteous souls. 
Such, the Apostle tells us, shall be "saved so as by 
fire." (1 Cor. 3:15.) Such the Lord illustrates as 
coming up out of great tribulation, washing their robes 
and making them white, and eventually obtaining a 
blessing, but not the chief one which they might have 
obtained had they followed faithfully with the pilgrims 
and strangers, the "little flock."— Rev. 7:9,14. 

The story of Lot's haste out of Sodom, and of his 
wife's transgression of the angel's command in looking 
back and hankering after the things left behind, are 
brought to our attention in that part of our Lord's 
great prophecy relating to the end of this age;— "Remember 
Lot's wife!" (Luke 17:32.) This reference 



seems to corroborate the thought that Lot's experiences 
were somewhat typical. The Lord's people will be 
tested along the line of their separation from the spirit 
of the world. Those who, like Abraham, are the friends 
of God will be far off from the danger; others not so 
faithful will be in the full midst of the trouble, yet if 
loyal at heart to the Lord they will be delivered with 
great loss, and the sufferings which such disappointments 
and losses will imply; yet in the end such will 
gain the heavenly, spiritual, life for which they started 
out. None, however, will be delivered if they remain 
in the city of destruction, Babylon. If they do not 
avoid it at first, they must at least be willing to leave 
it, and that with great energy, ere its destruction comes; 
and if they love the things behind, more than they appreciate 
deliverance— so that they in any degree look 
back or long for the evil things doomed to destruction 
in the coming trouble, it will mean that they will not 
be worthy of having any part or lot in the deliverance. 
The record is that Lot's wife became a pillar of salt, 
and altho infidelity has been inclined to dispute such a 
miracle, we have every reason to believe the truthfulness 
of the record; and like all miracles, if explained, 
it would no doubt seem reasonable enough. An explanation 
of the miracle has been suggested by a traveler, 
as follows: "Just as some of the victims of 
Pompeii stumbled in their flight, and were buried 
under the ashes, which still keep the outline of their 
figure, so Lot's wife was covered with the half-liquid, 
slimy mud." "An atmosphere heavily charged with 
the fumes of sulphur and bitumen might easily produce 
suffocation, as was the case with the elder Pliny 
in the destruction of Pompeii. And as no dead body 
would ever decompose on the shores of this salt sea, 
if left in such an atmosphere, it would become encrusted 
with salt crystals. Pillars of salt are found in 
the vicinity which have formed from the spray, mist 
and saline exhalations of the dead sea, and are constantly 
growing larger." 

SUFFERING THE VENGEANCE OF ETERNAL FIRE. 



Jude tells us that the destruction of Sodom was intended 
by the Lord to be an illustration of the fate of the 
wicked. But it certainly does not illustrate what that 
fate is generally supposed to be: it does not illustrate 
perpetual fire, with the Sodomites continually burning 
and never destroyed, and with demons poking the fires 
and torturing the victims. Nothing of the kind. The 
"eternal fires" which God intends for the wicked, and 
which he illustrated in the case of the Sodomites, signify 
fires, whose work of destruction is complete and 
everlasting. It is divine vengeance or retribution 
against sinners— "they shall be punished with an everlasting 



destruction" (2 Thess. 1:9), beyond all hope of 
recovery. The "lake of fire" of Revelation, and the Dead 
Sea of Sodom represent in symbol the Second Death 
—extinction, from which there is no hope by a resurrection 
or otherwise. None will go into the Second 
Death on account of ignorance. All who enter it will 
do so because of wilful, deliberate participation in sin, 
or because of sympathy with it. 

Supposing Sodom to represent Sin, the lesson 
would be that all finding themselves in an evil condition 
of life, even tho, like Lot, their hearts be out of sympathy 
with it, should and must flee from it if they would 
avert the consequences. They must flee in haste and tarry 
not in all the plain. Yet it is a comforting thought 
that as the angel laid hold of the hands of Lot and his 
daughters and helped, urged and encouraged them 
to flee, so the Lord's providences will take hold of 
every one who shall seek to escape from sin, and will 
so cooperate with their good wills in the matter that 
they shall eventually be fully rescued from it. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 