God’s Kingdom​—The Sure Cure
“MAN has dominated man to his injury.” This statement, recorded in the Bible at Ecclesiastes 8:9, has held true throughout history and down to our very day. Why is this so? Why has man been unable to ameliorate the critical times he now faces?
“A small knowledge of human nature will convince us,” George Washington wrote in 1778, “that, with far the greatest part of mankind, [self] interest is the governing principle; and that almost every man is more or less, under its influence. . . . Few men are capable of making a continual sacrifice of all views of private interest, or advantage, to the common good. It is vain to exclaim against the depravity of human nature on this account; the fact is so, the experience of every age and nation has proved it and we must in a great measure, change the constitution of man, before we can make it otherwise.”
Since all men are born imperfect and sinful, it has been impossible for any man to deal in an absolutely perfect and just way with his fellowman. (Romans 5:12) Selfish personal interests either color or dominate his judgment and actions. And, try as men may to legislate against these inherent weaknesses, these cannot be set aside by any human government. “No system of government​—whether by a monarch, dictator, tyrant, aristocracy, oligarchy, republic, pure democracy, or the Communist Party—​has ever been devised that will insure that good and wise leaders will always steer the ship of state,” writes Laurence Beilenson in The Treaty Trap. “That is because those who select them or acquiesce in their rule have been people. . . . Nor are the people the rulers govern good and wise. When men come to love their neighbors as themselves, laws to restrain, policemen to enforce them, and armed might to protect will become superfluous, and so will treaties.”
While Beilenson feels, as do many, that such a “happy day” is “not imminent,” that view does not take God’s purpose for the earth into consideration. Man’s failure to govern wisely and peacefully, no matter what avenue is pursued, has clearly shown that mankind is incapable of self-rule. The only solution rests in God’s Kingdom under the rulership of his Son Jesus Christ. That is why Jesus, in giving his disciples a model prayer, taught them to pray to God: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”​—Matthew 6:10.
It is God’s will that his Kingdom, already established in the heavens, be the means to bring total peace to the earth. Concerning the rulership of his Son, the “Prince of Peace,” the inspired account relates: “His royal power will continue to grow; his kingdom will always be at peace. He will rule as King David’s successor, basing his power on right and justice, from now until the end of time. The LORD Almighty is determined to do all this.”​—Isaiah 9:6, 7, Today’s English Version.
Not only will that Kingdom cause true peace to envelop the globe but it will accomplish what no other government can: the elimination of man’s selfish tendencies due to his inherited imperfection. For under Kingdom rule mankind, relieved of sin and its condemnation to death, can enjoy the prospect of perfect, unending life on a paradise earth. (Romans 6:23) To this end, God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” And Jehovah promises: “Look! I am making all things new.” (Revelation 21:4, 5) That will be the sure cure for our critical times.

