Be Alert to Finding Deaf People in Your Territory
1 Jehovah is extending the invitation: “‘Come!’ . . . Let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.” (Rev. 22:17) A growing number of deaf people are among those responding to this call. As a result, during the last 13 years, 27 sign-language congregations and 43 sign-language groups have been formed in the United States branch.
2 Although sign-language congregations and groups focus all their preaching efforts on contacting deaf and hearing-impaired people in their respective territories, there are many such ones who are yet to be found and witnessed to in this country.
3 How Can You Help? While in public places, have you observed people using sign language? Do you know someone at your workplace or at your school who has a deaf family member? Be alert to finding those who are deaf as you carry out your daily activities. But how can you ensure that they will receive a Kingdom witness?
4 Giving a Witness: Inform the nearest sign-language congregation or group of the deaf person’s whereabouts. Many deaf ones make faster progress in learning the truth when they are able to associate with deaf Witnesses at congregation meetings conducted in American Sign Language. Therefore, if there is a sign-language congregation or group in your locality, your congregation secretary should forward to it information about all deaf people in your territory.
5 What if there is no one nearby to give spiritual assistance to deaf people in your community? How might you help? Why not make a return visit and talk to any hearing members of the household? Offer to show a sign-language video to arouse the interest of the deaf person. Some publishers have even learned American Sign Language so as to reach the deaf more effectively. (Acts 16:9, 10) The Require brochure and the Knowledge book are available in American Sign Language on video. Conducting Bible studies using these tools has already yielded many positive results.
6 By being alert to finding deaf people in your area, you can give them the opportunity to take life’s water free.​—Matt. 10:11.

