Come to the “Light Bearers” District Convention
“LOOK! darkness itself will cover the earth, and thick gloom the national groups.” (Isaiah 60:2) How true today are those words! Without question, false religion is keeping people in the dark as to what kind of worship pleases God. Why? Because Satan, the god of this system of things, “has blinded the minds of the unbelievers.”​—2 Corinthians 4:4.
In striking contrast to those blinded by Satan are Jehovah’s Witnesses. To them can be applied the words of the prophet Isaiah: “Upon you Jehovah will shine forth, and upon you his own glory will be seen.” (Isaiah 60:2) How thankful they are to have come out of darkness into God’s wonderful light! It is a spiritual light, the truth of God’s Word that enlightens the mind, so that even those who are literally blind can see the truth.
Of course, help is needed. It is unlikely that someone who simply reads the Bible without taking advantage of divinely provided aids could discern the light. That is why Jehovah God has provided “the faithful and discreet slave,” foretold at Matthew 24:45-47. Today that “slave” is represented by the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It is under the direction of this body that the “Light Bearers” District Convention has been arranged.
The purpose of this convention is to help all of Jehovah’s people to be better light bearers, in keeping with Paul’s words at Philippians 2:15. There, Christians are admonished to shine as “illuminators in the world.”​—Matthew 5:14, 16.
In the United States, the series of “Light Bearers” District Conventions is scheduled to begin on Friday, June 5. At 10:20 a.m., a musical program will help all to get in the right frame of heart and mind, ready for the spiritual program ahead. Each day has its own theme, and the theme for Friday is “Send Out Your Light and Your Truth.”​—Psalm 43:3.
Friday morning’s program will feature the keynote address, “Light Bearers​—For What Purpose?” Certainly, Christians are not light bearers with any personal, selfish motive. Rather, they serve for the same reasons that Jesus Christ, the Chief Light Bearer, came to earth, namely, to bear witness to the truth and to glorify the name of the Creator. Fittingly, Jesus said of himself: “As long as I am in the world, I am the world’s light.” (John 9:5) Thus, he left a model for us to follow his steps closely. (1 Peter 2:21) The afternoon of that first day will highlight both a talk and a Bible drama dealing with King Josiah, which will be of special interest to youths.
Saturday’s theme is “You Are the Light of the World . . . Let Your Light Shine.” (Matthew 5:14, 16) The morning’s program will feature a symposium entitled “Letting Your Light Shine.” Opportunity will be provided for those who have made a dedication to Jehovah to get baptized. The afternoon’s program will present an enlightening symposium entitled “Shedding Light on Christ’s Presence and Revelation.”
The theme chosen for Sunday, the third and last day of the convention, is “Go On Walking as Children of Light.” (Ephesians 5:8) The morning’s program will contain a symposium entitled “Caring for One Another in the Christian Household,” which will deal with family obligations. There will also be a talk explaining what it means to be in subjection to God and Christ.
The convention will reach its climax Sunday afternoon with the public talk entitled “Follow the Light of the World.” This discourse will contain a discussion of John 1:1-16 and will show the need for Bible knowledge, stressing that Jesus Christ is the light of the world. The convention will close with earnest exhortation to “Go On Walking in the Light.”
Show your appreciation for this spiritual feast that Jehovah is providing through his visible organization. Be present from the opening song on Friday morning until the concluding prayer on Sunday afternoon. Pay close attention to all that is said from the platform. Take notes to help you concentrate and for future reference. Finally, plan to have a share in some form of volunteer service. Thus, you will enjoy not only the blessing of receiving but the even greater blessing of giving.​—Acts 20:35.

