Scenes From the Promised Land
He Provided for Israel in Sinai
IMAGINE millions​—men, women, and children—​heading into a “great and fear-inspiring wilderness, with poisonous serpents and scorpions and with thirsty ground that has no water”!
Those words of God found at Deuteronomy 8:15 bring into focus what might have seemed to be an awesome journey looming before the Israelites as they exited Egypt and marched into the wilderness of the Sinai. One formidable problem: Who would provide enough food and water?
The Israelites had been in servitude back in the Nile delta, but they did not lack. Wall paintings in ancient tombs depict an assortment of grapes, melons, and other crops, as well as fish and poultry that would make for a varied diet. How accurate, then, the longing complaint in the wilderness: “Who will give us meat to eat? How we remember the fish that we used to eat in Egypt for nothing, the cucumbers and the watermelons and the leeks and the onions and the garlic!”​—Numbers 11:4, 5; 20:5.
After the Israelites crossed the Red Sea, the reality of Sinai soon dawned on them. They did not take the well-traveled trade route to the north but turned toward the tip of the triangular peninsula. By the time they had moved about 50 miles [80 km] through the wilderness, their need for water seemed critical. They could not drink what they found, for it was bitter and possibly bore diseases. “What are we to drink?” they cried. God intervened, turning the water sweet.​—Exodus 15:22-25.
Note the view of the camel train above. You can appreciate the question of how Israel would be able to continue through the wilderness toward Mount Sinai. How would they continue to find enough water​—and food—​for themselves as well as the flocks and herds that they needed to keep alive?​—Exodus 12:38.
They moved farther southward and soon found refreshing water and food at Elim. (Exodus 15:27) That, however, was not their destination. They were heading to “the mountain of the true God,” Mount Sinai. (Exodus 3:1; 18:5; 19:2; 24:12-18) That was 75 miles [120 km] away​—miles of rugged, arid land.
As the huge group progressed toward Mount Sinai, they came near​—and likely stopped at—​the major oasis known as Feiran. A small part of it is visible in the photograph on the opposite page.a It runs through a pass in the wilderness, toward the Red Sea (Gulf of Suez). What refreshment they could find there!
While the wilderness of Sinai might generally fit the description of a “great and fear-inspiring wilderness,” the Israelites could enjoy the shade of stately palms and other trees at the Feiran oasis. They would find ample sweet dates, providing food on the spot and a supply that they could carry with them.
All of this was possible because groundwater rose to the surface at Feiran. Imagine how you would feel if you were in the desert wilderness and suddenly found fresh water to drink! This illustrates that even in Sinai there are places where water is obtainable. Sometimes a well must be dug to quite a depth. It would then take work to draw up buckets or jars full of the vital fluid, especially if flocks and herds needed to be watered. To this day Bedouin of Sinai are attracted to wells where they can draw up water for themselves and their camels.​—Compare Genesis 24:11-20; 26:18-22.
Yes, despite occasions when they grumbled over what seemed like an insurmountable lack, the Israelites had water and food. Sometimes God miraculously provided such. (Exodus 16:11-18, 31; 17:2-6) At other times he evidently guided them to “a resting-place” where their real needs could be satisfied by natural supplies. (Numbers 10:33-36) All the while, he held before them the abundance that awaited the faithful in the Promised Land.​—Deuteronomy 11:10-15.
[Footnotes]
The photograph is available in larger size in the 1992 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture Credit Line on page 24]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Picture Credit Line on page 24]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Picture Credit Line on page 24, 25]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Picture Credit Line on page 25]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.

