
Cultivate the Habit of Being Punctual




 1. What example does Jehovah set regarding punctuality?
1 Jehovah is always on time. For instance, he gives his servants ‘help at the right time.’ (Heb. 4:16) He also dispenses spiritual “food at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45) We can therefore be confident that the coming day of his anger “will not be late.” (Hab. 2:3) How we benefit from Jehovah’s punctuality! (Ps. 70:5) As busy, imperfect humans, however, being on time can be a real challenge for us. Why should we cultivate the habit of being punctual?
 2. Why does punctuality bring honor to Jehovah?
2 Punctuality has become the exception during these last days when many people are lovers of themselves and without self-control. (2 Tim. 3:1-3) So when Christians are punctual for work, appointments, and meetings, others take notice, and this brings honor to Jehovah. (1 Pet. 2:12) Do we usually begin secular work on time but find that we are often late for theocratic events? Being on time for Christian meetings, including the opening song and prayer, demonstrates a desire to imitate our orderly heavenly Father.—1 Cor. 14:33, 40.
 3. Why does punctuality demonstrate consideration for others?
3 Being punctual also shows consideration for others. (Phil. 2:3, 4) For example, when we are on time for Christian meetings, including meetings for field service, fellow worshippers are not unduly disturbed. On the other hand, if we are habitually late, it gives others the impression that we consider our time to be more valuable than theirs. Punctuality demonstrates reliability, diligence, and trustworthiness—qualities appreciated by those around us.
 4. If we are often late, how can we make improvement?
4 If you are often late, meditate on the reasons why. Organize yourself by making a realistic schedule that enables you to accomplish tasks at their appointed time. (Eccl. 3:1; Phil. 1:10) Ask Jehovah for help. (1 John 5:14) Being punctual is one way of showing appreciation for the two greatest commandments of the Law—to love God and to love our neighbor.—Matt. 22:37-39.




