Announcements
● Literature offer for August: One of the following 32-page brochures for a contribution of 30¢: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $2.50. October: Subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for a contribution of $4.00 for each one-year subscription. November: New World Translation and True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for a contribution of $4.50.
● Starting in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk “Moving Ahead Worldwide Despite Persecution.” This will be a slide presentation. The public talk to be given by district overseers in connection with the new series of circuit assemblies beginning in September will be “Acts of God​—What Are They?”
● Secretaries should confirm the shipping addresses on congregation literature invoices to avoid returns. This includes congregations that are using one of the Society’s literature distribution centers, as the Society may mail certain items to them. If your current shipping address is different from what appears on your literature invoices, notify the Society in writing immediately, using the S-36 form.
● During the week of September 1-6, 1986, the Society will be taking an inventory of all literature on hand in Brooklyn. Because of this inventory, no congregation literature orders will be processed for shipment or for pickup during that week.
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature. Please fill out the forms completely and send the original to us no later than September 6, 1986. Keep a carbon copy for your files. We are sending a third copy for use as a work sheet.
● 1987 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses: Publishers and pioneers, please order your calendars through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these calendars now. Then on September 1, 1986, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society, using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Calendars in other languages should be listed under “Other Language Publications,” showing the quantity for each language separately as well as the year 1987. The calendars will be available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish.
Calendars are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers, pioneers, and the public. Do not send the remittance with the order. (See the Cost List, pars. 22-24.) Until the calendars are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices.
● New Publications Available:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Kosraean
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Arabic
Kingdom News No. 33​—Italian

