Everyone Can Have a Share
1 The apostle John heard 24 elders in the heavens praise God, saying: “You are worthy, Jehovah, . . . to receive the glory and the honor and the power.” (Rev. 4:11) All of Jehovah’s servants today can extol God with similar words of praise. (Ps. 148:1, 12, 13) We can do this during August by using the new Topic for Conversation and offering one of the suggested brochures.
2 The literature offer for August allows us to be versatile in adapting our presentation to the needs of the householder. We will be offering Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise. Prepare to offer whichever brochure seems to be most appropriate for the territory as well as the person that you meet at the door.
THE GOVERNMENT BROCHURE
3 After introducing yourself, you might say: “Mankind has suffered much throughout history. What do you think is the reason for this? [Allow for a response.] The Bible explains that man is incapable of governing himself well. [Read Ecclesiastes 8:9.] This scripture shows that it is impossible for humans to establish a government that will really bring lasting happiness. Only God can do that. Notice what the Bible says God’s government will accomplish.” [Read Micah 4:3, 4.] Conclude by saying: “To help you understand how God’s government will bring paradise, you may have this brochure for the contribution of 30¢. Notice what it says here on page 3.” Read paragraph.
THE LIFE ON EARTH BROCHURE
4 Are you a young praiser of Jehovah or someone who is just getting started in field service? The following presentation may help you to have a share in placing brochures during August. After giving your name, you could say: “I would like to leave with you a brochure that shows how a heavenly king will bring lasting happiness to mankind. Notice what is stated above picture number 49. [Read comments.] You will find it interesting to examine the pictures and read the scriptures that are cited in this brochure. It is yours for the contribution of 30¢.”
THE DIVINE NAME BROCHURE
5 A fine way to praise God is by exalting his name Jehovah. After giving your name, you may say: “I have been talking with your neighbors about the importance of knowing the name of the true God. Have you noticed that not many people use God’s name or know what it stands for? [Allow for a reply.] The Bible says at Psalm 83:18 that God’s name is Jehovah. His name means that he fulfills his promises. One of the wonderful promises he has made that will soon be fulfilled is found in Micah 4:3, 4.” Read the text and comment briefly. Then, continue by opening the brochure to page 31 and say: “Notice these comments concerning the value of knowing God’s name. [Read paragraph 1.] The information in this brochure is very enlightening. You may have this copy for a contribution of 30¢.”
6 Householders have different interests or needs. Some are religious and still read the Bible. Others like to talk about politics and government. Those limited in their reading ability would likely appreciate a simplified text with illustrations. Hence, when we talk to a person we need to discern what his interest is and offer him the appropriate brochure. May we all have a share in praising Jehovah during August by offering the brochures as we preach the good news of the Kingdom.

