Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 3
Song 139
10 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Encourage all to share in magazine witnessing on second Saturday of August. Suggest appropriate presentations for current magazines.
15 min: Local needs or talk on “Is the Bible Relevant for Me?” in May 22, 1986, Awake!
20 min: “Everyone Can Have a Share.” Talk and demonstrations. After a brief introduction based on paragraphs 1 and 2, present three well-rehearsed demonstrations of presentations discussed in paragraphs 3-5. Encourage young publishers in the congregation to learn presentation. As time permits, get comments from publishers about brochure offer and how they did in the field service on first Sunday of the month. Remind publishers that brochure placements are to be counted as booklets.
Song 166 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 10
Song 222
 8 min: Local announcements, accounts report, and Theocratic News.
17 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Using the Brochures to Start Studies.” Question-and-answer discussion with all paragraphs being read. Have well-prepared publishers demonstrate suggestions in paragraphs 3-5. Get comments from any who have started studies in brochures. Highlight point of using brochure as stepping-stone to a study in Live Forever book.
20 min: “Continued Increase Calls for Simplification of Procedures.” After brief introduction using material in paragraphs 1 and 2 of insert, conduct question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 3-11, with qualified brother reading paragraphs.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 17
Song 205
 7 min: Local announcements and “Progressively Walk in Jehovah’s Way.” Mention field service arrangements for the week. Make brief suggestions for presenting magazines on fourth Saturday of August.
18 min: “A Career With Everlasting Rewards.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. After paragraph 4, interview one or two pioneers about joys experienced in pioneering and why they are pursuing this career.
20 min: “Continued Increase Calls for Simplification of Procedures.” Talk, or preferably secretary and service overseer discuss paragraphs 12-28 of insert. Make encouraging local application of information.
Song 204 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 24
Song 26
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “The Circuit Overseer’s Visit​—A Provision for Spiritual Progress.” Question-and-answer coverage. Read selected scriptures as time allows. Draw out brief personal comments on how the friends have benefited from visits by the traveling overseers.
10 min: Experiences using Reasoning book. Select several publishers in advance to relate good results they have had in using the Reasoning book.
15 min: Talk by elder based on School brochure, pages 3, 30, and 31. Help parents appreciate the need to prepare their children for challenges they will encounter in school. Show how important it is for parents to become acquainted with their children’s teachers. New teachers should receive a copy of School brochure. Select points from the School brochure that may have local application. On matter of flag salute and national anthems, see Reasoning book, pages 274-5. Explain how to bring specific matters to the attention of teachers in a kindly and tactful manner.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.

