Presenting the Good News​—By Using the Brochures to Start Studies
1 More than 28 million copies of Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! have been published in 129 languages. Millions of copies of The Government That Will Bring Paradise and The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever have also been printed in many languages. During the month of August, our objective is to place these brochures and to start home Bible studies.
2 How can a brochure be used to start a Bible study, since there are no printed questions at the bottom of the pages? This can be done by merely reading the brochure with the householder, looking up the scriptures, and discussing the information. However, to do this successfully, we must be familiar with the material in the brochure and be alert to see that the main points in each paragraph are understood by the householder. The following paragraphs set forth suggestions on how discussions can be started in each of the brochures.
3 Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!: This brochure is easy to understand and has special appeal for younger ones as well as people with limited reading ability. The Scriptural points and pictures are numbered for easy reference. To start a study, ask the householder to open his copy of the brochure to Numbers 4 and 5. Ask him to describe what he sees in the picture. Help him to appreciate how it depicts the perfect start that God gave to Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden. Ask him if the earth is a paradise today and allow for his reply. After commenting briefly on the bad conditions in the earth today, turn to Number 49 and explain how Paradise will be restored to earth and how wickedness will be eliminated. Consider with the householder the written comments, the scriptures, and the picture. Then turn to Numbers 1 and 2 and ask the householder who alone can make the earth a paradise. Allow for his comment. Obviously, it would be the same one who made a paradise in the beginning​—God. Make arrangements to continue the discussion at a later time.
4 The Government That Will Bring Paradise: When placing this brochure, it is suggested that the paragraph on page 3 be considered. A direct approach would be to suggest reading the material on the following pages together in order to see why we need God’s Kingdom so much. Each paragraph could be read and discussed and the scriptures looked up and analyzed. The longer scripture citations may be summarized and the householder could be encouraged to read them as he has time. Help the householder to appreciate the pictures and understand how they tie in with the paragraphs under consideration.
5 The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever: Ask the householder to open his copy of the brochure to page 6. Read the heading “God’s Name​—Its Meaning and Pronunciation.” Then ask how he thinks we could find out what God’s name is. Allow for a reply. Then tell him that this portion of the brochure answers the question. Invite the householder to read the first paragraph with you, discuss it, and consider the cited scriptures. Emphasize the point that unless the Creator himself told us, there would be no way that we could know his name. Continue reading and discussing the paragraphs and scriptures.
6 These colorful and informative brochures can serve as stepping-stones to a regular home Bible study in the Live Forever book. A discussion in one of the brochures can help you to determine if the householder is genuinely interested in the truth. Any portion of a brochure that gets the householder’s attention may be considered and it is not necessary to study an entire brochure before going into one of the study books. May we all make good use of the brochures as we help sheeplike ones acquire an accurate knowledge of the truth.​—John 17:3.

