The Circuit Overseer’s Visit​—A Provision for Spiritual Progress
1 “We have just had the refreshing visit of our traveling overseer . . . and our expressions of gratitude need to be forwarded to you for assigning such a fine servant of Jehovah to our area.” The Society quite often receives such comments of appreciation for traveling overseers. Timely visits from experienced older men help us to make spiritual advancement.
2 In the first century, traveling elders accomplished much in building up the congregations. They gave needed counsel. (1 Thess. 2:1, 10-12) They brought direction from the governing body. (Acts 16:4, 5) They related experiences from other parts of the field, showing how the good news was reaching others. (Acts 14:27, 28) What stimulating occasions such visits must have been!
3 Regular visits by traveling overseers today also stimulate spiritual growth. However, in order to derive the fullest benefit possible, we individually need to have the proper mental attitude and give full support to the activities organized during each visit. How can this be done?
PROPER MENTAL ATTITUDE AND PREPARATION
4 First, we should ‘brace up our minds for activity.’ (1 Pet. 1:13) To do this, we need to have the right point of view of the visit and make specific plans to have an enlarged share in the ministry. Can you auxiliary pioneer during the month of the circuit overseer’s visit? Could you adjust your daily routine so as to work in the field service during the week? Could you schedule return visits or a Bible study for a weekday afternoon? The circuit overseer would be pleased to accompany you and even to conduct your study if that is your desire.
5 The information presented in the meetings during the circuit overseer’s visit can also add to your spiritual growth. Listen carefully to his talks and be prepared to participate in the special program “Continue in the Things That You Learned.” You may want to take notes of interesting Scriptural points or of counsel given. The pioneer meeting can help regular pioneers and those currently serving as auxiliary pioneers to improve the quality of their ministry. Meetings with the elders and ministerial servants enable these spirit-appointed men to receive needed counsel and direction from God’s organization. All of this serves to strengthen the congregation.​—Acts 15:36, 41.
6 The circuit overseer’s visit offers fine encouragement to help Bible students make further progress. His visit may help them to appreciate the importance of attending all congregation meetings. Be sure to explain to them the role and work of the circuit overseer. If the student has progressed to the point of qualifying as an approved associate, invite him to share in the ministry during the week. Cultivate heartfelt appreciation for this timely provision through Jehovah’s visible organization.
7 Traveling overseers serving the 378 circuits and 38 districts in this country have many years of experience in the truth and in the full-time ministry. These brothers and their wives give of themselves wholeheartedly. Every six months or so, it is a privilege to share in a week of spiritually stimulating Kingdom activity with them. It would be wise on our part to take full advantage of the circuit overseer’s visit and receive whatever spiritual gift he may impart. (Rom. 1:11, 12) Plan now to benefit from this provision for your spiritual progress.

