
Image Index

Referenced by page number









Covers  Paul, Tabitha, Gallio, Luke, a temple officer with the apostles, a Sadducee, Paul being escorted to Caesarea, and modern-day witnessing with a sound car and a phonograph.






Page 1  Paul, in chains, and Luke aboard a cargo ship on its way to Rome.






Pages 2, 3  Brothers J. E. Barr and T. Jaracz of the Governing Body at a world map.






Page 11  Jesus commissions the 11 faithful apostles and other followers on a mountain in Galilee.






Page 14  Jesus ascends into the sky. The apostles gaze after him.






Page 20  At Pentecost, the disciples begin speaking to visitors in their own languages.






Page 36  The apostles stand before a raging Caiaphas. The temple officers are at the disposal of the Sanhedrin to make arrests.






Page 44  Bottom: After World War II, an East German court wrongfully convicted Jehovah’s Witnesses as American spies.​—Periodical Neue Berliner Illustrierte, October 3, 1950.






Page 46  Stephen stands accused before the Sanhedrin. Wealthy Sadducees are in the background, and ultraorthodox Pharisees, in the foreground.






Page 54  Peter lays his hands on a new disciple; Simon is shown with a coin purse.






Page 75  Peter and his traveling companions enter Cornelius’ home. Cornelius wears a special cloak draped over his left shoulder to mark his rank as a centurion.






Page 83  Peter is led by an angel; the Tower of Antonia is the possible location of Peter’s imprisonment.






Page 84  Bottom: Mob violence near Montreal, Quebec, in 1945.​—Periodical Weekend Magazine, July 1956.






Page 91  Paul and Barnabas are thrown out of Pisidian Antioch. The city’s new aqueduct is shown in the background, likely built during the early first century C.E.






Page 94  Paul and Barnabas resist adulation in Lystra. Public sacrifices were usually colorful and noisy occasions with lots of music.






Page 100  Top: Silas and Judas encourage the congregation in Syrian Antioch. (Acts 15:30-32) Bottom: A circuit overseer speaks to a congregation in Uganda.






Page 107  The Jerusalem congregation meets in a private home.






Page 124  Paul and Timothy are portrayed traveling aboard a Roman merchant ship. A lighthouse can be seen in the distance.






Page 139  Paul and Silas are depicted in a gated courtyard, escaping an angry mob.






Page 155  Gallio chastises Paul’s accusers. He wears clothing befitting his position: a white imperial toga with a broad purple stripe and calcei, a type of shoe.






Page 158  Demetrius addresses workers in a silversmith’s shop in Ephesus. The silver shrines of Artemis are sold as souvenirs.






Page 171  Paul and his companions board a ship. The Great Harbor Monument, built in the first century B.C.E., is shown in the background.






Page 180  Bottom: During the 1940’s literature ban in Canada, a young Witness smuggles Bible literature. (Reenactment.)






Page 182  Paul yields to the elders’ request. Luke and Timothy are sitting in the background, assisting with the delivery of the contributions.






Page 190  Paul’s nephew speaks to Claudius Lysias in the Tower of Antonia, possible location of Paul’s custody. Herod’s temple shown in the background.






Page 206  Paul prays for weary travelers in the hold of a cargo ship.






Page 222  The prisoner Paul, chained to a Roman soldier, viewing part of the city of Rome.





PEOPLE PROFILES

Proselytes
Peter
John
Priests
Gamaliel
Philip
Ethiopian eunuch
Saul
Tabitha
Cornelius
Herod Agrippa I
Barnabas
James
Mark
Timothy
Luke
Lydia
Caesars
Epicureans and Stoics
Sadducees and Pharisees
Felix
Porcius Festus
Herod Agrippa II



