Einstein’s Appraisal of Man’s Knowledge
“The greatest single achievement of science,” asserts noted science writer Lewis Thomas in an essay appearing in The New York Times, “is the discovery that we are profoundly ignorant.” Is this statement an exaggeration? To the contrary, in a letter to the Times, Ely E. Pilchik wrote: “Let me submit some support [for Thomas’ statement] from a fairly weighty source.” He explained that on May 20, 1954, he had addressed the following inquiry to Professor Albert Einstein:
“It has been reported to me that in the last month or so you had conversations with a visitor in which the subject of our knowledge of the laws of the universe was discussed. You indicated that despite all our recent advancements our knowledge remains rather meager. You illustrated this by two examples: First, our increase in knowledge is comparable to that which a man, interested in learning more about the moon, gets when he climbs upon the roof of his house to catch a closer look at that luminary.
“According to the report, your second illustration of our minimal knowledge of the universe focused on the moment you completed your formula of the general theory of relativity. [At] that moment an ordinary house-fly landed on your paper. You reflected that here you had set down all the major universal physical laws, as though to say, here is the key to all the secrets of the universe, yet you really do not know very much about the nature of that little fly.
“So have these words been conveyed to me. I should like, with your permission, to cite them if they be correct. If not, I would most deeply appreciate your correcting me.”
The inquirer received a reply dated May 21, 1954, which said: “The description of my conversation with your informant is substantially correct and you may use it in this form. With kind regards, Sincerely yours, (signed) A. Einstein.”​—New York Times, September 1, 1981.
Though man continues to increase his knowledge of the universe, it is still relatively meager, bringing to mind Job’s words concerning God and his creation: “Look! These are the fringes of his ways, and what a whisper of a matter has been heard of him! But of his mighty thunder who can show an understanding?”​—Job 26:14.

