Loyally Submitting to Theocratic Order
“Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity! It is like the dew of Hermon that is descending upon the mountains of Zion.”​—Psalm 133:1, 3.
 1. How does Jehovah’s Word describe his earthly household of dedicated servants?
WHAT a fine description this is of the household of those who, though widely spread around the earth, have dedicated their lives to their common Parent, Jehovah God! And He surely presides over this global household in a grand manner. Lovingly he provides for all our needs.​—Psalm 145:16.
 2. What does submitting to theocratic order mean?
2 Yet, firmly Jehovah insists on peace and unity on the part of all his devoted children. (1 Corinthians 1:10) And these good results come by God’s servants loyally submitting to theocratic order. What does that mean? Since God’s rulership is called a theocracy (God rule), submitting to theocratic order means being obedient to the laws, rules and principles issuing from God.​—Isaiah 33:22.
 3. How did Jesus express his feelings about submitting to God’s rule?
3 The finest example of loyally submitting to theocratic order is that of Jesus Christ. In heaven he was “the firstborn of all creation.” (Colossians 1:15) “Jehovah himself produced me as the beginning of his way, the earliest of his achievements of long ago. From time indefinite I was installed, from the start, from times earlier than the earth. . . . I came to be beside [God] as a master worker, and I came to be the one he was specially fond of day by day, I being glad before him all the time.” (Proverbs 8:22, 23, 30) His delight in submitting to God’s rule was evident when he was on earth, for Jesus explained: “I have come down from heaven to do, not my will, but the will of him that sent me.” (John 6:38) As part of doing God’s will, he was very careful to teach God’s thoughts, not his own. “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him that sent me,” Jesus said. (John 7:16) What a fine attitude for all of God’s servants to imitate!
 4. Describe the theocratic arrangement in our day.
4 Because of his loyal submission to theocratic rule, even to the death, Jesus was rewarded with immortal heavenly life. Additionally, he was given “all authority . . . in heaven and on the earth.” (Matthew 28:18) In turn, he entrusted “all his belongings” on earth (earthly interests of his Kingdom) to faithful anointed Christians. These ones Jesus called a “faithful and discreet slave.” (Matthew 24:45-47) Their reward is someday to share heavenly rule with Christ as “priests” and “kings” in his kingdom. (Revelation 14:1, 4; 20:6) Today, a remnant of this ‘faithful slave’ is still alive on earth. Their duties include receiving and passing on to all of Jehovah’s earthly servants spiritual food at the proper time. They occupy a position similar to that of Paul and his colaborers when that apostle said of the wonderful truths God gives to his people: “It is to us God has revealed them through his spirit.” (1 Corinthians 2:9, 10) They also take the lead in the Kingdom preaching service that must be accomplished “in all the inhabited earth” before the end of this doomed system of things.​—Matthew 24:14.
Results of Wrong Course
 5, 6. (a) What consequences came to Eve and Adam for wanting independence from Jehovah? (b) How does Jehovah deal with ‘wolves in sheep’s clothing’?
5 How vital it is for everyone in God’s family to submit loyally to the teachings and arrangements of the Great Theocrat, Jehovah, and his King-Son, Christ Jesus, as transmitted through the ‘faithful slave’ on earth! Since theocratic order begins with Jehovah himself and extends downward, never would we want to imitate Satan the Devil by becoming independent of theocratic rule. Recall the sorry results that came to Eve when she listened to Satan’s deceptive urging for her not to submit to theocratic order. In effect, he said to her: ‘Be independent of God. Do your own thinking. Decide for yourself what is right and wrong. Then you’ll be like God. You positively will not die.’ (Genesis 3:1-5) That may have sounded appealing, but it was a lie. (John 8:44) When her husband joined her in abandoning submission to theocratic order, they were expelled from the garden of Eden and from God’s family of loyal ones. In time, just as Jehovah had warned, the death sentence was executed on both of them.​—Genesis 2:17.
6 Likewise today, any among Jehovah’s people who indulge in independent and contrary teaching imitate, not God, but Satan the Devil. However, Jehovah sees what is happening among his family and takes account. (Proverbs 15:3) He will not tolerate wolflike persons who would devour his sheeplike ones, but at the proper time he takes decisive action. (Matthew 7:15-23) Like a loving father, he protects the spiritual well-being of his family.​—Ezekiel 34:11-16.
 7. (a) What did Aaron and Miriam fail to take to heart? (b) With what consequences?
7 Other Bible examples also highlight the danger of not loyally submitting to theocratic order. For example, Miriam and Aaron presumed on their family relationship with Moses and challenged his position in the congregation of ancient Israel. (Numbers 12:1, 2) They failed to take to heart the fact that Jehovah himself had assigned to Moses special authority, attested to by miraculous events. Jehovah reminded them: “My servant Moses . . . is being entrusted with all my house. Mouth to mouth I speak to him. . . . Why, then, did you not fear to speak against my servant, against Moses?” Then “Jehovah’s anger got to be hot against them.” Aaron was severely rebuked, and, for her part, Miriam was struck with leprosy and expelled from the camp of Israel for seven days.​—Numbers 12:7-15.
 8. What does the case of King Saul illustrate?
8 Then there was King Saul of ancient Israel who refused to wait on Jehovah. Instead, he presumptuously offered up sacrifices even though he was not a priest. His feeble excuse was that he was in danger of losing his army through desertions. Yet, whose army was it? Saul’s or Jehovah’s? The prophet Samuel told him: “You have acted foolishly. You have not kept the commandment of Jehovah your God . . . And now your kingdom will not last.” (1 Samuel 13:13, 14) The kingship was taken from Saul and given to ‘a man agreeable to Jehovah’s heart.’ Thus, Saul paid a heavy price for his lack of submission and also for his lack of genuine repentance when the matter was called to his attention. This illustrates that Jehovah does take note of presumptuous, independent, nontheocratic activity among his people.​—Proverbs 11:2.
 9. Why was King Uzziah made an outcast?
9 The case of King Uzziah of Judah is similar. Although he was king over Jehovah’s people, he was not authorized to serve in any priestly capacity. Yet he insisted on exercising the function of a priest. The priests protested vigorously and declared: “It is not your business, O Uzziah, to burn incense to Jehovah, but it is the business of the priests the sons of Aaron, the ones sanctified, to burn incense. Go out from the sanctuary; for you have acted unfaithfully.” Then, showing his lack of repentance, Uzziah raged against the priests, adding to his sin of presumptuousness. “During his rage against the priests, leprosy itself flashed up in his forehead . . . because Jehovah had smitten him.” He continued to be a leper to his dying day, an outcast, “severed from the house of Jehovah.”​—2 Chronicles 26:16-21.
10. How did Paul describe those who challenged his appointment by Jesus?
10 The apostle Paul spoke of certain ones who challenged the special appointment he had from the Head of the Christian congregation, Jesus Christ. (2 Corinthians 11:12) But Paul said that such men were “false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ. And no wonder, for Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light.” (2 Corinthians 11:13, 14) Those men had their own selfish purposes to advance. Paul had warned of this kind of person, stating: “From among you yourselves men will rise and speak twisted things to draw away the disciples after themselves. Therefore keep awake.” (Acts 20:30, 31) Paul pleaded with the brothers, including those would-be apostles, not to allow strife and disorder to mar the unity and fruitfulness of the Christian congregation. If any failed to heed the spirit-inspired counsel, then they were headed for certain disaster.​—Galatians 1:7-9.
11. How does Jehovah protect the harmony of his earthly household?
11 The inspired Bible writer John declared: “Everyone that pushes ahead and does not remain in the teaching of the Christ does not have God. . . . If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, never receive him into your homes or say a greeting to him. For he that says a greeting to him is a sharer in his wicked works.” (2 John 9-11) Yes, Jehovah will protect the good spirit and harmony of his household.
Being on Guard Today
12. To what is Jehovah gathering all those who love him?
12 In this “final part of the days” Jehovah is gathering all those who love him into one unified, harmonious organization. People of all nations are heeding the call, “Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.” (Isaiah 2:2, 3) Note that Jehovah instructs people in his ways so that they can walk in his paths, not their own ways and their own paths.​—Jeremiah 10:23, 24.
13. (a) Why must we be especially on guard now? (b) What do we need to offset Satan’s designs?
13 However, Satan now has “great anger.” He knows that he has only “a short period of time” left before he is put out of action. So he “walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.” (Revelation 12:12; 1 Peter 5:8) Therefore, we need to be on guard against any efforts of the god of this world, Satan the Devil, to introduce contention and division among the members of Jehovah’s family. “So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, buying out the opportune time for yourselves, because the days are wicked. On this account cease becoming unreasonable, but go on perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.” (Ephesians 5:15-17) By taking advantage of Jehovah’s provisions for our spiritual welfare, we will be built up, refined, properly armed. In this way we will be able to offset Satan’s wicked schemes and defeat his purpose.​—Ephesians 6:10-13.
14. Why is there great danger in thinking more highly of ourselves than we ought to?
14 A mental attitude that must be guarded against is thinking more highly of ourselves than we ought to think. (Romans 12:3) That could lead a Christian into believing that he has a special mission from God apart from the channel through which Jehovah dispenses his truths and directs his household. It would, in effect, place him in a supposed special relationship with Jehovah not enjoyed by any other brother or sister in the household. But that sort of isolation can lead only to folly: “One isolating himself will seek his own selfish longing; against all practical wisdom he will break forth.”​—Proverbs 18:1.
Waiting on Jehovah
15. (a) Is it proper to make suggestions to Jehovah’s “slave” class? (b) Illustrate the application of theocratic submission in the first century.
15 At times, some bring to the attention of the “slave” class various doctrinal or organizational matters that they feel ought to be revised. Certainly, suggestions for improvement are proper, as are inquiries for clarification. An example of this was when Paul, Barnabas and others were sent “to go up to the apostles and older men in Jerusalem” regarding circumcision. When those elders at Jerusalem decided the matter, under the direction of holy spirit, they then sent brothers to various cities to “deliver to those there for observance the decrees that had been decided upon by the apostles and older men who were in Jerusalem.” Loyal submission to those decrees brought Jehovah’s blessing. Thus, “the congregations continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number from day to day.”​—Acts 15:1–16:5.
16. (a) What is the proper spirit to show after offering suggestions? (b) How does Paul counsel handling those who show the wrong spirit?
16 The proper spirit after offering suggestions is to be content to leave the matter to the prayerful consideration of the mature brothers directing the work in Jehovah’s organization. But if those making the suggestions are not content with that and continue to dispute the subject in the congregations with a view to getting others to support them, what then? That would create divisions, and could subvert the faith of some. So Paul counsels: “Keep your eye on those who cause divisions and occasions for stumbling contrary to the teaching that you have learned, and avoid them.” Paul also counseled Titus to “reprove those who contradict,” adding: “It is necessary to shut the mouths of these, as these very men keep on subverting entire households by teaching things they ought not . . . For this very cause keep on reproving them with severity.”​—Romans 16:17, 18; Titus 1:9-13.
17. How can we today imitate David’s fine attitude?
17 God’s Word states: “Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.” (1 Corinthians 8:1) So how much better to keep busy in the primary work of proclaiming God’s wonderful kingdom, speaking upbuilding things, strengthening the faith of others and ourselves, while patiently waiting for Jehovah to work out his will through his appointed channel! (Romans 14:19; Philippians 4:8, 9) Imitate David when he said: “For on you, O Jehovah, I waited; you yourself proceeded to answer, O Jehovah my God.” (Psalm 38:15) Always keep in mind the important consideration as stated by Paul, namely, “that you should all speak in agreement, and that there should not be divisions among you, but that you may be fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.” (1 Corinthians 1:10) Because this principle is being applied in Jehovah’s family throughout the world, we see marvelous results. Indeed, “how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity”!​—Psalm 133:1.
Can You Answer These Questions:
□ How did Jesus set a fine example in submitting to theocratic order?
□ What can result from a lack of submission to theocratic order?
□ Why must we be especially on guard against Satan today?
□ In making suggestions, what attitude should we have?
[Picture on page 18]
Because of not submitting to theocratic order, King Uzziah was struck with leprosy

