Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
When we are busy in Jehovah’s service, time certainly goes by fast, doesn’t it? Here we are at the close of another service year, and what a fine year it has been in many respects, capped off by a grand spiritual feast at the summer district assemblies.
We know that you will be interested in some recent developments in preparing for future expansion. Two large, high-speed rotary offset presses have been purchased for the Brooklyn factory. One is being installed this summer and the other will be delivered in October. The presses will improve the quality of printing, especially the pictures. Each has a top capacity of 32,000 impressions per hour, which is three or four times the capacity of one of the four older presses being dismantled to make room for the new ones. For over a year now the new Photoplate Department, with its versatile 32ʺ × 32ʺ precision camera, has contributed toward improved illustrations and a considerable savings in the printing of our literature and magazines.
The Towers building is over 80 percent renovated. Working down from the fifteenth or top floor, each floor has been finished progressively and occupied, until now there remain only floors one to three, and the sub-basement, to be completed. Since May we have been making use of the two new dining rooms, accommodating over 950 persons, and a new kitchen on the basement level.
By early fall the Society will have in operation a small business computer to handle bookkeeping, invoicing, the making of labels and inventory of literature. This will speed up operations here and give you better service.
Also we are happy to pass along to you some encouraging news on expansion from overseas that has come to us. In Colombia, France, Greece, the Netherlands, New Caledonia, South Africa, Switzerland and Zambia expanded facilities are under construction or are well along in the planning stage. Some other branches are looking into the possibility of expanding their facilities or obtaining new quarters. All of this gives evidence that Jehovah is providing his organization with what is needed to continue the gathering of the sheeplike ones.
Looking to the new service year, we can confidently wait upon Jehovah to bless our efforts, as we put Kingdom interests first in our lives. We assure you of our joy in working with you in these momentous last days.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

