Presenting the Good News—With Discernment and Tact
1 “Let your utterance be always with graciousness, seasoned with salt, so as to know how you ought to give an answer to each one.” (Col. 4:6) This requires the use of discernment and tact while witnessing to our neighbors, that we “might by all means save some.”—1 Cor. 9:19-23.
2 How can we do this effectively when most people we meet at the doors are strangers? Well, first of all, we already know much about the attitudes, fears and concerns of people in our neighborhood—the high cost of living, crime, unhappy marriages, problems in raising children, racial tensions and so forth.
3 For example, in October we will be offering the special Awake! that features a series of articles on the theme: “Racial Differences—How Great Are They?” While using this issue of Awake!, how can you effectively discuss this controversial subject? First, you might give some thought to the general attitude of the people in the neighborhood in which you will be working. Are racial feelings strong or extreme? Or, are most people rather moderate and tolerant? Will you be talking mainly to those of your own race or those of another? And remember that our purpose in discussing the subject of racial differences is not only to set the record straight on how God views people of different races but primarily to establish an opening for preaching the good news.
4 Questions, rather than bold statements, will often help to ‘season with salt’ what you have to say on this delicate subject, especially in some communities. After commenting on several appropriate phrases from 2 Timothy 3:1-5 to show conditions that would mark the last days, you might ask if they feel that those attitudes are responsible to a great degree for the racial problems that exist in many parts of the world.
5 Even in an area where racial feelings run high, you can tactfully ask, “While each of us has his own opinion on the issue of race, wouldn’t it be nice if people of all races could live without displays of racial hatred and violence?” If the householder is of your own race, you might ask: “Do you believe that the bitter feelings that sometimes exist between our race and other races will ever be eliminated?”
6 If you detect that the person has a moderate view of racial differences, you might ask: “While racial prejudice is strong in some parts of the country, have you ever considered God’s viewpoint toward the different races, as found at Acts 10:34, 35?” Or you may wish to refer to Revelation 7:9, where John records a vision from God, of people “out of all nations and tribes and . . . tongues” praising God for their having been delivered into his new system of things.
7 In certain areas you may be able to say: “In discussing racial differences some people have said certain races are more intelligent than others. Whatever your view might be, I’m sure you would appreciate reading what this issue of Awake! has to say on the subject.”
8 In many instances you will be able not only to offer the special issue of Awake! but also to invite the householder to subscribe. Briefly tell him how he will benefit from the variety of articles featured in Awake! in the 24 issues of each year. The three booklets you place with the subscription will afford an excellent opportunity to return and start a Bible study.
9 By thus using discernment and tact in the field service, we can be confident that Jehovah will help us to “impart what is favorable to the hearers.”—Eph. 4:29.

