Use New Tract to Start Conversations
1 The new tract, “The Family—Can It Survive?”, has been especially designed to aid us to start conversations. And conversations on the Bible lead to Bible studies. So, this will be our twin objective in September: To distribute tracts and start conversations leading to Bible studies. And since we will be spending more time with many of those contacted, we will be taking the whole month for distributing the tract.
2 The family and its survival are matters of concern to all. The pressures and problems of this modern generation affect people of all economic levels, young and old, men and women. So, whoever comes to the door, we have a topic that concerns that person. The important thing is to make your presentation simple but forceful.
3 Let them know that you have brought them a special message about the family. Hand it to them and tell them that it is free. Then state that, while at their home, you want to call their attention to several points in the tract. Open another copy of the tract and refer to some of these points of concern: Divorces have increased so that now the rate is close to one in three marriages. Many couples who stay together are having serious problems. Children rebel against their parents and youthful lawbreakers are steadily increasing. To promote conversation and interest, ask them how they feel about these threats to the survival of the family.
THE BIBLE HAS THE ANSWERS
4 Discussing several threats to the family unit will lead naturally to the Bible. Explain to them how the Bible foretold the very conditions we see today. Read selected phrases from 2 Timothy 3:1-5, on page 2 of the tract (or directly from the Bible if the householder has the time): “In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, . . . disobedient to parents, . . . having no natural affection.”
5 The Bible not only foretells these conditions that threaten the family, but also shows how families can have a good measure of success and happiness. After making this point, you might turn to page 4 of the tract and call attention to one or more of the questions presented. But, while these serious family problems exist in the community and world wide, we do not want to imply that they exist in the home of the person with whom we are speaking. Be careful not to give the impression of prying.
6 Now you are ready to introduce the Truth book. Turn to chapter 20, “Building a Happy Family Life.” Invite the person to listen as you read the first paragraph (or another of your choice). Ask if it is not reasonable to turn to the Originator of marriage and family life to get the best advice. This will lead right into paragraph 2. Conclude your brief study by referring to the subheadings in the chapter and suggest reading the rest of it very soon. Offer the Truth book and ask if it would be convenient to stop by the following week to continue the discussion.
7 Realistically, we will not expect to go as far as presenting a Bible study at every door. But try to get the tract into every home, if possible. And as you do this with enthusiasm and real concern for your neighbors, likely there will be many opportunities to engage people in conversation and occasionally to place the Truth book in order to lay the groundwork for a Bible study. Evening witnessing and auxiliary pioneering may open up additional opportunities for many to engage more fully in the tract distribution in September. Keep in mind the twin goal: Distributing tracts and starting conversations with a view to having Bible studies.

