Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 4
15 min: Song 37. Announcements from page 7 and any local announcements. Theocratic News. “Become Kind to One Another.” Talk based on article in November 15, 1975, Watchtower (pp. 675, 676). Have audience read appropriate scriptures and comment on them.
25 min: Talk and audience discussion of organizational adjustments discussed in insert of this Our Kingdom Service. Since all of insert will be considered, only the highlights will be discussed. Selected scriptures can be used in showing Scriptural support for adjustments.
20 min: “Use New Tract to Start Conversations.” Read and progressively demonstrate suggestions in article: (1) Publisher goes to door; householder busy but accepts brief witness and tract, then interrupts with “not interested” before publisher is able to present Truth book. (Chairman: No reason to be discouraged. Preaching of good news is being done. We know some will reject.) (2) Same publisher introduces tract and discusses points from 2 Timothy 3:1-5. Offers to demonstrate value of Truth book, but householder shows lack of interest. (3) Publisher now goes to third door; householder listens to presentation, accepts book, and publisher lays groundwork for Bible study by starting to discuss chapter on family when chairman cuts in to summarize what might be expected at various homes. In most instances, not be able to get beyond placing the tract and perhaps offering the book, but do not be discouraged. They have the tract and you are preaching the good news. But wherever there is enough interest, follow through and try to start a Bible study. In some cases, might find it best to arrange for return visit to start Bible study.
Since four issues of the magazines will be arriving in September, we will want to carry them along when we are sharing in the tract distribution. Most of the September issues feature articles about problems affecting family life. When the conversation at the door indicates that the householder would appreciate something further to read, offer the magazines or the Truth book. Keep in mind that our objective is, not simply to place literature, but to start conversations leading to Bible studies. If each publisher would be able to start one study during the month, that would be a very good accomplishment during the tract campaign. Outline service arrangements and encourage all to share. Song 7 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 11
20 min: Song 11. Local announcements, including accounts report. “Making Service Meetings Interesting.” Talk and audience discussion. Presiding overseer might handle and include any suggestions that the body of elders feel would improve the service meetings locally.
20 min: Benefiting from the Schools of the Congregation. Newly assigned school overseer reviews with audience how all can benefit from Theocratic School. (See Study 2 of School Guidebook.) Report can be given on progress of literacy and/or reading improvement classes, and others can be invited to participate if they need help in reading improvement. Some practical and helpful points from the letter sent recently to the body of elders on the reading schools can be covered. (If no reading school is in operation or anticipated, the full time can be spent on the Theocratic School.)
20 min: “Increasing Your Joy in Serving God.” Questions and answers. Cover article in 10 minutes. Devote remaining 10 minutes to interviewing publishers of various ages and backgrounds as to what brings them particular joy in Jehovah’s service. Show how some overcame problems in increasing joy, such as (1) fear of talking to strangers or lack of motivation; (2) lack of preparation for service; (3) frequent territory coverage or negative reaction of people in territory. If finding people home is a problem, perhaps evening witnessing is the answer. Review service arrangements for coming week, keeping in mind our twin objective of placing tracts and starting conversations leading to Bible studies. Song 101 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 18
17 min: Song 12. Local announcements. Clean worship requires that we look after “orphans and widows in their tribulation.” Discuss with congregation practical ways that this requirement of true worship can be fulfilled. Have audience look up and comment on following scriptures: Jas. 1:27; Ex. 22:22-24; Deut. 24:19-21; 27:19; Ps. 146:9. Recognize that in addition to actual widows and fatherless children, there are those whose mates are not in the truth or children with one or both parents not in the truth. They need special encouragement and help also. And where there is a material need, we want to be quick to see how we can be of assistance by sharing what we have. (See w77 9/15, pp. 560-565; w74 2/1, pp. 82, 83; w71 7/1, pp. 414, 415; ad pp. 570, 1654.)
13 min: Talk on article in July 15, 1977, Watchtower: “Humility—A Most Desirable Quality.”
15 min: Discussion of Branch Letter by field overseer who served last service year. Relate highlights of congregation’s activities during year. Based on congregation’s records, some suggestions might be made for improvements in field service activity and/or meeting attendance. Publishers may benefit from reviewing their personal field record. (Publisher’s Record card file should be on hand for any who desire to check their cards after this meeting.) Is there something we can do to have a fuller share in all features of service and to become more fully involved in the meetings? Discuss local arrangements that have been made to assist publishers and to make service more convenient.
15 min: Review progress so far in tract distribution. Any problems developing? Several experienced publishers might relate their experiences and tell how they have been successful in presenting tract, leading into a Bible study in Truth book. What can be done to ensure that all tracts will be distributed by end of month? If some need more tracts or have more than they can put out, arrangements can be made for redistribution. If there is likelihood of some tracts remaining at end of month, perhaps we might shorten presentation somewhat while not cutting down on effectiveness. Outline arrangements for group witnessing for coming week, including evening witnessing, and encourage all to support. Song 76 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 25
15 min: Song 77. Local announcements. Audience discussion: Appreciating the Provisions of Jehovah. How does showing appreciation help us to avoid being critical or being a complainer? (1 Tim. 6:6-8; Matt. 18:32-35) Why is it important not to take for granted the physical and spiritual blessings of Jehovah, including life itself? (Deut. 8:10-14; Ps. 90:12; Luke 12:15) In what practical ways can we reflect the attitude of David at Psalm 27:4?
13 min: Talk based on article: “Do Not Despise the Man of Little Means” in May 15, 1977, Watchtower.
18 min: Presenting the Good News. By discussion and demonstrations, help audience see how to apply suggestions in offering Awake! subscriptions in October.
14 min: Helping Others to Wake Up Before It Is Too Late! Newly assigned field overseer gives brief report on what has been accomplished in tract work in September. Keep following up on interest located. Discuss arrangements for getting Awake! campaign off to a good start on the weekend. Encourage all to think of possibilities for placing subscriptions. Use booklets in starting Bible studies. By planning a good schedule for service, including evening witnessing, likely many will be able to have a very good share in service during month. Song 59 and prayer.

