From Our Readers
AIDS
I’m writing in response to your articles on AIDS and especially a letter commenting that “Jehovah’s Witnesses seem to be the only ones free of the risk of contracting AIDS because they don’t ‘shoot’ drugs, practice homosexuality or bisexuality, are faithful to their spouses, and don’t accept blood transfusions.” AIDS is a disease that threatens all, even Jehovah’s Witnesses. I deeply resent the insinuation that only they are free of AIDS. Please stop making it sound as if it is a divine retribution, because then you’d have to admit that cancer is also, and it isn’t.
R. C., United States
Our reader may have in mind an item from “Watching the World” (May 8, 1988). The statement was made by a medical expert on infectious diseases and was published in the Brazilian “ISTOÉ” magazine. Similar comments have been made by other medical sources who acknowledge the lower risk incurred by following the principles mentioned. Of course, R. C. is correct in saying that even Jehovah’s Witnesses are threatened, but usually because of their behavior before becoming Witnesses, or because they live with spouses who do not follow Biblical commands. We fail to see any parallel with cancer, which usually does not result from violations of Bible principles.​—ED.
Day Care
I would like to compliment you on your coverage of “The Day-Care Controversy” in the December 8, 1987, issue of Awake! The information was accurate and presented in a balanced way. . . . There was one important aspect of quality child care that your article did not mention​—the importance of a mutually respectful relationship between parents and child-care providers. The greater the involvement on the part of the parents, the better the likelihood that the quality of care will be high. Care givers need to know that they are appreciated by the parents and are not just paid servants. It’s important to establish close and easy communications with the care giver . . . You are serving your readers well by guiding their thinking on this important topic.
K. M., National Education Director
Children’s World, United States
Cultured Pearls
I really enjoy reading your magazines, and I find them informative and well presented. For this reason, I was somewhat shocked to see the article on cultured pearls in the Awake! of January 22, 1988. A pearl comes about through the introduction of foreign matter into the body of an oyster. Not only does this foreign substance encumber the oyster but it is later cut out of the living creature, which by then is fully equipped with its own nervous system. To me this amounts to cruelty to animals.
F. G., Federal Republic of Germany
The article was familiarizing our readers with an industry and was not addressing its morality. We recognize that there are personal sensitivities regarding the treatment of anything alive, and we do not criticize such personal feelings. However, we try to follow the indications of our Creator’s view expressed in the Bible, which speaks favorably of pearls and also allows for using “every moving animal . . . as food” for humans. (Genesis 9:3; Matthew 13:46) In the final analysis, the pearl operation is little different from any slaughterhouse where far more complex animals are killed for food daily.​—ED.

