The Bible’s Viewpoint
Why Bible Prophecies Are Valuable to You
“IF WE only had positive proof that the Bible is God’s Word,” say many persons, “we would believe it.” Oftentimes, however, such persons are unable to say what “positive proof” would be necessary to convince them. Would it be a miracle?
Jesus performed many miracles while here on earth, yet skeptics refused to accept them as proof that he was God’s Spokesman. Why, some contended that it was “by means of Beelzebub the ruler of the demons” that Jesus performed certain miracles! Jesus acknowledged that some “miracles” performed by others were actually the works of Satan. (Luke 11:14-19; Matthew 7:22, 23) Therefore, something else would be needed as positive proof that the Bible is God’s Word​—something that would show that the very words of the Bible, the messages contained therein, are from God himself.
In the pages of the Bible itself, we find such proof​—prophecy. Certainly, Jehovah as the God of truth and Source of all wisdom, the One knowing from the beginning the end, should be able to predict what will take place in future times, including our own. (Psalm 31:5; Proverbs 2:6; Isaiah 46:9, 10) This he has done in his written Word, and often in great detail. Let us consider just one set of prophecies that center on Jesus Christ.
Prophecies That Prove Jesus to Be the Messiah
Hundreds of Bible prophecies found their fulfillment in Jesus Christ.a Some may argue that Jesus and his disciples maneuvered things to this end. But could that really be? Consider some of the facts.
Neither Jesus nor his parents could have prompted a Roman caesar to issue a decree requiring Joseph and Mary to go to their hometown of Bethlehem for census and tax registration purposes just at the time of Jesus’ birth. So Romans, who were in no way interested in the outworking of Bible prophecy, played a part in Jesus’ being born in Bethlehem in fulfillment of the prophecy at Micah 5:2.
The more Jesus exposed the hypocrisy of the Jewish religious leaders, the more they wanted to kill him. But his death was not to come directly from the hands of his fellow countrymen. Had the Jews executed Jesus, they would likely have stoned him to death, since this was the means of inflicting the death penalty outlined in the Mosaic Law. (John 8:59; 10:31) However, according to the prophecies, the Messiah had to be hanged on a stake to take away “the curse of the Law.” (Compare Deuteronomy 21:22, 23 with Galatians 3:13.) He had to be “lifted up” so that he might “draw men of all sorts.” (Compare Numbers 21:4, 9 with John 3:14 and Joh 12:32, 33.) With impalement, as used by the Romans, there could be no doubt about the fulfillment of these prophecies. So the Romans, who were not interested in helping to fulfill Bible prophecies, again played a role in causing Jehovah’s Word of prophecy to be proved true.
Furthermore, while hanging on the stake, Jesus could do nothing to determine what was being done with his garments. He could not maneuver the Roman soldiers into casting lots over them. But they did, exactly as Bible prophecy foretold that they would! (Psalm 22:18; John 19:24) Again, it was the Romans, not Jesus or his disciples, who were involved in causing prophecy to ring true.
Jesus foretold that events would occur in Jerusalem in his generation that would mean the city’s abrupt end. (Luke 21:5-24) Over 500 years before Jesus’ time, Daniel had foretold this. (Daniel 9:26, 27) In the year 70 C.E., Jerusalem was destroyed. The words of Jesus and Daniel were fulfilled. Once again, Bible prophecy was stamped as reliable.
Will You Benefit From Prophecy?
There are many Bible prophecies yet to be fulfilled. For example, Jehovah had his Son, Jesus Christ, prophesy that this present wicked system of things would come to an end, to be followed by a new world of righteousness under his heavenly Kingdom. (Matthew 24:3-14; Revelation 21:1-5; see also 2 Peter 3:7-13.) All of this has been written down in the Bible, Jehovah’s Word of prophecy that has always proved to be true. Should we not, then, give it serious consideration?
What reason would children have to distrust the promises of parents who in the past had done only good things for them and who had always kept their word? Likewise, what reason would we have to distrust Jehovah’s promise of bringing about the Kingdom of his Son? What reason would we have to believe that Jehovah, who has done so much good for his creatures in the past, would all at once lose interest in their welfare?
There are no convincing arguments to that effect. Therefore, we have every reason to trust in Jehovah and his Word and to rest our hope in him. His reliable word of prophecy gives us a purpose for living. It directs our activity toward a worthwhile goal. It is truly of the greatest value to us today.
[Footnotes]
For examples, please see the book “Let Your Kingdom Come,” page 67, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Box on page 26]
Bible prophecies foretelling the destruction of cities, such as Sodom and Gomorrah (Genesis 18:20, 21; 19:12, 13), Nineveh (Zephaniah 2:13), Babylon (Jeremiah 51:1, 2), and Petra in Edom (Jeremiah 49:7-22), easily illustrate that the word of prophecy has proved accurate.
[Box on page 27]
WOULD YOU LIKE TO EXPERIENCE THE FUTURE FULFILLMENT OF THESE PROPHECIES?
  “He is making wars to cease.”​—Psalm 46:9.
  “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”​—Isaiah 33:24.
  “And death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Revelation 21:4.
  “The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out.”​—John 5:28, 29.
  “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”​—Psalm 37:29.

