Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
The Bible says, “The one listening to me, he will reside in security and be undisturbed from dread of calamity.” (Prov. 1:33) The need for such security is great, and it is available to those who listen to the wisdom of God. To listen to God, one must have his Word the Bible to read and study in understandable language. Therefore, during this month Jehovah’s witnesses will make a special effort to offer to all persons the modern-English New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, the complete Bible in one volume, for $1 a copy.
WATCH TOWER PUBLICATIONS INDEX
Keep the valuable information contained in The Watchtower at your fingertips. In the months to come you will find many opportunities to refer back to points discussed in the pages of this journal during 1961. To facilitate this, the Watch Tower Society has prepared the Watch Tower Publications Index for 1961, containing thorough listings of both subjects and scriptures discussed in all English-language publications printed for public distribution during the past year. Covered in the Index are the twenty-four issues of The Watchtower for 1961, also the twenty-four issues of its companion journal Awake!, the book “Let Your Name Be Sanctified,” the booklets Blood, Medicine and the Law of God and When All Nations Unite Under God’s Kingdom, the Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses for both 1961 and 1962, and appendix material in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, 1961 edition. This Index is available for 10c.
1962 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
Interest in Jehovah’s witnesses and their world-wide preaching work is constantly on the increase. This was particularly emphasized in the news reports of the United Worshipers District Assemblies this summer. Therefore the 1962 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses takes on a new significance as it brings you an informative and heart warming report of this modern-day example of preaching as Jesus did it. Get your copy for only 50c. Send too for the beautiful 1962 calendar. It is only 25c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
January 21: Courageous in the Face of the World’s Armageddon, ¶1-28. Page 741.
January 28: Courageous in the Face of the World’s Armageddon, ¶29-38, and Courage Under Divine Protection. Page 748.

