Drug Addicts Find a Solution
TODAY many youths have no real goal in life. To them life under the present system seems empty and meaningless. Adult hypocrisy, injustices and the reckless depletion of earth’s resources have caused a considerable number to become bitter. Among such youths are those who have turned to drugs, only to worsen their situation. But, happily, Bible truth as proclaimed by Jehovah’s Christian witnesses has aided numerous young people to break free from enslavement to drugs.
A young drug addict in Denmark spent three months at the state hospital for withdrawal from the drug habit, but without results. Later he lived with his aunt, who was manifesting interest in the work of Jehovah’s witnesses. He accompanied her to some of their meetings. This led to his having a personal Bible study. What he learned gave him the needed aid to transform his life. In the course of just two months he completely gave up drugs, got a job and also had the long hair that hung clear down his back cut off. Now he is joyfully sharing with others the Bible truth that gave him a real purpose in living.
Somewhat similar is the experience of a young man in Norway. After having been on drugs for two and a half years, he was admitted to a hospital. There, although not being aided to break the drug habit, he learned about Jehovah’s witnesses. Subsequent to his release from the hospital he noted that at the same time every day a group of persons with book bags assembled at a certain place. He concluded that they were Jehovah’s witnesses. One day he mustered up enough courage to approach them, requesting some Bible literature and a Bible study. Three or four studies were conducted with him, but he was too enmeshed in the drug habit to give it up. So the study did not continue.
Some months after having no Bible study with Jehovah’s witnesses, this man tried to commit suicide. He was sent to a hospital to have his stomach pumped and then transferred to a mental institution. While at the mental hospital, he felt that he just had to get to the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses. But such a thing was impossible according to the rules, for he had been in the hospital for only five days.
He prayed to Jehovah for help so that he might be able to attend a meeting at the Kingdom Hall. The next day, contrary to all rules, he was permitted to go. Again a Bible study was started with him. After just two studies he had his long hair cut.
How did the doctors react? Were they pleased at the good effect of Bible truth? Apparently not. They sent for a Lutheran minister to talk with him. Despite the obvious changes for the better, the young man was warned against Jehovah’s witnesses.
Some weeks afterward he was released from the hospital. He told his old friends why he had cut his hair and informed them that he had quit using drugs. Though several times offered drugs free, he stuck to his decision. Thus his old acquaintances came to appreciate that he really meant what he had said.
His parents were overjoyed because of the changes he had made. Both his mother and sister later agreed to a study of the Bible. And the young man is very grateful to Jehovah that Bible truth enabled him to break free from the drug habit.
A study of the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses likewise helped two young men in Alaska to straighten out their lives. They came to Alaska with a panel truck decorated with posters and flowers. Very long hair, old clothing, peace symbols and beads testified to their dissatisfaction with the Establishment. For almost five years they had lived a communal life of immorality, selling and using such drugs as marijuana, heroin, LSD and cocaine. But today, as the result of Bible study, they are abiding by the lofty principles of God’s Word, recommending to others that conformity to God’s righteous laws is the best way of life.
But how did a study of the Bible aid these former drug addicts? Through this study they found satisfying answers to questions that had long perplexed them. They learned that the sorrowful plight in which the world finds itself is really a fulfillment of Bible prophecy. The worsening conditions are a proof that soon God himself will bring an end to all injustices. They also came to appreciate that applying the things learned from the Scriptures leads to contentment and a purposeful life now.

