From Our Readers
Evolution Versus Creation  The series “How Did We Get Here? By Accident or by Design?” (May 8, 1997) was presented clearly, simply, and with utter logic. I found it exciting to see page after page of scientific evidence for creation. The illustrations were powerful. I particularly enjoyed revisiting the cell and all its parts. Pondering the function of mitochondrion and Golgi bodies is something I haven’t done since school, and I thoroughly enjoyed it.
J. S., United States
As a biology major and a lifelong agnostic, I wish to thank you for the articles. Although the articles suffered from certain oversimplifications . . . , they nonetheless called attention to a genuine problem with current evolutionary theory: the near-universal assumption by the scientific community of the preeminence of evolution by natural selection, despite the many gaps in the evidence. Science must continually submit to testing by skeptics if it is rightly to be called science. In calling attention to weaknesses in Neo-Darwinian theory, you are not only presenting an argument for faith in Jehovah but also doing a service to the future of scientific investigation. Thank you.
A. S., United States
Moving  I really appreciated the article “Count the Cost of Moving!” (May 8, 1997) I am living through most of what you wrote about. Having moved from Africa to Europe, I am constantly confronted with painful encounters involving race, language, color and, most of all, prejudice. The popular media have fed people a distorted image of Africans and of foreigners in general.
P. A., Germany
Entertainment  Thank you for the article “What Has Happened to Entertainment?” (May 22, 1997) I am 12 years old, and during my school holidays, I have been watching a lot of TV. The article helped me to see that there are other entertaining things I can do.
J. L., England
Preaching in African Rurals  I would like to thank you for the article “What a Fowl Chases in the Rain . . .” (May 22, 1997) I appreciate the dedication and endurance our brothers in Nigeria have. Even though they had to face snakes, crocodiles, and leeches, their love for people spurred them on. When I next go out preaching and get hot or tired, I’ll think of our dear brothers in Nigeria.
S. S., United States
Sexuality—Changing Attitudes  I would like to express my sincere gratitude for the series “Sexuality—What Changing Attitudes Mean.” (June 8, 1997) It was a great strengthener of my faith. A man in the neighborhood recently told me [a woman] that I was ‘physically handicapped’ because I am 19 and still a virgin. I am glad I was able to let him know that I am both physically and spiritually healthy in the eyes of Jehovah.
W. M. C. C., Zimbabwe
Your reference on page 10 to “promiscuous genes” is incorrect. As a fourth year undergraduate in biological sciences, I can tell you that “promiscuous genes” refers to genes in a chromosome that move within the chromosome or relocate to a new chromosome. It has nothing to do with behavior.
L. P., Canada
The statement that God did not make us with “promiscuous genes” was actually a reference to a speech made by the Anglican bishop of Edinburgh, Scotland, a portion of which was quoted on page 4 of that issue of “Awake!” The bishop said that “God . . . has given us promiscuous genes”—clearly an attempt to excuse immoral behavior. Our article exposed the folly of such claims.—ED.

