





He ‘Knew the Way’




GUY HOLLIS PIERCE, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, finished his earthly course on Tuesday, March 18, 2014. He was 79 years old when his hope to be one of Christ’s resurrected brothers became a reality.—Heb. 2:10-12; 1 Pet. 3:18.
Guy Pierce was born in Auburn, California, U.S.A., on November 6, 1934, and was baptized in 1955. He married his beloved wife, Penny, in 1977 and raised a family. His experience as a family man contributed to his fatherly manner. By 1982 he and Penny were busy in the pioneer work, and in 1986 he began 11 years of service as a circuit overseer in the United States.
In 1997, Guy and Penny Pierce began to serve as members of the United States Bethel family. Brother Pierce worked in the Service Department, and in 1998 he was appointed as a helper to the Personnel Committee of the Governing Body. Brother Pierce’s appointment as a member of the Governing Body was announced on October 2, 1999, at the annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania. In recent years, he served with the Personnel, Writing, Publishing, and Coordinators’ committees.
People of varied backgrounds and cultures were drawn to Brother Pierce because of his warm smile and good sense of humor. However, the qualities that especially endeared him to others were his love, his humility, his respect for righteous laws and principles, and his complete faith in Jehovah. To Guy Pierce, there was a greater possibility that the sun would not rise than that Jehovah’s promises would go unfulfilled, and he wanted to share that truth with the whole world.
Brother Pierce was tireless in serving Jehovah, rising early in the morning and often working late into the night. His travels to encourage his Christian brothers and sisters took him all over the world, and he was never too busy to spend time with individual Bethel family members and others who sought his fellowship, advice, and assistance. Even after years have passed, fellow believers recall his hospitality, friendship, and Scriptural encouragement.
Our brother and dear friend is survived by his wife and six children, as well as grandchildren and great-grandchildren. He also had countless spiritual children. A memorial talk for Brother Pierce was given at Brooklyn Bethel on Saturday, March 22, 2014, by Mark Sanderson, a fellow member of the Governing Body. Among other matters, he spoke of Brother Pierce’s heavenly hope and read Jesus’ words: “In the house of my Father are many dwelling places. . . . If I go my way and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will receive you home to myself, so that where I am you also may be. And where I am going, you know the way.”—John 14:2-4.
True, we will miss Brother Pierce very much. Yet, we rejoice that he ‘knew the way’ to his permanent ‘dwelling place.’



