





Jehovah Richly Blesses a Willing Spirit




OUR Creator has dignified humans with the priceless gift of free will. Furthermore, he richly blesses those who unselfishly use their free will to advance true worship and who do their part to sanctify his holy name and support his grand purpose. Jehovah does not want mechanical obedience impelled by threats and coercion. Instead, he highly values willing devotion motivated by genuine love and deep appreciation.
For example, when the Israelites were in the wilderness of Sinai, Jehovah instructed them to build a place of worship. He said: “Take up a contribution for Jehovah from among yourselves. Let everyone with a willing heart bring a contribution for Jehovah.” (Ex. 35:5) Each Israelite could give whatever he was able to give, and each voluntary contribution—no matter what it might be or how much—could be used in an appropriate way to carry out the divine purpose. What was the response?
“Everyone whose heart impelled him” and “everyone whose spirit incited him” made a voluntary offering, “each with a willing heart.” Men and women willingly brought something for Jehovah’s work: brooches, earrings, rings, gold, silver, copper, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair, ram skins dyed red, sealskins, acacia wood, gemstones, balsam, and oil. Eventually, “the goods were enough for all the work to be done, and more than enough.”—Ex. 35:21-24, 27-29; 36:7.
What brought Jehovah the most pleasure was, not the material offerings, but the willing spirit of those who thus supported pure worship. They were also moved to contribute their time and labor. “All the skilled women spun with their hands,” says the account. Indeed, “all the skilled women whose hearts impelled them spun the goat hair.” Moreover, Jehovah gave Bezalel “wisdom, understanding, and knowledge of every sort of craftsmanship.” In fact, God filled Bezalel and Oholiab with the skill needed to do all the work that was commissioned.—Ex. 35:25, 26, 30-35.
When Jehovah invited the Israelites to make a donation, he had full confidence that “everyone with a willing heart” would support true worship. In turn, he unstintingly blessed the willinghearted with guidance and boundless joy. Jehovah thus demonstrated that when he blesses his servants’ willing spirit, he can make sure that there is no lack of resources or expertise to accomplish his will. (Ps. 34:9) As you unselfishly serve Jehovah, he is sure to bless your willing spirit.



HOW SOME CHOOSE TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE WORLDWIDE WORK
  As in the apostle Paul’s day, many today “set something aside,” or budget, an amount of money and place it in the congregation contribution box labeled “Worldwide Work.” (1 Cor. 16:2) Each month, congregations forward these contributions to the office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves their country. It is also possible for you to send donations directly to a legal entity that is used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in your country. To learn the name of the primary legal entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in your country, please contact the branch office that serves the country. The address of the branch office can be found on www.jw.org. The types of donations that you can send directly are the following:
OUTRIGHT DONATIONS
  Donations via electronic bank transfer, debit card, or credit card. In some branches this is also possible using jw.org or another designated Web site.

  Donations of cash, jewelry, or other valuable personal property. Include a letter indicating that the cash or the item is an outright donation.


CONDITIONAL DONATION ARRANGEMENT
  Donations of cash with the condition that it can be returned if needed by the donor.

  Include a letter stating that the donation is conditional.


CHARITABLE PLANNING
  In addition to gifts of money and valuable personal property, there are other methods of giving to benefit Kingdom service worldwide. These are listed below. Regardless of the method or methods you would like to use, please first contact the branch office that serves your country to see which methods are available in the country. Since legal requirements and tax laws vary, it is important to consult qualified tax and legal advisers before choosing the best way to donate.
Insurance: A donation made by specifying an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as the beneficiary of a life insurance policy or a retirement/pension plan.
Bank Accounts: Bank accounts, certificates of deposit, or individual retirement accounts set up as a trust or made payable on death to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in accord with local bank requirements.
Stocks and Bonds: Stocks and bonds donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as an outright gift or by means of a written agreement to transfer on death.
Real Estate: Salable real estate donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses, either by making an outright gift or, in the case of residential property, by reserving a life estate to the donor, who can continue to live in the residence during his or her lifetime.
Gift Annuity: Money or securities donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses under an arrangement where the donor receives a specified annuity payment every year for life. The donor may receive an income-tax deduction for the year in which the gift annuity is established.
Wills and Trusts: Property or money may be bequeathed to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses by means of a legally executed will or by specifying the entity as the beneficiary of a trust agreement. This arrangement may provide certain tax advantages.
  As the term “charitable planning” implies, these types of donations typically require some planning on the part of the donor. To assist individuals desiring to benefit the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses through some form of charitable giving, a brochure entitled Charitable Planning to Benefit Kingdom Service Worldwide has been prepared in English and Spanish. The brochure was written to provide information on a variety of ways that gifts may be made now or later, as through a bequest at death. The information covered in this brochure may not apply fully to your situation because of tax or other laws in your country. Hence, after reading the brochure, you should confer with your own legal or tax advisers. By using such methods of charitable giving, many have been able to help support our religious and humanitarian activities worldwide and maximize their tax benefits. If available in your country, the brochure may be obtained by requesting a copy from the secretary of the local congregation.
  For more information, you may contact the branch that serves your country.


