Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 2
15 min: Song 46, appropriate items from Announcements, local announcements, Theocratic News and Question Box.
20 min: “What Are You Doing in Remembrance of Him?” covered by questions and answers. Make announcements of Memorial arrangements. Outline special field service for month, including evening witnessing. Encourage auxiliary pioneer work. Demonstrate how we might prepare a Bible student for the Memorial, explaining who partakes and why we attend (not more than 5 minutes).
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Making Good Use of Literature.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Demonstrate: (1) brief presentation to busy householder as suggested in paragraph 3; (2) presentation in paragraph 5. Let audience comment on points from demonstrations and the article that benefited them.
10 min: Review highlights from this meeting and encourage all to apply practical points. Service arrangements for the week. Song 107 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 9
10 min: Song 55, local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Prepare for a Fitting Observance.” Family discussion of article. Father takes lead, drawing out comments from family members as time allows. Also reviews highlights of article on Memorial contained in the March 1, 1980 issue of The Watchtower. Concludes by encouraging each member of the family to be enthusiastic in inviting and helping as many as possible to be in attendance with them at the Memorial. Keep discussion fast-moving and positive.
25 min: Elders should develop this part locally, considering needs of congregation. It may be beneficial to include points that circuit overseer brought to attention of congregation on his last visit. A talk can be given based on Watchtower article “How Genuine Is Your Love?” from September 1, 1979, Watchtower, pages 3, 4. Include interviews of two or three publishers of various ages who have enjoyed auxiliary pioneer work in the past.
10 min: Review suggestions from this meeting and encourage all to apply direction given. Outline field service arrangements for week. Song 70 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 16
THEME: Rejoice in Your Youth.—Eccl. 11:9.
 5 min: Song 91 and local announcements.
15 min: Interview group of children using material from Bible Stories book, Stories 87 and 94. Highlight role of children in true worship. Have young ones on platform and review material as time allows. Brother handling part should rehearse with participants.
20 min: “We Appreciate Our Youths.” Assign to qualified elder who is family man, if possible. By use of well-chosen questions, discuss information with audience. Make local application. Include specific points from November, 1979, Our Kingdom Service on subject “Youths—Are You Involved?” Youths should participate as fully as possible in congregation activities. Must demonstrate patience. Youths in congregation today are the pioneers, servants and parents of tomorrow. Parents and others in congregation should assist youths and view them as vital part of congregation. Include brief demonstration of current offer, using qualified teen-age publishers.
10 min: “What Do You Want out of Life?” Talk by local elder, from Youth book, chapter 23. Help youths appreciate urgency of times and the need to progressively shoulder responsibility. Must develop a close relationship with Jehovah and face future with confidence. Encourage auxiliary pioneer work during spring vacations.
10 min: Review specific suggestions from meeting and encourage congregation to apply what was considered. Highlight field service arrangements and remind all of coming Memorial. Song 92 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 23
15 min: Song 106. Local announcements apart from Memorial. Use the rest of the time in harmony with what is needed locally, or call on publishers for experiences they have had in engaging others in discussing the Topic for Conversation “God’s Promise of Something New.”
15 min: Interview group of children on Bible Stories book, Stories 98-101 covering Lord’s Evening Meal and events that followed. (98) What were Jesus’ apostles asking Jesus about? (99) Why did Judas leave the room after Jesus celebrated the Passover? Why should we not want to be like Judas? What new celebration did Jesus start? (100) That night, what did the apostles do when Jesus was praying? What should we do when we are faced with problems? What did Judas do and why? (101) What did the enemies do to Jesus? What did Peter do? Why do we not want to be like Peter was then? What was finally done with Jesus? What did Jesus talk about with the criminal hanging alongside him? What can that mean for us?
15 min: “He ‘Loved Them to the End.’” Talk based on March 1, 1980, Watchtower article on pages 8-12, highlighting points under heading “Self-examination.” Include any Memorial announcements.
15 min: Memorial Review. Audience participation. What suggestions have we discussed on service meetings to help us prepare for the Memorial? Do you have in mind turning in lists of those invited and who do attend? (Lists should be given to your book study conductors.) What have you youngsters learned from the Bible Stories book about the Memorial? Why is it beneficial to read the suggested Bible accounts in preparation for the Memorial? Song 83 and prayer.

