Question Box
● What forms of address are recommended for use during congregational meetings?
When Jesus taught his followers to pray, he instructed them to address Jehovah as “Our Father.” This thought of a spiritual family relationship between all of his followers was further emphasized when he told them “all you are brothers.” (Matt. 23:8) Many times the apostles and disciples of Jesus used the term “brother” in a very direct sense. Peter referred to Paul as “our beloved brother Paul” and Paul spoke of “Titus my brother,” and “our brother Timothy.”—2 Pet. 3:15; 2 Cor. 2:13; Heb. 13:23.
In view of this close spiritual relationship, Jehovah’s Witnesses normally address each other as “brother” and “sister.” They generally do this along with the last name during congregational meetings. For the one presiding to use first names can, at times, cause certain problems. If a person were new to our meetings and we were not too well acquainted with him, he could feel we were being overly familiar if we called upon him by his first name since last names are customarily used when people are gathered at Christian meetings.
Whereas, the one presiding could call on very young children by their first name, were he to call older persons by their first name some may view this as a lack of respect. Or take the case of a sister whose husband is not in the truth but comes to a meeting for the first time. How will he feel if he hears his wife called by her first name by another married man in front of the whole congregation?
Such difficulties are resolved if those conducting meetings use last names when calling on individuals to comment. We would not address newly interested persons as “brother” or “sister” since the spiritual relationship of God’s family does not exist in their case. Rather, use the first and last names together or preface the last name with the more formal Mr., Mrs. or Miss unless there is a reason for making an exception. On the other hand, when a person is approaching dedication and considers himself to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, there may be no objection to prefacing the last name with “brother” or “sister.”
When we use “brother” or “sister” during our congregation meetings, it indicates a very blessed relationship, a family relationship under the one Father, Jehovah God. (Eph. 2:19b) It is a bond that is far closer and more precious than any indicated by the use of first names.

