We Appreciate Our Youths
1 Since the time of the first human family Jehovah God has made provision for youths to be meaningfully involved in true worship. Accordingly the psalmist sang: “You are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, my confidence from my youth.”—Ps. 71:5; Gen. 4:1-4.
2 How happy we are to have our youths praising Jehovah with us! Like Jehovah God, we appreciate their faithful service. Many persons have been attracted to the Kingdom message by young publishers. Sometimes our most zealous workers are youths. As they grow up in the truth, their spirituality can make a significant contribution to the overall spirituality of the congregations.
3 Bible prophecy foretold the problems of youths that are so prevalent today. (2 Tim. 3:1, 2) While it is true that some young ones in various congregations have had serious problems, how happy we are when they respond to efforts that help them to recover from some form of wrongdoing and thereafter make real progress as fine Christian youths. Like Timothy, however, many of our young brothers and sisters have developed from infancy to adulthood, untarnished by the spirit of the world. (2 Tim. 3:14; Acts 16:1) Young ones who are conducting themselves well as Christians are deserving of commendation, particularly when we consider the pressures that many are subjected to from unbelieving companions and, sometimes, from schoolteachers, who may deride their Bible-based viewpoints. The faith of our young brothers and sisters condemns the ungodly world around them and attracts honest-hearted ones to the truth.—Heb. 11:7.
4 To illustrate what is being done, one young sister who was teased and ridiculed because of her modest dress and labeled as “untouchable,” was not intimidated into conforming to this world’s ungodly standards. Instead she explained that as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses that was the standard she kept. The teacher of another young publisher presented the evolution theory as fact and the Bible as myth. Loyally defending the Bible resulted in this publisher’s being able to start a number of Bible studies. Some of those showing interest began attending meetings.
5 We encourage all of you young ones among us to keep on “progressing in wisdom . . . and in favor with God and men.” (Luke 2:51, 52) Jehovah God invites you to act wisely, appreciating your role in the ‘great issue.’ (Prov. 27:11) Your God-given assignment is to ‘fear God and keep his commandments.’ (Eccl. 12:13) Continue developing as stable, helpful and trustworthy members of your families, honoring your father and your mother. (Eph. 6:1-3) As disciples of Jesus Christ, participate regularly in the meetings and field service activities. As you continue to progress, devoting yourselves to Jehovah God in an unbreakable relationship, you can be sure that many blessings from Jehovah await you both now and in the future.

