What Are You Doing in Remembrance of Him?
1 What a grand privilege it will be for us, on March 31, 1980, to be present for the 1,947th anniversary of the Lord’s Evening Meal! On that first memorable occasion, you will recall, Jesus told his disciples: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:19) Their close relationship with Jesus, no doubt, heightened their appreciation of the significance of his sacrificial death. The apostle Peter, reflecting back over the earthly life and ministry of Jesus, wrote to fellow Christians: “To this course you were called, because even Christ suffered for you, leaving you a model for you to follow his steps closely.”—1 Pet. 2:21.
AN OUTSTANDING EXAMPLE
2 At the early age of 12, Jesus demonstrated a keen appreciation for spiritual things. When separated from his parents for three days after the Passover celebration, he was found in the house of his Father, “sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and questioning them.” Yes, Jesus “went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.” (Luke 2:39-52) If you are a young person, are you doing that too?
3 Jesus was a man of action. Zeal for the house of his Father was in evidence when he single-handedly drove out those who were making Jehovah’s temple a house of merchandise. (John 2:14-17) Jesus was never afraid to speak the truth with boldness. (John 3:1-12) He taught masterfully as was indicated by the reaction of those who were present for his Sermon on the Mount. Matthew tells us that “the effect was that the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching; for he was teaching them as a person having authority, and not as their scribes.” (Matt. 7:28, 29) Are you zealous and bold in speaking about Jehovah’s name and kingdom?
WHAT WE CAN DO
4 Jesus saw the wisdom of reaching people through varied methods of preaching. After gaining the victory over death, before his ascension to heaven, he left instructions for his disciples to carry on the work that he himself started. (Consider Matthew 28:19, 20.) Could you have an increased share in this work this month? Could you share in the auxiliary pioneer work? Consider evening witnessing as well. Such increased field activity will afford us the opportunity to invite our Bible students as well as all others who show interest to attend the Memorial with us.
5 At the Memorial last year, we had a new all-time peak of 1,335,268 in attendance in the United States. This means that there were over 800,000 more present on that occasion than the 1979 peak number of publishers in this country. This year we have prepared a printed message that will be handed to all attenders. It will serve to encourage them to keep on associating and thus benefit from the spiritual provisions available throughout the year. An effort will be made to determine how many attenders at this year’s Memorial do not have regular home Bible studies or are not regularly attending meetings. All publishers are encouraged to make a written list of the individuals they invite and who do attend the Memorial so that further steps can be taken by the elders and ministerial servants to visit and encourage them thereafter. These lists should be turned in to the book study conductors as soon as possible after the Memorial date.
6 We encourage all, especially the elders and ministerial servants, to take the initiative to introduce themselves to interested persons who attend the Memorial and make them feel welcome. This will be a stepping-stone to further assisting them in the future.—Rom. 12:13.
7 Fitting preparations were made back in 33 C.E. for keeping the Passover, after which Jesus introduced the Lord’s Evening Meal. (Mark 14:12-16) All bodies of elders should make adequate arrangements for celebrating the Memorial this year. Advance preparation should be made in selecting a speaker for the occasion, arranging for the unleavened bread and the wine, assigning attendants, cleaning the Kingdom Hall, as well as meeting and welcoming all interested persons who attend. May Jehovah bless us as we endeavor to invite as many interested persons as possible to be present with us in celebrating the Memorial of Jesus Christ’s death.

