Announcements
● Literature offer for November: Subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower, for $3.50 each for a one-year subscription; six-month subscription, $2.00. December: The New World Translation and either Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? or any other older 192-page book, for $3.75. If 192-page books unavailable, can offer the New World Translation and the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! for $3.25. January and February: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for $2.50.
● New Publications Available:
Common Swedish Bible of 1982 (congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $1.50)—Swedish
Holy Scriptures (bi2; Common Swedish Bible Hebrew Scriptures combined with New World Translation of the Greek Scriptures; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $1.50)—Swedish
Commentary on the Letter of James—Arabic
“Let Your Kingdom Come”—Indonesian
Making Your Family Life Happy—Samoan
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Chinese, Hausa, Hiri Motu, Thai, Yoruba
A Secure Future—How You Can Find It—Vietnamese
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Gouro, Igala, Indonesian, Isoko, Kirundi, Kisii, Maragoli, Masai, Sranan
Is There a God Who Cares?—Welsh
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century—Hungarian
Kingdom News No. 32—Chinese
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The First to the Corinthians (single cassette)—Swedish
The Second to the Corinthians, To the Galatians (single cassette)—Swedish
To the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians (single cassette)—Swedish
The First to the Thessalonians through To Philemon (single cassette)—Swedish
The First of Peter through The Letter of Jude (single cassette)—Swedish
A Revelation to John (single cassette)—Swedish
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Lapel cards (for circuit assemblies)—English, Spanish
● 1984 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses: Publishers and pioneers, please order your Yearbooks through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these Yearbooks now. Then on November 1, 1983, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). The Yearbooks will be available in English, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese and Spanish. Until the Yearbooks are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Congregations should order only the number of Yearbooks for which there are requests. Payment should not accompany the congregation order. The Yearbooks are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers and the public. (See the 1983 Cost List, paragraphs 22-24.) Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1983, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit on the Remittance and Credit Request (S-20). Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 25c each. (Note to secretary: Please have announcement made to the congregation when the Yearbooks are received so that all who ordered can obtain their copies.)
● The Society has begun publishing Awake! in the Hebrew and Russian languages as quarterly (four issues per year) editions. Congregations may order distributor copies of these magazines. We will not take subscriptions for them since they are quarterly editions. The cost will be the same as for other magazines.

