Finding Joy in Personal Study
1 The psalmist has pronounced “happy” the one whose “delight is in the law of Jehovah” and who reads it “in an undertone day and night.” (Ps. 1:1, 2) Do you regularly experience that joy of heart, yes, true happiness, that comes with taking in accurate knowledge of our loving God Jehovah? Many do. But why is it that some find study and meditation a chore, truly hard work that brings great benefits, yes, but not necessarily joy during the process? What can be done to turn this seeming chore into a joyful experience?
HOW CAN WE INCREASE OUR JOY?
2 First we must appreciate that taking in such knowledge actually means life for us. (John 17:3) So important is this that The Watchtower once stated: “If you ‘cannot find time’ for Bible study, then you are, in effect, saying that you do not want life.” But should the gaining of everlasting life be the sole motive of our Bible study? Note Jesus’ answer to those Jewish leaders seeking to kill him: “You are searching the Scriptures, because you think that by means of them you will have everlasting life; . . . but I well know that you do not have the love of God in you.” (John 5:39, 42) Yes, our personal study must be motivated by a love for God and a desire to help others.—Acts 20:35; 1 Cor. 8:1.
3 For instance, by preparing thoroughly for all congregation meetings, we will be more inclined to participate, and our comments will be more meaningful. In this way we can encourage and incite others to love and fine works. (Heb. 10:24, 25) And how will this affect our field ministry? Our advance preparation for meetings will impress more deeply upon our minds the spiritual truths we learn at the Kingdom Hall, and thus we will be able to recall these points when witnessing to others. We will be better equipped in all features of service to offer to others ‘a reason for the hope within us,’ and our ministry will be much more effective.—1 Pet. 3:15.
FINDING THE TIME
4 Is finding study time a problem? If we appreciate that Bible study actually means our life, and if we sincerely desire to use what we learn to benefit others, we will be moved to ‘buy out time’ from less important activities. (Eph. 5:15, 16) It may require limiting our television viewing or our reading of nonessential material. Perhaps we could make better use of some time in the evening just before retiring, or we could rise a little earlier in the morning. Even 15 or 20 minutes each day used in this way is beneficial, especially when done regularly. Just 15 minutes of personal study every day adds up to more than 91 hours in a year’s time!
5 But for us to reap the fullest joy from our periods of study, we must use the time well. We should avoid daydreaming or letting our mind wander, but, rather, focus our thoughts on a specific subject. By setting a goal and removing ourselves from distractions such as the television or a noisy room, we will be more productive. Real personal study requires thoughtful meditation on the practical value of what we are learning. If we follow Paul’s advice to “ponder over these things; be absorbed in them,” we will feel satisfied with what we are able to accomplish and will find real joy in personal study.—1 Tim. 4:15.

