Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 30
Song 77
 5 min: Local announcements.
30 min: What Is Your Goal in Life? This part is to cover the first two subjects in the School brochure, “Our Purpose in Life” and “Our View of the Future,” pages 4-7. Handle by questions and answers, with questions directed primarily to the school-age children. Use some viewpoint questions to determine true thinking of the children. Look up cited scriptures. Use young qualified brother to read selected paragraphs as time permits.
10 min: Conclude meeting with local experiences related to October subscription offer. Encourage continued zealous presentation of subscriptions during November. Refer to announcement on theocratic calendar for November 6, encouraging all to share in field service on first Sunday of month.
Song 73 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 6
Song 63
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Include financial report. Remind all to bring Our Ministry book to Service Meeting next week.
23 min: “Have Your ‘Perceptive Powers Trained.’” Talk. Include 5-minute demonstration on paragraph 7. Teenage daughter asks her father if she can attend cousin’s wedding, to be held in a church. Asks if Society would approve. Suggests father call or write. Father helps her see it is Jehovah’s approval we want. Society has already given guidelines. Gets 1971-1975 Index. Subject “Weddings, attending worldly” refers to December 15, 1974, Watchtower, pages 766-7. Asks her to read the material and later tell him if she still wants to attend. Speaker concludes with comments on value of The Watchtower. Help our neighbors see value of subscribing during November. One-minute closing scene where daughter comments that Society does not say can’t go, but after seeing all dangers involved has decided not to go.
12 min: “Use New Book to Help Others.” Questions and answers. Conclude meeting with brief comment about announcement on theocratic calendar on November 12.
Song 85 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 13
Song 49
 5 min: Local announcements.
18 min: Discussion of Our Ministry book, pages 55-9. This should be a discussion between two or possibly three elders. In addition to mentioning the qualifications of ministerial servants, tell who the local servants are and what responsibilities they are caring for. Build appreciation for these spiritual men and encourage other men to reach out for such responsibility in the congregation.—1 Tim. 3:13.
10 min: “Improving Our Teaching Ability—By Making Key Points Stand Out.” Talk. Illustrate points from current book study material or Sunday’s Watchtower lesson.
12 min: Do We Celebrate National Thanksgiving Day? Group discussion between elder and several children. Cover pertinent points from November 22, 1976, Awake!, pages 9-13. Children’s comments include material from School brochure, page 21.
Song 111 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 20
Song 25
 5 min: Local announcements. Bring Our Ministry book next week.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—Calling Back on Subscribers.” Questions and answers. In paragraphs 4 and 5 give specific points from current magazines or demonstrate briefly.
15 min: Use time for local needs or entertain expressions from longtime subscribers to The Watchtower on how particular truths or articles changed their lives or helped them make important decisions in life. Assign some in truth for number of years to give advance thought to point. Stress how subscriptions will help interested persons do the same.
 5 min: Talk. Brothers throughout the world will be observing point made on date of November 26 on theocratic calendar. Encourage congregation to join international brotherhood and thus help render “sacred service day and night.”—Rev. 7:15.
Song 9 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 27
Song 19
 5 min: Local announcements. Refer to comment on theocratic calendar for December 4.
12 min: “Finding Joy in Personal Study.” Talk.
20 min: Consideration of Our Ministry book, page 60 to subheading on page 65. Discuss first two paragraphs with audience. Material under subheading “Kingdom Hall” should be presented as a talk. Include comments from information presented at district conventions about fund established to assist in the building of more Kingdom Halls where needed. Encourage support. Discuss material under subheading “Congregation Meetings” with audience, building appreciation for Jehovah’s provisions.
 8 min: Discuss December offer of New World Translation and either Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? or any other older 192-page book. Review talking points about Bible, older book and brochure, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! Prepare now to use new Topic for Conversation. See December Our Kingdom Ministry.
Song 99 and concluding prayer.

