Presenting the Good News—Calling Back on Subscribers
1 November is now the second month of our current Awake! and Watchtower subscription campaign. Undoubtedly many individuals became new subscribers during October, and it is good for us to follow up and see if a Bible study might be started. How may we do this?
2 Most of these new subscribers will not be receiving their magazines in the mail as yet, so we could call back with the latest issues. After several of such visits a friendship begins to develop. A good conversation can often be started on the basis of one or two articles that may appeal to the new subscriber. The key is to know the magazines well and make the visit a friendly one. Let the subscriber see that you are interested in him and that the information you have is vital to his welfare and happiness.
3 Remember, our objective with subscribers is to start a Bible study. Their having information is not enough. The eunuch had the book of Isaiah but he needed Philip to explain it. (Acts 8:27-36) Philip used the direct approach, and a productive Bible study was held immediately. Why not try the same with subscribers? Whether this initial effort is successful or not, make a definite offer to return and study the Bible with the individual. Here is one way it could be done:
4 As subscribers, we will know approximately when the issues are received through the mail. So we could call within a few days and point out interesting articles in the latest issues. Sometimes it is good to sit down with the subscriber and read a few paragraphs together, where this is possible. Such friendly discussions can often lead to a home Bible study’s being developed in time. In making such a call, one could greet the fellow subscriber warmly and then say something like this: “I know you must have just received your [issue date] Watchtower [or Awake!] in the mail, as I have just received mine, and I thought of you when I read this article. [Show title.] If you have your copy nearby, I would like to show you a point that really interested me.” Such calls, while brief, could be made longer and include further discussion as a friendship builds up. Eventually the householder is looking forward to his weekly Bible discussion with your help. When the time is appropriate a study may be started in the Live Forever book.
5 We hope you will have good success in obtaining subscriptions and then in starting studies with these individuals who show interest in God’s Word. Remember, we want to help them become true disciples of Jesus Christ. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Be friendly on your calls; let people know you are genuinely interested in them and their family. Help them to see how the Watchtower and Awake! magazines they receive will further improve their knowledge of God and his purposes. At the appropriate time offer to study with them and then be dependable in making your calls to assist them in taking in the knowledge that leads to everlasting life.—John 17:3.

