Use New Book to Help Others
1 We were all thrilled this past summer to receive the new book, United in Worship of the Only True God, when it was released at the “Kingdom Unity” District Conventions. On page 2 of that book the statement is made: “Millions of persons have a knowledge of basic Bible teachings. But to experience to the full the joy of sharing in united worship of the true God, they need to press on to Christian maturity. This book has been prepared to help all such persons to broaden and deepen their understanding of God’s Word and to apply it more fully in their lives.” Since we received this book have we put it into the hands of someone who could benefit from it in that way?
2 It would be a kindness to offer it to anyone with whom you are conducting a home Bible study. Even if some will not be ready to study a second book for a number of months, their having the book may whet their appetite. It may also stimulate them to do additional reading, and that can hasten their spiritual growth. You have something good. Do not hold back from sharing it with them.—Prov. 3:27.
3 We suggest that you also carry a copy of the book when sharing in your regular field ministry. Why? Because tens of millions of copies of the Live Forever book and the Truth book have been placed with interested persons. With many, home Bible studies have been conducted. If they continue to show some interest, present this new book, and then offer to study it with them. This is appropriate at any time, regardless of what our regular literature offer for the month may be.
4 As you have observed, the chapters in the new book are each just seven or eight pages in length. That is about right for a Congregation Book Study. But it may prove to be more than you can cover effectively in an hour at a home Bible study. When using this book for study, do not rush through the material. Allow time for the student to look up the scriptures personally and to reason on them. Some paragraphs have a number of scriptures cited; all of them are valuable. If answers given to the study questions are superficial, use auxiliary questions to direct attention to important points that might otherwise be missed. Be sure that the student really understands what is being studied and its value to him personally.
5 May our use of this fine publication enable many more persons to share with us the real joy that comes from unitedly worshiping Jehovah, the only true God.

