VOL. XV. APRIL 15, 1894. NO. 8. 

IMMORTALITY. 



WHAT IS IT? HOW AND WHEN OBTAINABLE? TO WHOM PROMISED? 
"Our Savior Jesus Christ. ..hath abolished death, 



and hath brought life and immortality to light 
through the gospel. "--2 Tim. 1:10. 

THE doctrine of the endless torment of the 

wicked is built upon the theory that they 

and all men are immortal creatures;— that 

somehow and somewhere all men became possessed 

of a power to live always;— that they 

cannot rid themselves of life, even should they 

so prefer; and that even God, their Creator, 

has done a work in creating them that he 

could not undo if he so desired. 

This hypothesis, if conceded— and it is very 
generally accepted— becomes the basis for a 
certain sort of logical reasoning. We are assured 
that since all men are immortal they 
must all live somewhere and under some conditions; 
and that since God has promised a 
reward to the obedient and a punishment to 
the disobedient, the immortality of the righteous 
will be spent in bliss and the immortality 
of the sinners in misery. 

Our first question should be, Is the above 
hypothesis, the foundation of this view, correct? 
Is it true that God who has the power 
to create has not the power to undo his work, 
and destroy man? Reasoning on the subject, 
before going to God's Word to see what he 
says about the matter, we should say that there 
must be some mistake about this hypothesis— 
that it is less difficult to destroy than to create 
a being; and that he who created all things 
must be "able to destroy both soul and body" 
should he so desire, as also saith the Scriptures. 
-See Matt. 10:28; Jas. 4:12. 

Our reasoning further would be that, since 
God's character is both just and kind, if he 
had not had ability to destroy his creatures 
if unsatisfactory (if when once created they 
must live on regardless of their own well-being 
or the well-being of others, and 
must therefore spend an eternity of misery, 
in separation from the holy and in confinement 
with others of their own miserable and 
sinful disposition), then God would have been 
much more careful as to who got life at all, 
and as to the circumstances and conditions of 
birth and parentage. We hold it would be 
discreditable to God's justice, wisdom, love 
and power to assume that he would permit ignorant 
and depraved parents to bring forth ad 
libitum a depraved offspring, mentally, morally 
and physically degraded and weak, if those 
creatures must spend an eternity somewhere, 
and if the chances were, as is generally supposed, 
a thousand to one against their everlasting 



happiness. 

But we do not wish to rest our faith upon 
human reasonings,—either our own or those 
of others— while we have the Bible, God's inspired 
revelation, to give us positive information 
on this important subject. In it, and in 
it alone, God has revealed his character, his 
plan and his power to execute it. 

Before going to the Scriptures, however, it 
will be well for us to make sure that we have 
the correct conception of the meaning of the 

R1641 :page 116 

words immortal and immortality. Although 
these are English words, we believe that the 
majority of English speaking people do not 
realize their full import. They suppose them to 
mean merely everlasting life. This, however, 
is a great mistake; for, according to the Scriptures, 
some will have everlasting life who will 
never have immortality;--nay, they expressly 
tell us that many, "a great company," will 
enjoy an everlasting existence, while but few, 
"a little flock," will be made immortal. 

The term Everlasting Life simply describes 
an existence which will never cease. It may 
be supported by food and drink and other 
necessary conditions, but it simply means that 
life will continue forever. This everlasting 
life may belong to both mortal and immortal 
beings, the only difference being that to the 
former it is granted through certain conditions 
upon which it depends for support, as for instance, 
light, heat, air, food and drink, while 
in the latter it inheres independent of all 
conditions. 

The term Immortality describes an existence 
which, therefore, cannot cease, being proof 
against death. It is an indestructible existence, 
not dependent upon food and drink or conditions 
of any kind. It describes an existence 
which needs no refreshment or supply— possessed 
of inherent life. 

If these definitions be accepted as correct 
(and they cannot be successfully disputed), 
then all opposition to the Scriptural teaching, 
that Immortality is not an inherent and natural 
possession of humanity, but a prize offered 
to a special class of overcomers, should cease; 
because opposition generally springs from the 
supposition that the denial of natural human 
immortality means a denial of any future life, 
and implies that a man and a brute are alike 
in death— without hope of a future existence. 
We are glad that we are able to thus remove 



at once the prejudice which hinders so many 
from a candid examination of the Scriptural 
teaching upon the subject. 

Having carefully studied all that the Bible 
has to say upon this topic, we will first assert 
what its teachings are, and afterward give the 
proof. 

The Scriptures assert that this very high order 
of existence (which we men cannot fully comprehend), 
this life without food or other means 
of supply—inherent life, Immortality— was originally 
possessed by the Heavenly Father only. 
He alone has it without derivation from another 
as a gift or reward. All others, therefore, 
who ever will attain to this highest order 
or degree of existence, will obtain it as a reward 
or gift, and will then possess the divine 
nature, in which nature, alone, Immortality 
inheres. 

Angels no more possess immortality than do 
men; for, although they possess the divine image 
and likeness (as do all of God's intelligent 
creatures), they are not partakers of the divine 

R1642:page 116 

nature;— theirs is angelic nature, as man's is 
human nature. True, there is no dying among 
the angels as there is among men, but neither 
would men die if it were not for the penalty 
of sin, under which all men came by father 
Adam's disobedience, and from which all of 
them, who will accept the terms of the New 
Covenant, will shortly be set free. (Isa. 61:1.) 
But that angels could be destroyed, as man 
has been, is fully substantiated by God's dealing 
with Satan, who, before he sinned, was an 
angel of light, a son of the morning— one of 
the earliest creation. (Isa. 14:12.) Both in 
literal and symbolic language the Bible declares 
that Satan is to be destroyed;— which 
proves conclusively that he and other angels 
do not possess that exclusively divine attribute 
of inherent life, Immortality. 

And the Scriptures assure us that even our 
great Redeemer, who was the very first and 
chief of God's creatures, "the beginning of 
the creation" of God, and by whom angels 
and men and all other created things were 
made (Rev. 3:14; John 1:3; Col. 1:15-17; 
Heb. 1:2; Eph. 3:9), and who consequently 
was next to the Father in honor and glory and 
power,— even he did not possess this wonderful 
kind of life, this essentially divine quality, 
until after his resurrection from the dead, after 
he had given himself as man's great sin-offering, 



once for all and forever. Then, as a reward 
for his perfect obedience to the Father's will and 
plan, even unto death, he was highly exalted 

R1642:page 117 

and given a name above every other name. 
His obedience to the divine will proved him 
an overcomer of evil in the highest degree, and 
he was honored with a seat with the Father 
in the throne or dominion of the Universe. 
Among the other favors conferred upon our 
great Redeemer after his sacrifice and at his 
resurrection was this divine quality of having 
"life in himself," not dependent on supplies 
of food, etc., the gift of Immortality. 

Indeed, if our Redeemer had possessed this 
kind of life before, he could not have been our 
Redeemer; for he could not have died for us. 
To any one possessing immortality, suffering 
and death are impossible. Thanks be to God 
that Christ died for our sins— once for all. 
But he will never die again: he is now immortal 
and cannot die. "Christ being raised 
from the dead dieth no more: death hath no 
more dominion over him. "—Rom. 6:9. 

With these views of the exclusiveness of this 
quality of being called Immortality, and seeing 
that it is essentially a quality of the divine 
nature only, it may well cause us surprise to find 
it promised or offered to any creature— angel 
or man. Yet we do find it not only given to 
our resurrected Lord Jesus, but offered also to 
a particular class of men, within a special period 
of time, under certain conditions and for a 
special purpose in the divine plan. 

God's purpose is clearly stated in connection 
with the text at the head of this article, 
thus: "God. ..hath saved us, and CALLED 
US WITH A HOLY CALLING; not according to our 
works [or past evidence of worthiness], but 
ACCORDING TO HIS OWN PURPOSE and favor, 
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the 
world began, but is now made manifest by the 
appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who hath 
abolished death and brought LIFE and IMMORTALITY 
to light through the gospel."— 
2 Tim. 1:8-10. 

God's purpose was to make a "new creation," 
of his own nature— the divine nature— of which 
new creation his Beloved Son, our Lord, was to 
be the chief or head, next to himself. God's purpose 
was that this new order of beings should be 
selected from among the human order; not that 
the human family had specially pleased God in 
works, or in any other manner had merited 



this honorable preference; but of his favor he 

purposed it so. And it is in the carrying out 

of this purpose that our Lord Jesus has already 

been manifested, and that by his obedience 

he has not only secured to himself the 

Father's favor and his own exaltation to the 

divine nature and glory and honor, but by the 

same act of obedience, even unto death, he 

has opened the way to two things; viz., life and 

immortality. Life, everlasting life, is opened 

up to the world in general; and each member 

of the race may secure it by conformity to the 

terms of the New Covenant: and immortality 

is brought to light for the special class, the foreordained 

Church, which, according to God's 

purpose and wonderful favor, is now being 

called, and tested, and selected, for participation 

in the divine nature and association in the 

divine plan, as heirs of God and joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ, their Lord and Redeemer. 

Observation and reflection teach us what the 
Scriptures expressly declare; namely, that the 
requirements of character for that high position 
are exacting, the way to that great exaltation 
narrow, difficult, and that few of the many 
called will win the prize, make their calling 
and selection sure (by full and hearty obedience 
of mind) and become partakers of the divine 
nature. The overcomers who will sit with 
Christ in his throne, as he overcame and was 
associated with the Father in his dominion, 
will be but "few," a "little flock." Not 
many great, mighty or noble, according to the 
reckoning of this world, will be chosen; but 
the humble and meek, rich in faith.— 1 Cor. 1:26; 
Jas. 2:5. 

Some of the Scriptures upon which the foregoing 
statements are based are the following: 
Showing that God is the only original possessor 
of Immortality, 1 Tim. 6:15,16. Showing 
that to Christ has been given this quality of 
having "life IN HIMSELF," not needing further 
supply, John 5:26. Showing that each one 
of the faithful, overcoming Church, Christ's 
bride and joint-heir, is to share the same gift, 
a well-spring of life in himself, springing up 
everlastingly, John 4: 14. But each must run 
a race and win it as a prize, as did their 

R1642:page 118 

Master and Captain, the Lord Jesus. (Rom. 2:7; 

1 Tim. 4:10; 1 Cor. 9:25; 2 Pet. 1:4-7,8,10.) 

And such shall have part in the same 

kind of a resurrection that Christ experienced, 

Phil. 3:10,1 1. His was the first or chief resurrection, 



to the highest station; and, as his 

"body," they will share with him that first or 

chief resurrection to glory, honor and immortality, 

and over them consequently the second 

death will have "no power," Rev. 20:6. That 

this class will obtain this inherent quality of the 

divine nature (immortality), and be like their 

Lord, is clearly stated by the Apostle in his 

description of their resurrection, the "first resurrection," 

"the resurrection of the dead," 

1 Cor. 15:42-44,50-54. (The word incorruptible, 

when applied to being, existence, is of 

similar significance to immortal). The exceeding, 

great and precious promises of God, by 

which these are called or begotten, are incorruptible 

seed, and wherever retained and 

nourished will develop into being of the divine 

nature, 1 Pet. 1:23 and 2 Pet. 1:4. These citations 

include all the uses of these words, immortal, 

immortality, incorruptible and incorruption 

in the Bible;— in the original as well as in 

the English language. 

THE ORIGIN OF THE BELIEF IN HUMAN IMMORTALITY. 
ITS EARLIEST TEACHER. 



Whence then came the popular notion that 
all human beings possess immortality, innately, 
inherently? Evidently it came not from 
the Bible; for, as we have seen, the Bible 
teaches the reverse, that God alone had it as 
an inherent quality, and that he has offered it 
as a gift to but a small and very select class. 
Nay, more, the Bible distinctly declares that 
man is mortal, that death is possible to him. 
(Job 4:17; Deut. 30:15; Rom. 6:12; 8:11; 
1 Cor. 15:53; 2 Cor. 4:1 1); and more, that 
he has passed under its sentence (Rom. 5:12); 
that his only hope is in a resurrection, 
a re- vitalizing or re-creation from the dead; 
and that an everlasting continuance of life may 
be had only upon the condition of full obedience 
to the divine requirements.— 1 Cor. 15:17,18,20,21; 
Rom. 5:18,19; Acts 4:2; 17:18; 
24:15. 

Scanning the pages of history, we find that, 
although the doctrine of human immortality 
is not taught by God's inspired witnesses, it is 
the very essence of all heathen religions. Savage 
tribes in every quarter of the earth believe 
the doctrine, and from their tribal traditions 
have held it from time immemorial. It is not 
true, therefore, that Socrates and Plato were 
the first to teach the doctrine: it had an earlier 



teacher than either of them, and a yet more 
able one. They, however, polished the doctrine, 
as long held by the Greeks, and made a 
philosophy out of it, and thus made it the more 
seductive and acceptable to the cultured class 
of their day and since. 

The first record of this false teaching is 
found in the oldest history known to man— 
the Bible. The false teacher was Satan. "He 
was a liar from the beginning [not from his 
beginning, but from the beginning of man's 
experience— from Eden] and abode not in 
the truth." He used this false doctrine in 
tempting mother Eve to wilfully and knowingly 
disobey God's command. God had said 
to Adam and Eve that the penalty of disobedience 
would be death. Satan's denial of this, 
saying, "Ye shall not surely die!" was practically 
saying that God could not destroy 
them after having created them. It was practically, 
therefore, the first affirmation of the 
doctrine of inherent, human immortality. And 
this is the teacher who has blinded and confused 
all nations and peoples upon this subject. 
Himself and his agents and coadjutors, the 
fallen "angels who kept not their first estate" 
(Jude 6), have taught the world this lie, in the 
same manner that they attempted to teach 
Israel,— by dreams and by necromancy,— by 
personating their dead friends, through "spirit-mediums" 
of modern times. 

During the Jewish age God guarded his typical 
people against those delusions and lying 
spirits of devils, assuring them that "the dead 
know not any thing"; that "his sons come 
to honor and he knoweth it not, and to dishonor 
and he perceiveth it not of them"; for 
"there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 

R1643:page 118 

nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest." 
-Job 14:21; Eccl. 9:5,10. 

R1643:page 119 

The following references will show clearly 
the Lord's attitude on this subject during the 
period of typical Israel's favor; viz., Deut. 18:10-12; 
Lev. 19:31; 20:6; 2 Kings 21:6; 23:24; 
Isa. 8:19; 19:3; 29:4; 1 Cor. 10:20; Jas. 3:15; 
2 Tim. 3:8. In God's dealing with the 
Gospel Church, as we have already seen, he 
guarded them against the error by setting before 
them the true and only hope of everlasting 
life and of immortality; bringing BOTH to 



light in the gospel; showing that life everlasting 
would be given only to faithful, obedient 
men as a reward at the resurrection, and that 
immortality would be bestowed as a favor upon 
a little flock, the special "overcomers" of 
this Gospel age. 

DOCTRINES OF DEVILS. 



These "seducing spirits and doctrines of 
devils," so successful over the entire world in 
all past time, the Lord advises his people, will 
be specially active and specially seductive in 
form in the close or "harvest" of this Gospel 
age. "Now the spirit speaketh expressly that 
in the latter times some shall depart from the 
faith, [through] giving heed to seducing spirits, 
and doctrines of devils speaking lies in 
hypocrisy." (1 Tim. 4:1.) We are also forewarned 
that this "hypocrisy" consists in personating 
messengers of light ("angels of light" 
—2 Cor. 11:13,14), and affecting to bring in 
"new light." 

Among the barbarians, steeped in ignorance, 
there is no need of new light— they are left 
asleep. But amongst the enlightened and civilized 
(despite his blinding influences, 2 Cor. 4:4), 
thought and investigation are being 
aroused; and there Satan is kept busy. Among 
such necromancy and incantations will not do; 
their intellects are too alert to be much or 
long hoodwinked by these. Even the finer 
deceptions of Spiritism (with its manifestations 
of superhuman powers through rapping, tipping, 
writing and speaking and impersonating 
mediums with familiar spirits, which it claims 
are for the purpose of proving human immortality), 
are too gross and senseless to deceive 
and captivate God's consecrated ones, the very 
class Satan is most anxious to stumble. Consequently 
there are changes in progress,— new 
garments of "new light" are assumed continually, 
and every feature of present truth sent 
by God to "the household of faith," as meat 
in due season, is promptly counterfeited, in 
order "to deceive if it were possible the very 
elect." 

But it is not possible to deceive those whose 
faith in God is fixed in Christ— who are trusting 
in the merit of Christ's great redeeming 
sacrifice and whose hearts are wholly consecrated 
to the Lord's service. Such "shall never 
fall"; but all others are to be separated from 
the true, and God permits, yea, using Satan's 



wrath to work out his own plans, he may be 
and is said to send the strong delusions which 
are now perplexing all whose faith is not 
founded upon the rock Christ Jesus, and who 
have not already put on the whole armor of 
God, supplied in his Word. All who have 
failed to receive the truth in the love of it, but 
take pleasure rather in the error and serve 
error, God wills shall be deceived by these 
"doctrines of devils," that thus their condemnation, 
as unfit for a share in the Kingdom, 
may be manifested.— See 2 Thes. 2:10,1 1; 
and WATCH TOWER, April '91. 

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE, THEOSOPHY, ETC. 



Among the popular and more refined devices 
of the great Adversary are Christian Science 
in its various schools and with slight differences 
and Theosophy. These on the outside, 
together with the evolutionary and anti-Biblical 
theories inside the nominal churches, 
called Higher Criticism, advanced thought, 
etc., are rapidly tearing to fragments all of 
truth that the poor nominal churches ever held. 
These all bear the distinctive marks of the 
"father of lies." They all with one consent 
declare man to be immortal. 

The assumedly wise "Higher Critics," who 
claim that the writers of the Bible were less 
learned, less wise and less inspired than themselves, 
and hence that their writings should be 
regarded only as well-meant "old wives fables," 
claim that man is "falling upward"-- 
evolving from a state or condition of low degradation, 
perhaps from a monkey or even a 

R1643 : page 120 

tadpole state, up to the divine nature, by virtue 
of inherent immortality. 

Christian Science is wholly a misnomer; for 
it is devoid of scientific elements, and merely 
prefixes the name Christian to destroy and deceive 
God's people; for to them Christ was 
not a Savior, nor was a savior needed: he was 
merely a good man, a Christian Scientist who 
but imperfectly understood the new science 
which he introduced, but which in these 
latter times has been perfected and fully set 
forth by Mrs. Doctor Eddy of Boston, Mass. 
As expounded by its various schools it teaches 
the immortality of all things, and has for its 
trade-mark, so to speak, the expression, "All 



is life, there is no death!" Thus they speak 
Satan's falsehood, "Ye shall not surely die." 

The various shades of Universalism unite in 
the same conclusion. Some hold that man 
evolved from a tadpole or ape, some that he 
was poorly made and a very bad likeness and 
not at all the image of God, and declare that 
he was like "a half-baked cake;" but all unite 
in the belief that all men are being evolved to 
perfection and the divine nature, and assure 
all in Satan's very language, "Ye shall not 
surely die." 

And, finally, we have Theosophy— the latest 
nonsense to appeal to the cultured and aesthetic, 
but really blind and naked and hungry in 
the nominal churches. (Rev. 3:17.) It comes 
forward as the newest and most polished form 
of religious thought; but those versed in ancient 
and medieval history know that it is, in 
its very essence, a revival of the central thought 
of Hindooism, and in many particulars the delusion 
of the so-called German Mystics. Theosophy 
holds that "all things are of God" in 
the absolute and ridiculous sense. It holds that 
all finite existences were effluxed or thrown 
off from one Infinite Being; that these effluxed 
beings— angels, men, beasts and birds and 
devils— being portions of deity are immortal 
and (as Satan has always taught) "shall not 
surely die." Following the philosophy of Socrates 
and Plato (while denying these as the 
authors or even the burnishers of their doctrine, 
and claiming that Socrates and Plato got the 
information as they now get it direct from 
God, by communion and intuition), it claims 
that man not only will live forever future, but 
that he has lived forever past. It appeals 
to the weak-minded with the question, "Have 
you never seen places that seemed strangely 
familiar the first time you visited them? Those 
were places you had seen before your present 
existence began." And, as of old, Satan may 
sometimes assist a sluggish imagination with a 
dream. It holds that death is not death, 
but a new birth, and that each individual will 
be reborn again and again until he has developed 
sufficiently the divine nature, and then 
he will be reabsorbed into God for eternity. 

It professes to be based upon neither theology 
nor philosophy. The word Theosophy is 
defined by its advocates to mean the Religion 
of Wisdom. It claims that its wisdom is divine, 
resulting from direct intuition and communion 
with God. Consequently, it rejects 
philosophical reasoning, and revelation such 
as the Scriptures, as hindrances to true wisdom. 



Instead of accepting and using the revelation 

which God has provided— the Bible— and therefrom 

learning of the character and will of God 

and bringing their wills and actions into harmony 

with the spirit of its teachings, these 

have rejected the wisdom of God (Rom. 1:18-21; 

1 Cor. 1:18-21; 2:9-16) and substituted 

the vain imaginings of their own imperfect 

minds— holy meditations. "Professing to be 

wise, they become fools" was written, by divine 

authority, of a similar class.— Rom. 1:21,22. 

Claiming to reject all revealed religion, and 
ignoring doctrines entirely, Theosophy professes 
to be the religion of cause and effect- 
that sooner or later wrong doing will react 
upon the wrong doer, bringing its penalty; 
and right doing bringing its reward. Like the 
recent World's Parliament of Religions, it 
places Christ and Moses on a parity with Confucius, 
Plato and Socrates— as world-teachers. 
It is ready to quote from the Bible or from the 
Koran any fragment which can be turned to 
account in its own support, but it does not 
regard any book or man as specially inspired 
authority. It professes to be the patron of 
every noble trait and every benevolent design, 
and is willing to class as Theosophists all 

R1643 : page 121 

popular people. It favors alms-giving and 
good deeds, so done as to be seen of men. 

Theosophy is, therefore, as it claims, preeminently 
suited to the sentiments of the majority 
of the wise children of this world who 
do not appreciate either their own imperfection 
or the Lord's mercy in Christ. They 
say, "I want no one to pay my debts for me. 
I expect to pay for myself the penalty of my 
sins— if I commit any." All such are just ripe 
for Theosophy. Indeed, the entire "Christian 
world" is ready to leave its former confused 
creed-mooring and to set sail, with Theosophy 
for pilot and good works for motive power, 
to reach a haven of rest and happiness, if 
there be such a haven;— for many of them 
doubt it. Alas! how the ignorance of God's 
Word and plan and the present confusion of 
the nominal churches paves the way for this 
great falling away from the cross of Christ to 
"another gospel"— which is really no gospel. 
-Gal. 1:6,7. 

Of course none of these delusions have any 
use for the doctrine of the cross of Christ— 
the "ransom for all"— or its testimony in due 
time, now or hereafter. No; the Bible doctrine, 



of a ransom past and of a future restitution 
as a consequence, finds no place in any of 
these theories. Those who hold with Satan, 
"Ye shall not surely die," of course can see 

R1644: page 121 

no more sense in giving a ransom for a creature 
who is "falling upward" or being evolved 
from lower to higher conditions, than they 
could feel sympathy with a restitution which 
would bring them back to their "former 
estate," since according to their false theories 
this would mean the undoing of all the progress 
of six thousand years of evolution.— Compare 
Acts 3:19-21; Ezek. 16:53-55. 

These are some of the foretold "strong delusions" 
of our day. They are not actually 
strong or powerful— on the contrary they are 
very weak— but they have great power to delude 
many, because few are "weaned from the 
milk" (Isa. 28:9); few in the nominal church 
are mentally or spiritually out of their swaddling 
clothes; few have even used the milk of 
God's Word and grown thereby to the use and 
appreciation of the strong meat of present 
truth which is for the developed men in Christ. 
(Heb. 5: 13,14.) It is not surprising to us, therefore, 
that those whom Spiritism and Swedenborgianism 
did not affect are now being gathered 
into Christian Science and Theosophy, 
the later developments of Satan's cunning. 

The strength of these delusions lies in the 
errors mixed with the truths held by Christian 
people; and among these errors none is more 
injurious or better calculated to open the 
heart and mind to these delusive and destructive 
errors than the general belief of the first 
lie— "Ye shall not surely die"— a failure to 
understand the Bible doctrine concerning life 
and immortality brought to light by our Lord 
Jesus, through his gospel of salvation from sin 
by his ransom sacrifice. Every error held obscures 
and hinders some truth; and we have 
come to a place where every child of God 
needs all the panoply of truth— the armor of 
God. He who has not on the whole armor of 
God is almost sure to fall into error in this 
evil day. Who shall be able to stand? None, 
except those who are building up their most 
holy faith with the precious promises and doctrines 
of God's Word. 

The advocates of these doctrines are surprisingly 
alert everywhere— especially in this 
country where thought is most active and 
where liberty often means license,— and hundreds 



and thousands are embracing these errors 
as new light. The extent of their success 
is not yet apparent to very many; for their 
success lies in making a still hunt for their 
prey. They are to be found in almost every 
congregation of every denomination— especially 
the more cultured; and the "angel of 
light" feature is seldom neglected. The nominal 
church is already permeated, leavened, with 
these false doctrines; and they are spreading 
so rapidly that the Scriptural prophecy, that 
a thousand shall fall from the faith to one who 
will stand faithful, will soon be fulfilled and 
demonstrable. (Psa. 91:7.) The doctrine of 
the ransom, the cross of Christ, is the test. 
Already a large proportion of the nominal 
church disbelieves in Christ's death as their 
ransom or corresponding price, and have taken 
what is rapidly coming to be considered the 

R1644:page 122 

advanced position, that Jesus was merely AN 
EXAMPLE for us to follow, not also our redeemer. 

From the Scripture teaching upon the subject 
we cannot doubt that these deceptions 
will grow stronger and that even greater demonstrations 
of superhuman power will be permitted 
them— that all except the very elect 
may be stumbled. (Matt. 24:24; 2 Pet. 1:10.) 
The doing of wonderful things is an old trick 
with Satan. And if disease and death are to 
a considerable extent under his control (See 
Job 1:12; Heb. 2:14), why might he not in 
an emergency reverse the method and do some 
healing of diseases, thereby to re-establish his 
errors, and re-blind some whose eyes of understanding 
have been gradually opening, under 
the light of the Millennial day dawn? We 
believe that he is adopting this policy, and 
that he will do so yet more. And we believe 
that our Lord's suggestive inquiry was prophetic 
of this, when he said, "If Satan cast 
out Satan, he is divided against himself: how 
then shall his kingdom stand?" (Matt. 12:26.) 
So now when Satan's Kingdom is about to 
fall, it will be his effort to support it by many 
wonderful works done by his unknowing as 
well as by his wilful agents, falsely and in the 
name of Christ. 

THE ONLY FOUNDATION DISCARDED. 



Theosophists introduce their views with the 



true suggestion that,— "The various Christian 
religions have no prospect of converting the 
world to Christ through their creeds, which 
antagonize each other, and what the world 
needs is a religion of deeds, not of creeds." 
It proposes, as the only creed of life, unselfishness. 
This is captivating to some who, like 
Theosophists, delight to talk about doing good 
and being unselfish, but who perhaps do as 
little as or less than the majority of others, 
without substantial returns. 

Nevertheless, the jangle of creeds and the 
well-founded doubts of nominal Christians 
make them an easy prey to such delusions. 
Hence many are ceasing to believe in or even 
to think of creed, except to doubt them all and 
in every particular, and are grasping as a relief 
the single idea— "An unselfish life, now, 
will certainly secure for me the best there is 
hereafter." Thus Christ, and his great sacrifice 
for sins, are being buried under the mass 
of confused tradition known as the creeds of 
"Christendom." And the very fundamental 
error, which caused all the confusion of those 
creeds, survives them, takes a new form and 
announces itself, in Theosophy, an agent of reform 
and new light; and that fundamental 
error is the false view of death, that when a 
man dies he is not dead, but more than ever 
alive. This error is Satan's first lie: "Ye shall 
not surely die,"— all are immortal by nature, 
and even God cannot destroy you. 

Let all who would stand in this time of 
general falling away from the Bible, from 
Christ, from the cross which is the center of 
the divine plan of salvation, look well to this 
matter and get their heads as well as their 
hearts right and in harmony with God's revelation 
—the Scriptures. Only in Christ are life 
and immortality brought to light, truly. Other 
lights on these subjects are false lights, the 
surmisings of imperfect brains, misled by the 
great deceiver. 

True, these various errors are about to gather 
out of God's Kingdom ALL that offend, and 
those that do iniquity (and these constitute 
the great mass), while the faithful, who will 
receive the Kingdom and be joint-heirs of it 
with Christ, alone will "stand." (Eph. 6:11-13; 
Psa. 91 : 1,4.) But soon after the separation 
thus, of "wheat" from "tares," the fire of the 
great day of trouble (Zeph. 3:8) will make 
general havoc of present arrangements— social, 
political and financial— as well as of false 
religious doctrines and systems. Then shall 
the little flock, having received immortality 



and the Kingdom, shine forth as the Sun of 
Righteousness, and cause all the families of the 
earth to be blessed.-Matt. 13:43; Acts 3:19-21; 
Mai. 4:2. 

Then let all who know the Truth be active 
in its spread. If you cannot preach orally 
perhaps you can preach privately, to your 
friends or neighbors,— by printed page or pen 
or word, as well as by your consistent daily 
conduct. Those about you need whatever help 
you can give, and if they do not get it many 
of them surely will drift into these latter-day 
delusions of Satan. 



R1644 : page 123 

JONATHAN EDWARDS MUCH BLINDED. 



AS an illustration of Calvinism as it was 
preached in by-gone days, but which the 
intelligence both of hearers and preachers prohibits 
in this day of greater light, we quote the 
following from the New York Journal's review 
of a new biography of Jonathan Edwards recently 
published:— 

"Now let us see what impression was produced 
by the preaching of the doctrines of the 
immutable election of the few and the inevitable 
damnation of the many which Edwards 
with remorseless logic reared on his conception 
of the human will. The contemporary 
records and surviving traditions on the subject 
are brought together by Dr. Allen on pages 
126-129 of this volume. 'One man has recorded 
that as he listened to Edwards, when discoursing 
of the day of judgment, he fully anticipated 
that the dreadful day would begin, 
when the sermon should come to an end.' 
Then follows the memorable account left by 
an ear and eye witness of the effect of the sermon 
preached at Enfield, Conn., in July, 1741 
—a sermon which, in the words of the biographer, 
'If New England has forgiven, it has 
never been able to forget.' The title was, 
'Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God;' and 
the impression made by it was 'as if some 
supernatural apparition had frightened the 
people beyond control. They were convulsed 
in tears of distress and agony. Amid their 
sobs and outcries the preacher pauses, bidding 
them to be quiet in order that he might be 
heard.' The discourse was one constant stream 



of imprecation against sinful humanity, and 
it ended with these words: 'If we knew that 
there was one person, and but one, in the 
whole congregation that was to be the subject 
of this misery, what an awful thing it would 
be to think of! If we knew who it was, what 
an awful sight would it be to see such a person! 
How might all the rest of the congregation 
lift up a lamentable and bitter cry over him! 
But, alas! instead of one, how many, it is 
likely, will remember this discourse in hell! 
And it would be a wonder if some that are now 
present should not be in hell in a very short 
time, before this year is out. And it would be 
no wonder if some persons who now sit here 
in some seats of this meeting house, in health, 
and quiet and secure, should be there before 
the morrow morning." 
If it be true that 
"Satan trembles when he sees 

The weakest saint upon his knees," 

R1645 : page 123 

it must frequently cause him to chuckle and 
laugh to see how completely he succeeds in 
getting good men, wearing the livery of the 
royal priests, to blaspheme the character of the 
great Jehovah by such false statements. 

The cunning of the great adversary in hoodwinking 
and leading captive to his service the 
professed servants of God, through false doctrines, 
is wonderful, marvelous. He is the successful 
prince of this age. As "the god [mighty 
one] of this world," he has been wonderfully 
successful in blinding the minds of them which 
believe not simply and implicitly in God's 
Word, but manufacture and use theories of 
their own and the traditions of other men to 
accomplish their own plans and to bring quick 
and popular results; so that they come really 
to love the darkness of error, of Satan-designed 
human theory, rather than the light of 
truth and reason which God's Word supplies. 
And so blinded are they, that even when 
brought in contact with the light of truth, the 
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, they fear 
and dread it and cling to the darkness of which 
really they are often ashamed.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

O Lord, we are waiting, hoping, praying 
for that brighter, better day, when the reign 
of evil shall have finished its work of testing 
and proving the Church, the Bride; when Satan 
shall be bound and deceive the nations no 
more and blind thy children no longer with 
misrepresentations of thy Word, thy character 



and thy plan; when the Sun of Righteousness 
(the glorified Church— Head and body) shall 
shine forth, the true light which shall enlighten 
every man that ever came into being (John 1:9); 
when the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth as the waters cover the 
sea. For this, O Lord, we wait; and, as thou 
hast bidden us, we labor on and trust and 
pray— "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven." Yea, even 
now we discern the dawning of that better day 
which shall emancipate thy Church, the whole 
creation, from the bondage of sin and Satan 
and death, and open the way for all who will 
to come as the Lord's sheep into his great fold 
with its bountiful provision of life everlasting. 



page 124 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1645 : page 124 

JOSEPH FORGIVING HIS BRETHREN. 



II. QUAR., LESSON V., APR. 29, GEN. 45:1-15. 

Golden Text— "If thy brother trespass against thee, 
rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him."— Luke 17:3. 

Again the wisdom and noble character 
of Joseph shine out brilliantly in his treatment 
of his erring brethren. When the widespread 
famine had brought them down to 
Egypt to buy corn, he knew them, though, 
under the changed circumstances of his 
new position, they did not recognize him. 
He had left them a beardless boy of seventeen, 
sold into slavery: they now saw him a 
man of forty, arrayed in the vestments of 
royalty and speaking a foreign language 
which they did not understand. 

Had he been of a revengeful spirit, here 



was his opportunity for retaliation. Now 
he was in power, and they were at his mercy. 
Or if, on the other hand, his generosity 
had overcome his judgment, he might have 
received into his favor a host of enemies to 
further menace the peace and usefulness of 
his life and to stimulate and foster their 
own evil dispositions. But Joseph was a 
well-balanced man, and so went to neither 
the one extreme nor the other. His course 
showed that he had a forgiving as well as a 
cautious spirit, and that under proper circumstances 
he was ready to exercise forgiveness. 

He therefore wisely dealt with them 
roughly at first, that he might prove their 
present disposition and ascertain whether 
the experience of years had wrought any 
change in them, and also that he might 
learn something with reference to his father 
and his younger and only full brother, Benjamin. 
He soon learned that his father and 
Benjamin still lived (42:13); but by concealing 
his identity and dealing roughly 
with them he improved the opportunity to 
test their present disposition, both toward 
their aged father and Benjamin and toward 
each other; and when they were tested he 
gladly recognized the fact that a great 
change had taken place in them, as witnessed 
by their solicitude for their father's 
feelings about Benjamin, in view of his loss 
of Joseph, and of their tenderness toward 
Benjamin who was now the father's favorite 
in the place of Joseph, thus showing 
that they had overcome the bitter envy and 
hatred of their younger days. 

He heard them confess, too, in their own 
language, their guilt one to another with 
reference to their former treatment of himself, 
and learned also of Reuben's remonstrance 
at that time. (42:21,22.) Then 
the circumstances drew forth the pathetic 
prayer of Judah for the restoration of Benjamin 
to his father, and his offer of himself 
as a substitute, as a bondman to Joseph 
(44:18-34); and this, too, was accompanied 
by a humble confession of their former sins 
and the recognition of present calamity as 
a deserved punishment from God for them. 
The whole account of the conference with 
Jacob their father and with Joseph proved 
their contrition and change of heart. 

This was enough for Joseph: penitence 
and a true change of heart were all he desired, 
and having proved this effectually and 
wisely, he could no longer refrain himself 



(45:1): his truly forgiving heart now overflowed 
with benevolence, and he wept aloud 
and embraced and kissed his brethren, and 
lavished upon them the wealth of his favor, 
praying them also to forgive themselves 
and to strive to forget their former sins 
now so freely and fully forgiven. But Benjamin, 
his beloved own brother, and the one 
who had had no share in the guilt of the 
others, must have some special tokens of 
grace: nor did this seem to elicit the least 
jealousy on the part of the now reformed 
brethren. They must have returned to their 
home, not only to tell the good news, but 
also to confess to Jacob their sin against 
Joseph as the necessities of the case 
demanded. 

The remainder of the story is of thrilling 
interest— the breaking of the good news to 
Jacob, who at first thought it too good to 
believe, until he saw the tokens of Joseph's 
favor, the wagons from Egypt, and then 
said, "It is enough: Joseph my son is yet 
alive, I will go and see him before I die." 
Then the long journey, undertaken and 
cheered by the special direction of God, saying 
to him in the visions of the night— "I 
am God, the God of thy father. Fear not 
to go down into Egypt, for I will there make 
of thee a great nation. I will go down 

R1645 : page 125 

with thee into Egypt, and I will surely 
bring thee up again, and Joseph shall put 
his hand upon thine eyes." Then the joyful 
meeting and the realization of Joseph's 
glory and power, and better than all, of his 
still surviving filial and fraternal love; then 
the meeting and favor of Pharaoh and the 
settling in the land of Egypt under the 
fostering care of Joseph and Pharaoh, where 
Jacob enjoyed the evening of life in the 
midst of his family for seventeen years until 
his death. 

In this beautiful story of the course of 
divine providence in the life of one of the beloved 
of the Lord, while we see and gather 
from it precious lessons of confidence in God 
and faithfulness and zeal in his service, the 
thoughtful reader can scarcely fail to observe 
its typical foreshadowing of Christ, the 
Savior of his people and of the world also. 

Joseph was another illustration, like that 
of his father, of the chief blessing coming 
specially upon a younger son, as the chief 



divine blessing is also to come upon the 
Christ, Head and body, the Gospel Church, 
not the elder Jewish church. While all of 
Jacob's sons were elect in respect to inheriting 
in common a share in the Abrahamic 
blessing, Joseph was specially chosen as a 
type of Christ— Head and body— the one 
through whom blessings will come upon 
the natural seed of Abraham, that they in 
turn may bless all the families of the earth. 

Hated of his brethren, the fleshly Israelites, 
sold as a slave (thirty pieces of silver 
being the price of slaves, or twenty pieces 
for those under twenty years), he was thus 
prefiguring the hatred and sale of Christ by 
his enemies— his brethren of the Jewish nation, 
unto whom he came, as did Joseph, 
and they received him not. Joseph's three 
years' imprisonment seem to represent the 
three years of our Lord's ministry, the years 
after his baptism, when he was dying daily, 
giving up his life for others, or they were 
parallel also with his three days' imprisonment 
in the tomb, from whence, like Joseph, 
he came forth and was highly exalted, next 
to the King— to the right hand of the 
Majesty on high, all power in the Kingdom 
being given unto him. 

Joseph was given full charge and used 
his power to bless others, storing up food 
for all. So Christ has been given full 
charge: he is Lord of all and lays up for all 
sufficient grace to give everlasting life to 
all. Nor is Christ ashamed to own as his 
brethren those who have nothing to commend 
them to his favor but humble contrite 
hearts. He will not be ashamed to own 
them before his Father and all the holy 
angels. This also was beautifully prefigured 
in Joseph's treatment of his father and 
brethren. He was not ashamed to present 
them before the king, although he knew 
that shepherds were an abomination to the 
Egyptians. Then, in the period of famine, 
Joseph used the grain (life) to purchase for 
Pharaoh the land, the people, and all that 
they had.-Gen. 47:14-25. 

This scheme of statesmanship, which thus 
secured all the land, so that one-fifth of the 
annual produce should go to the support of 
the central government (47:23-26), thus 
breaking up the petty influence of the nobles 
and consolidating the state into a strong 
nation, gave also a striking type of Christ's 
work. During the Millennial age Christ 
will give the bread of everlasting life (himself, 



his merit) to all who desire it, but all 
must give their all in exchange to Jehovah, 
whom Pharaoh typified in this affair. Thus 

R1646 : page 125 

as Joseph, Pharaoh's exalted servant and 
representative, gave life to, or saved the 
lives of many, so Christ, as Jehovah's Prime 
Minister, has provided life for all, and offers 
it to all on the same conditions of faith and 
obedience to the King. 

Then again mark how beautifully Joseph's 
noble and benevolent treatment of his erring 
brethren prefigures the foretold course of 
our exalted Lord Jesus with his former enemies. 
Charity, always a noble quality, is 
specially admirable when seen in such a 
setting as this. Joseph did not even suggest 
what he might justly have done to his 
brethren as punishment for their sin against 
himself twenty-three years before. After 
testing his brethren and finding them 
changed in heart and penitent, he reveals 
himself a true, loving, forgiving friend and 
brother. He makes no boast of his own 
wisdom or virtue as the causes of his exaltation, 
but ascribes all the honor to God's 
overruling providence. He does not even 
remind them of his prophetic dream, which 
they had all just fulfilled in prostrating 
themselves before him. 

He simply forgave them and gave all the 
glory of the present deliverance from famine 
to God, saying, "Now, therefore, be not 
grieved, nor angry with yourselves that ye 
sold me hither, for God did send me before 
you to preserve life. God sent me before 

R1646 : page 126 

you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, 
and to save your lives by a great deliverance. 
So now it was not you that sent me 
hither, but God," etc. How simple, and 
how beautiful! Just so will Christ forgive 
his penitent enemies. He did not say, however, 
that God caused them to do the wrong. 
No, he told them plainly of sin, saying, "As 
for you, ye thought evil against me, but 
God meant it [overruled it] unto good, to 
bring to pass as it is this day, to save much 
people alive. Now, therefore, fear ye not, 
I will nourish you and your little ones. And 
he comforted them and spake kindly unto 
them."-Gen. 50:20,21. 



Thus it is declared of Christ that he will 
set men's sins in order before them, and 
that they must freely confess their sins and 
bear their shame (Psa. 50:21,22; Ezek. 16:61-63; 
1 John 1:9), as did Joseph's brethren. 
But, nevertheless, in the joys of his 
forgiving love and the blessing of his favor, 
the sting of shame will be taken away and 
the fruits of righteous and trustworthy 
character will reinstate the dignity and nobility 
of true manhood. 

In Joseph's case was emphasized God's 
promise to all his people— "All things shall 
work together for good to them that love 
God, to the called according to his purpose." 
(Rom. 8:28; Psa. 1:1-3,6.) And 
such as realize this providential supervision 
are not only kept the more humble and 
trustful, but are not vexed and soured by 
the vicissitudes of life and the misconduct 
of others as are those who are guiding 
themselves and fighting their own battles 
in life. Virtue in character, faith and consecration 
to God, appreciation of God's 
care and direction in all of life's affairs, and 
charity toward those through whose errors 
our trials and experiences come, is the proper 
attitude for every sincere child of God. 

R1646 : page 126 

JOSEPH'S LAST DAYS. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VI., MAY 6, GEN. 50:14-26. 

Golden Text— "The path of the just is as the shining 
light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. 
-Prov. 4:18. 

The evening of Joseph's life reveals to us 
a true nobility of character, which had stood 
the test of many a fiery ordeal, and displayed 
many of the blessed fruits of righteousness. 
The close of his life was like the sinking 
of the sun to rest after the shining of an 
eventful day. He had been a faithful servant, 
a loyal friend, a merciful and sympathetic 
brother, a dutiful and loving son, and 
finally a modest and moderate prince. 

To Joseph, as to most of the patriarchs, 
the severest trials and discipline came in 
early and middle life, and were rewarded 
with a serene old age; while to many others 
such as the Apostle enumerates in Heb. 11, 



the last days were tragic, and they filled the 
martyr's grave. The Lord's discipline and 
testing of his children in the furnace of 
affliction are regarded by many as evidences 
of his disfavor, while their temporal 
prosperity is regarded as a sure sign of his 
favor. But this is a great mistake; for experiences 
of both kinds are parts of the trial 
and testing. We are tested on one side of 
our nature by the storms of adversity, and 
on the other by the calms of temporal prosperity; 
and blessed is the man who neither 
faints under the former, nor is beguiled by 
the latter. Such well rounded, symmetrical 
and strong characters are indeed precious 
in the sight of the Lord. 

Such a man was Joseph: he was schooled 
and proved in adversity in earlier life and, 
in his later years, the topmost waves of 
temporal prosperity never seemed to move 
him to vanity, nor in any degree to unman 
him. He still looked beyond these temporal 
things to "the city that hath foundations, 
whose builder and maker is God." His confidence 
in God and his trust that the promise 
made to Abraham should be fulfilled, 
never forsook him. Even when surrounded 
by wealth and comfort he remembered that 
Egypt was not the promised land; and when 
he was dying, he, like his father Jacob, indicated 
his hope in a resurrection and the 
subsequent fulfilment of the divine promise, 
by commanding that his body should be 
buried in the land of Canaan. "By faith, 
Joseph, when he died, made mention of the 
departing of the children of Israel [verses 24,25], 
and gave commandment concerning 
his bones."— Heb. 1 1:22. 

It is probable that as Joseph proved so 
valuable a servant to the Pharaoh who exalted 
him, he was continued in office by his 
successor on the throne, perhaps to the end 
of his life. The benefits he had conferred 
upon Egypt were of great value, and seem 
to have been very gratefully received and 
remembered. 

The path of the just of the Golden Text 
is not an individual path, but one path in 
which all the just ones walk: it is the path 
of righteousness (Psa. 23:3), the path marked 

R1646 : page 127 

out by the Word of the Lord as one of 
meekness, patience, faith, love, etc.; and those 
who keep in this path are led of God into 



all truth in its due season. And this pathway 

becomes more and more radiant with 

the glorious light of divine truth as it nears 

"the perfect day" when the sun of righteousness 

shall have risen and the knowledge 

of the Lord shall fill the earth as the waters 

cover the sea— the Millennial day of Christ's 

reign on earth. 

All the patriarchs and prophets and saints 
of the past have walked in this path, and on 
all of them the light of God shone as it became 
due; but upon none did it ever shine so clearly 
as it shines to-day; for we are even now 
in the dawning of the glorious day of Christ, 
and soon this light will shine upon all. 



R1646 : page 127 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



page 127 

DEAR SIRS:— Last spring a colporteur 
called upon me and induced me to buy the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series. I read them, 
and since then have ordered six sets. Four 
sets are sold, and the others I am loaning. 
The light that shines into my mind and 
heart, through the inspired Word, impels 
me to lead others therein; and this I am 
endeavoring to do as I have opportunity. 
May the Lord bless you, and me, and all 
who love his appearing! 

Yours in Christ, F. H. RUSS. 



R1646 : page 127 

GENTLEMEN:-Enclosed herewith please 
find Exchange on New York for the sum of 
$6.00, for which please send me ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER one year and copies of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

By way of explanation for ordering this 
amount of books, I desire to say that, about 
two months ago, two young ladies came into 
my office selling those books. I was very 
busy when they presented their card; and, 
seeing that they were ladies selling books, 
I bought the three volumes, thinking that 
by so doing I was helping them out. I have 



since concluded that these ladies brought 
to me "glad tidings of great joy." I took 
the books home, and thought little of them, 
until a few weeks ago, when I had some 
spare time, I began reading the first volume, 
and it was so very interesting that I could 
not stop. The result is, my dear wife and 
myself have read these books with the keenest 
interest, and we consider it a God-send 
and a great blessing that we have had the 
opportunity of coming in contact with them. 
They are indeed a "helping hand" to the 
study of the Bible. The great truths revealed 
in the study of this series have simply 
reversed our earthly aspirations; and realizing 
to some extent, at least, the great opportunity 
for doing something for Christ, 
we intend to take advantage of this opportunity 
in distributing these books, first, 
among our nearest relatives and friends, 
and then among the poor who desire to read 
them and are unable to purchase; and for 
that reason we desire these extra copies. 
As soon as these are exhausted, we will 
order more, and try to do what we can in 
this way, be it ever so little. 
Yours, etc., J. F. RUTHERFORD. 



page 127 



BROTHER RUSSELL:-Please continue my 
WATCH TOWER. Enclosed find One Dollar 
for the same. Am fully committed to 
the new light. Have read all the DAWNS 
three or four times. Shall make them my 
theology in the future. Pray the Lord to 
show me how to use my entire ability to 
the best advantage. Please omit the title 
"Rev." from my name. 

God bless you and yours in the glorious 
work! B.J.WISE. 



R1646 : page 127 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am getting 
free from my inherited and traditional 
Babylonish ideas. Some things I have 
learned but crudely as yet, with regard to 
the great plan, but I have begun to read 
MILLENNIAL DAWN consecutively, as I 
had never done before. It is most wonderful, 
how many earnest, well-meaning souls 



are deluded. I am now, so far as I know, 
where I want to be enlightened on the 
Word of God, whatever it may cost to me 
of personal crucifixion. 

I am glad, dear Brother, that I never got 
any deeper into the inside workings of 
Babylon than I did. A little over nine 
months I served as a pastor, when God, our 
heavenly Father, showed me where I was. 
Now I want only to know our Father's will 

R1647 : page 127 

that I may do it. Only very recently have 
I begun to see my deserved place before 
God. I see such a wonderful privilege in 
the election of grace. I see now that God 

R1647 : page 128 

has not been obliged to give me a place 
among the "elect few," who "shall be partakers 
of the divine nature," but, that he 
calls whomsoever he will, and they must 
make their calling and election sure. "For, 
by grace are ye saved through faith, and 
that not of yourselves." Much light comes 
to me through MILLENNIAL DAWN; also on 
other matters through the WATCH TOWER. 

May the blessing of our Father be upon 
you and yours, and may he use you to 
"lighten the Gentiles" and his people Israel 
(in the flesh as well as in the Spirit). 

In love of the truth, JAS. D. WRIGHT. 



page 128 



DEAR SIR:— I have for the past four years 
been reading your MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
I am situated so that I cannot read it consecutively 
as the subject requires, but have 
read it with great pleasure and profit. I 
am thoroughly infatuated with the book. 
Your ideas have given me a higher conception 
of God and his dealings with the 
children of men than any other book of a 
kindred nature. Your ideas of the "Judgment 
Day," "Natures Distinct," "Restitution," 
are so plain and simple and logical 
that it seems strange I had not long ago 
arrived at such conclusions. If you have 
published a paper, send me a copy. I want 
to know more about this doctrine which 
removes so many of the stumbling blocks 



from the way. 
I am yours respectfully, E. M. CARR. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--The second 
volume of the DAWN series come to hand, 
also samples of WATCH TOWER. The study 
of the first two volumes of this work has 
done me so much good that I am constrained 
to send for the third and last volume. 

I cannot praise the dear Lord enough for 
the good that I have received through these 
two volumes. I had back-slidden and almost 
drifted into skepticism, when your first volume 
was handed me. But after reading it 
I was so convinced of the truths of God's 
Word and his glorious plan for blessing 
the world, that I besought him for forgiveness 
for my past sins and shortcomings, 
and again started to serve him. Its further 
study caused me to send for the second volume; 
and it has so blessed me by leading me 
into the deep truths of the Bible that I cannot 
thank God enough. How sweet is the 
meat furnished in due season to the household 
of faith! I am willing to be led by the 
Lord and to work in any department of his 
vineyard in which he may see fit to place 
me, praise his name! 

May the good Master bless you in your 
work, and continually guide you by his 
Spirit, is my prayer. 

Yours in Christ, H. H. CHEESEMAN. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 

As I have told you before, I have been 
converted entirely by the spirit of God, in 
reading Plan of the Ages. The presentation 
of the truth is, to me, satisfying and 
convincing,— wonderful, wonderful. I can 
lift up my heart and rejoice, knowing that 
our redemption draweth nigh. What joy 
unspeakable! 

You do not know how I long for fellowship 
with others who can see the real truth 
of God's Word. Remember me when you 
observe the Lord's Supper. I shall be with 
you in the spirit as you partake of the 
emblems of the sacrifice— the Lamb that 
was slain for the sin of the whole world. 

Yours in Christ, W. B. LINDSLEY. 



R1647 : page 128 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--I have been 
thinking of writing to you for some time. 
I want to thank you as the instrument in 
God's hands for leading me into the light. 
I have been a truth-seeker for years; and 
crying, Oh, that I knew where I might find 
him! I have often prayed to God in secret 
to show me his glory. I need not now say 
that I am feasting mentally on the riches of 
his grace. The Lord sent me a set of the 
DAWNS about three months ago; and I 
have not only read them, but I constantly 
read, mark, learn and inwardly digest them. 
They have become a burning fire shut up 
within my bones, and I cannot forbear to 
tell the glad tidings of great joy which shall 
be to all people. 

I was once a Methodist preacher; for 
eight years I have been a Baptist preacher, 
but, thank God, I am now only a preacher 
of the Lord. I have left Babylon forever. 
Oh, that I may be faithful to the end, that 
I may be accounted worthy to escape those 
things that are coming on the earth, and to 
stand before the Son of Man! 

I have sold twelve sets of the DAWNS, and 
I am devoting all the time I can afford to 
preaching and getting people to read. I 
have much opposition, but faithful is he 
who promised, 

Your brother in Christ, L. T. MEARS. 



EXTHA EDITION 



VOU XV., NO. 8 




J 

ion s 




a£@h ^o%D©f 




AND 



^EpaLtt) OF CfipiST'S ^PpESEjMCE 

APRIL 25, I894 



C, T, RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



" The distifit if not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lard. It 
is exmtgkf&r th* ditcifU that h* he as his Master < % and tit* servant as hit 
Lord, tf they have called th* Master of th* house Bethebitb* haw much mere 
shall they call them of his household? 

"Fear them not, therefore; for there is nothing covered thai shall not be 
revealed; and hid that shall not he known.— Matt. 70:94-16.*' 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO. 

ALLEGHENY, PA. 

U, S. A. 

Entered a* Second Claw Mail Matter at the P. O., Allegheny, Pa. 



"No weapon that is formed against thee shall 
prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against 
thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. 

" This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord 
and their righteous reward from me, saiih the 
Lord" — fsa. 54:17. 






" No "weapon that is formed against thee, shall 
prosper, and every tongue thai shall rise against 
thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. 

" This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord 
and their righteous reward from tnc, saith the 
lord.'—fsa. 54:17. 



. ' : s^M 



-• ' 



R CONSPIRACY EXPOSED. 



" B/esred are ye when meit that! rtvite v», Bad 

persecute you, and shall say all tmmner of evil ttgaiust 

you fatiely, for my sake."—-AIalf. J : 11. 

LITTLE did the Editor fhink,when penning words of 
caution to watch and pray, printed in our issueof April 
i, under the caption, " Lest Ye Enter into Temptation," 
that they were so soon to prove so necessary and timely as 
they have since proved. 

The story we here relate is a sad one; but it seems duty 
to tell it in detait, because those most concerned were in- 
troduced to our readers and frequently mentioned in these 
columns in warmest terras of brotherly regard. It is proper 
now, therefore, that you should know of their deflection. 
This painful story we have published separate from our 
regular issues, that if possible only the elder, and it is to be 
hoped steadfast, readers of the Watch Tower may know 
of it h lest others — " babes " — might be " stumbled." 

Those who have been readers of the Watch Tower for 
several years, well know that on the strength of the words 
of our Lord and the Prophets and Apostles ( Dan. ia no; 
Psa. 91:7; 1 Cor. 3:13; Matt. 13:41) we have l>ccn ex- 
pecting "siftings" and "stumblings" and the " falling" of 
many in this "evil day." Such, therefore, like ourselves, 
will not be- so greatly surprised at the facts, although like 
ourselves they may well be surprised, each time, to know 
who stumbles and over what Unsuspicious hearts arc al- 
ways surprised; and the best and purest hearts are general- 
ly unsuspicious. 



■ 









,- ' 



■ 



- 
- 



. . -fZ v<-->vj— - J w --*-V'- - 



, *- ■••»-••:(*,.,■.. ,jv..«< 



-»*..j|.r, i .w( , B w,. M u, ■ m iii im i Bi w unii iii > M |-ir 



readers and frequently mentioned in these columns in warmest 
terms of brotherly regard. It is proper now, therefore, that you 
should know of their deflection. This painful story we have 
published separate from our regular issues, that if possible only 
the elder, and it is to be hoped steadfast, readers of the Watch 
Tower may know of it, lest others-"babes"-might be stumbled. 

Those who have been readers of the Watch Tower for several 
years, well know that on the strength of the words of our Lord 
and the Prophets and Apostles (Dan. 12:10; Psa. 91:7; 1 Cor. 
3:13; Matt. 13:41) we have been expecting "sittings" and 
"stumblings" and the "falling" of many in this "evil day." Such, 
therefore, like ourselves, will not be so greatly surprised at the 
facts, although like ourselves they may well be surprised, each 
time, to know who stumbles and over what. Unsuspicious 
hearts are always surprised; and the best and purest hearts are 
generally unsuspicious. 

To prepare the reader for what follows, it is proper to state that 
the conspiracy of which it is our unpleasant task to tell you, and 
of which the Editor was made the subject, resembled more the 
betrayal of our dear Master (as some of the friends here 
remarked) than anything else to which we can compare it. We 
had no suspicion of it whatever, until five days before, and only 
since have learned that it had been gradually forming for the past 
two years; that it had been expected to "explode" the matter like 
"a bomb, and blow [dear?] Brother Russell and this work sky- 
high" at the Spring Meeting a year ago, and by thus breaking his 
influence to get free from what they call "bondage to Brother 
Russell," and force open to their own uses and abuses the 
columns of ZION'S Watch Tower, which they claim a 

3H115 

right to command;-because it is Zion's Watch Tower, and they 
are members of Zion. 

They were greatly disappointed, it appears, when that meeting 
was abandoned in favor of the Chicago Convention later, but 
declared that the "bomb" would "explode in less than eighteen 
months"-referring doubtless to the expected Memorial meeting 
this Spring. But Providence again foiled the scheme by leading 
us unwittingly to decide not to call such a meeting this year. We 
knew at the time that they were greatly disappointed, for they 
said so; but we had no idea that they had such murderous plans 
and hearts. We use the word "murderous" advisedly, because we 
esteem that to kill the character and influence of a man is a baser 
murder than to kill his body merely, and that the murder of the 
character of one the least of God's children is worse in the sight 
of God than the physical murder of a worldly man. (See Matt. 
18:6; 1 John 3:15.) Perhaps few realize this matter so; but we 
submit that it is the correct view, as shown by the foregoing 
Scriptures. If all could get this true view of the matter, they 



would see the importance of the Apostle's words-Let all evil 
speaking, backbiting, slander, malice, envy, strife, be put away 
from you, as becometh saints.-Eph. 4:31; Col. 3:8-10. 

About January '93, when they still expected the Spring Meeting 
to be held that year, they began preparing for it, by hints and 
suggestions, privately given, that there was something grievously 
wrong with Brother Russell's business character and methods. 
This was expected to undermine the confidence of the flock here 
and to prepare them to believe the "bomb," when exploded at the 
time of the Convention, when representatives of the truth from 
all over the country would be here. Of course this was done with 
many protestations of deep sorrow for "poor Brother Russel"- 
nothing being stated positively, but everything bad being hinted. 
My friends would have brought the matter to my attention at 
once, but of course were diffident about inquiring into my 
personal affairs and business,-especially as they knew nothing 
definitely to inquire about. At last, however, I got some idea that 
"some ugly rumors" were afloat, and at once called together 
about forty of the principle brethren and sisters of the 
congregation here, including those whose names seemed to be 
associated with the "ugly rumors,"-which were some of these 
who, we now find, were even then conspirators. We stated the 
case, and requested and urged that any and every thing known be 
told to us all, so that if any misunderstanding had occurred it 
could be set straight at once; for I assured them that there could 
be no real foundation to any rumors, my business career, like my 
religious course, being straightforward and based on principles 
of justice and truth. All denied any knowledge of anything 
derogatory to my character, and went away satisfied, except the 
conspirators, one of whom, (Mrs. Zech) I now learn, while 
speaking fairly to my face and seemingly joining with the others, 
remarked privately, afterward, "/ could have turned the entire 
course of that meeting if I had chosen, "- referring evidently to 
the "bomb" which it had been decided should be kept,-to be 
exploded at the expected Memorial Convention of '94. 

At the said meeting at my home, I gave a little resume of my 
business affairs, protesting, however, that I did so only for their 
and the truth's sake, and that my business affairs had as much 
right to privacy as those of any one else; and so I here protest 
again, but, later on, will go into details,-only for the sake of 
hindering God's "little ones" from being "stumbled" by the false 
statements which have already been circulated privately, by 
letter, and at the Chicago Convention last Summer, and now, 
within the past few days, in print (the oral "bomb" project having 
failed). The venomous circular recently issued by O. von Zech, 
E. Bryan, J. B. Adamson and S. D. Rogers is now to be the 
"bomb" designed to destroy confidence in Brother Russell 
(whom Providence has made to some extent an under-shepherd 



to the Lord's sheep), and thus to shatter the work-in order that 
the conspirators may gather some of the wreckage; for already 
they have a new paper under way. 

So much for the conspiracy, of which we were in ignorance until 
a few days ago. Meanwhile, the conspirators were fair to my face 
and spoke endearing words, as will be shown later on in this case 
by some of their letters to myself and wife, written during the 
very time they were concocting their scheme and keeping their 
"bomb." Meanwhile, we were their sincere friends, and all but 
one of them has shared the hospitality of our home within the 
last three months. Yes, at the very time that they were preparing 
the circular, designed to assassinate my character, one of them, 
in the presence of a dozen brethren, offered me his hand, as 
Judas kissed the Master. But by that time, although I knew much 
less than I now do of his perfidy, I knew him to be my slanderer 
and refused his hand, telling him that the right hand of 
fellowship meant something to me, and that I had no desire to 
give it to those who stealthily and murderously stabbed my 
character behind my back. 

But now for the details of the matter:- 

To give a connected view of the things which have transpired 
here lately, we must recall to the TOWER readers the facts stated 
in our issue of April 1, under the caption-'The Work in 
England." (And we assure you that every word of it is strictly 
correct; and that the figures given, as showing the funds of the 
Tract Society supplied in books for Brother Rogers' expenses, 
are net after deducting all money received from him and all 
books transferred to other colporteurs in England and all books 
now stored there. These figures, however, include books 
supplied to Bro. Rogers in the U. S. before he started for 
England, from the proceeds of which his expenses there were to 
be paid. It should be noted, too, that we state in the TOWER the 
amount of money Bro. Rogers would have received for the 
books at "retail." We thus particularize because he, in an 
ambiguous manner, denies the statement.) 

We heard Bro. Rogers' proposed mendicant plan in the presence 
of our office assistants (who with ourselves constitute our 
household), until Bro. Rogers said that he had told us all about it 
and "could think of nothing more to explain." As before stated, 
we assured him that we could not think of adopting his plan and 
discarding the successful one now in operation, but urged him to 
try it himself if he felt sure that it was the Lord's will concerning 
him. He replied that we were "rejecting the Lord's message" 
etc. (We learn since that he no longer relies for leading upon the 
Word of the Lord and his providences in Answer —to prayer, but 
that, instead, he sits down and thinks by the hour — as 



3H116 

he did during his stay at our home-and believes that the Lord 
thus reveals things to him. Alas! how many have been misled by 
this and similar misapprehensions, and to the neglect of the 
Word of God, which is "able to make wise unto salvation," and 
through which the man of God may be thoroughly furnished unto 
every good work. (2 Tim. 3:15-17) Just what bad condition of 
heart lies at the bottom of such a course we may not be able to 
discern, but it seems generally to be spiritual vanity.) This was 
Monday evening; the next two days he visited considerably with 
Bro. Zech. We know not what passed between them except that 
by Wednesday night their causes were one; Bro. Zech evidently 
appreciating the idea of "taking the money from the fish's 
mouth." If Bro. Zech thus embraced Bro. Rogers cause it was but 
natural that Bro. Rogers should fall in with Bro. Zech's 
"grievances," and they strengthened each other's hands and 
hearts in evil. We since learn that on the Saturday evening 
previous one of Bro. Zech's family, Paul Koetitz visited Bro. 
Erlenmyer (whom he had previously tried to poison against me) 
and in great glee said, We have Bryan and Adamson and now 
here is Rogers all the way from England. It seems as if the Lord 
sent him at this time. That makes four, and there are a lot more. 
Just wait, something terrible is going to happen. And Bro. and 
Sister Zech and Paul Koetitz were at his house a week previous 
and stayed until midnight talking about Bro. Russell and a 
coming catastrophe. They gave Bro. Russell a black character, 
and Bro. Zech said he was going to tell all to the Congregation, 
soon. Bro. E. said, Why not talk the matter over with Bro. 
Russell? He replied, It is no use, he would explain everything 
away;-the congregation ought to know these rotten things. Bro. 
E. was much distressed and waited in fear for the "boiling pot" 
to "boil over." 

To start the matter, Bro. Rogers, Bro. and Sister Zech and Bro. 
Paul Koetitz attended one of the six Wednesday Evening Prayer 
and Testimony Meetings, held for nearly a year in this vicinity. 
There, in the absence of Bro. Russell, those meetings were 
denounced, and Bro. Russell, for his connection with their 
institution, was denounced as a "pope," etc. The leader of the 
meeting in vain called for order and told them that the meeting 
was for the purpose of divine worship and praise, and for mutual 
assistance in spiritual development. Mrs. Russell was present and 
reproved both the interruption and the unkind spirit manifested. 
She pointed out that while the meetings were suggested and 
recommended by me, the matter was left to the congregation, 
nearly all of which had taken up with the suggestion and voted to 
have the meetings-not for doctrinal discussions, etc., but solely 
and only for worship and spiritual upbuilding. 

She pointed out, also, that none were in any sense forced to 
attend; and that those who did not care for prayer and conference 



in harmony with the object of the meetings should stay away and 
give to the others who did so desire, proper liberty to worship 
God as they pleased. She pointed out, too, that there are many 
meetings at which doctrinal subjects, etc., are considered. She 
showed plainly that while Bro. Russell's course contained 
nothing like a popish disregard of the wishes of others, the 
course of Bro. Rogers, in coming from England to force his ideas 
upon Bro. Russell, and now the course of all these in interrupting 
the worship of others, was decidedly popish, if indeed it were not 
worse than popish. Finally the discontents withdrew; Bro. 
Rogers staying that night at Bro. Zech's. 

But I was unsuspicious all the while and lost the morning of that 
very day from the Lord's work (DAWN, VOL. IV.) to collect 
money to make good my check of $700, given to Bro. Zech the 
afternoon before to keep his note from going to protest. The next 
day Bro. Rogers returned to our house for another conference (at 
which the entire family was present and which occupied the 
whole morning), and remained for dinner. After dinner he said 
he was going to Zech's but would be back for tea; but we told 
him that as he had been ten days at our home interrupting 
important work, and as Bro. Zech with whom he was more in 
harmony had made him welcome, we would not invite him to 
stop longer in our home. He then went to Bro. Zech's house, 
where, evidently, it was decided that now would be the most 
favorable time to explode the "bomb" that had been kept for 
some eighteen months. So Bro. Rogers was sent west, arranged 
with Bro. Bryan, who was to manipulate an assorted lot of 
grievances and damaging charges against Bro. Russell, and got 
Bro. Adamson into line;-who, it seems, had some previous 
knowledge of the conspiracy. Brother Adamson had a grievance 
relative to his tract, as will be explained further on; and being 
one of the older colporteurs, it was hoped that his name would 
add to the destructive force of the coming "explosion." They had 
seen Bro. Russell pass through trying experiences with "false 
brethren" before, for God and truth were on his side; but never 
before had they seen such a combination against him; and they 
encouraged themselves that now Bro. Russell would be 
humbled in the dust, and they would profit thereby. 

THE CONSPIRACY CULMINATES 

Accordingly, they-Rogers, Adamson and Bryan-gathered at 
Bro. Zech's home, and with him and his family, sent out, on 
Wednesday, April 4, special letters to the Church at Allegheny, 
inviting them to gather at Bro. Zech's house the next evening to 
hear matters of importance, etc., -meaning the "bomb" and 
smaller fire works. 

About forty or fifty of the congregation attended, all of whom 
except one, so far as we are aware, received special invitations to 



be present. As we were not present, we submit the report of Bro. 
E. C. Henninges, the Secretary of that meeting, well known to 
many of our readers. It is as follows:- 

THE SECRETARY'S REPORT 

"In response to invitations sent out, signed E. Bryan, S. D. 
Rogers, J. B. Adamson and O. von Zech, requesting attendance 
at Bro. Zech's house on April 5, at 7:30 P. M., to hear "things 
concerning our highest welfare,' about forty of the Church at 
Allegheny attended. Finding on arrival that it was to be a 
congregational meeting at which some kind of charges were to 
be preferred against Bro. Russell, a Chairman and Secretary 
were called for by those in attendance, that whatever was done 
might be "done decently and in order;' besides which, if seemed 
proper that if the Congregation were to "hear' the complaints, it 
implied that 

3H117 

they were to render their judgment or verdict, and all this 
required proper order and a congregational head or chairman to 
the meeting and an authorized record. And further, some present 
who had knowledge of Bro. Russell's past experiences with 
Bros. Zech, Bryan and Rogers, foresaw that it would be most 
unjust to have the self-constituted impeaching committee appoint 
one of their own number to manage the trial, as they insisted on 
doing, and at the same time call it a congregational meeting. 
After nearly an hour had been spent in trying to get the 
congregation to sit quietly and hear their best friend traduced, 
without any power to properly inquire into facts, etc., the four 
complainants were overruled by the congregation, and Bro. H. 
C. Wolf was chosen Chairman, and myself Secretary, of the 
meeting. 

"Bro. Bryan was first introduced, but became, under some 
interruption, so excited, disorderly and rebellious that he 
grievously insulted the congregation by saying, "I refuse to 
recognize the authority of the Chair. ' It was promptly moved 
and seconded that we hear Bro. Bryan no further; but an 
amendment, giving him the alternative of apology or dismissal 
was carried. On his declaration that he had "no thought of 
apology, ' he was dropped, after having occupied the floor for 
about fifteen minutes. 

"Bro. Rogers had the next opportunity, and spoke for nearly two 
hours. He gave a resume of his plan, which several of us had 
heard before at Bro. Russell's house, a report of which was given 
in ZION'S WATCH TOWER of April 1, '94, under the heading, 
"The Work in England. ' At Bro. Russell's he said he had not yet 
tried his new method. At Bro. Zech's he declared that he "had 
tried this method largely in London,' and it was "very successful. 
' He stated, as grievances, four ways in which he claimed Bro. 
Russell had injured him. (1) By pointing out that the printed page 



is the best way to preach the Gospel. (2) On account of this he 
got the feeling that he must sell so many books per day to pay 
expenses, and this kept him from trusting the Lord. These two 
things kept him in a great bondage which he had felt, but the 
cause of which he and only lately realized. (3) By telling him 
that he had v NO talent' for public speaking. (4) By advising him 
to change his London meeting to one in Bible-class style. This 
last he regards as an "assumption of control of my privileges. ' 

"Bro. Zech spoke at odd times against Bro. Russell in general 
terms, to the effect that Bro. Russell had too much authority and 
lack of love for the brethren; also v Bro. Russell does great sins; 
and, if you do not want to hear it, you are partaker of his sins. ' 
Twelve o'clock, midnight, came without Bro. Adamson having 
had his say except in the opening prayer, in which he thanked 
God for having the privilege of sharing in v this great reform 
movement' for liberty and equality amongst the brethren. 

"Upon motion, the meeting adjourned, while Bro. Bryan shouted 
that they would be heard from fully in a few days-that a hall 
would be rented where they [the four] could have matters all 
their own way, and that it would not be called as a 
congregational meeting and that " this thing will not down; 

we will print it and publish it to all the world, ' etc. 

"Respectfully submitted, E. C. Henninges." 

After the meeting had dismissed, a few were invited to stay 
longer, and did stay until four o'clock A. M. Then were detailed 
the other matters, and through some who were there we finally 
got to know about the "bombs," etc. When asked if they had 
gone to Brother Russell and asked whether he could or would 
give them an explanation, they replied that some of the minor 
charges had been presented and that "he had explained them 
away; " but they had never mentioned the two leading items 
(the "bombs" which they had been keeping for eighteen months). 
When asked why they had not presented those leading matters to 
Bro. Russell they replied,-We knew before-hand that Bro. 
Russell could Answer—them, and explain them all away. "And 
so" said the inquirer, "you thus confess that you did not want an 
explanation, but wanted to slander Bro. Russell." 

THE CONSPIRACY EXPOSED 

The next Sunday afternoon, after the discourse, strangers were 
dismissed during the singing of a hymn and the regular 
congregation was requested to tarry. To those who remained we 
gave a full history of the matter, in substance as we now present 
it below:- 

The conspiracy which reached a head on Thursday evening April 
5, at the residence of Bro. and Sister Zech was a surprise to us 
all; and although we now find that it had been forming for nearly 
two years, yet, so far as we can learn, Bros. Adamson and 



Rogers had nothing to do with it until the past few weeks, 
although the former had considerable information respecting it. 
But their readiness to become participants therein speaks for 
their hearts much of the same "gall of bitterness" which has for a 
longer period been the power of Satan working in the others;-for 
we cannot but believe that Satan has been the moving and 
inspiring conspirator-moving to envy, jealousy, etc., and now, 
finally, to an attempt to assassinate my character and thus to 
greatly injure the cause which, under God's providence, I 
represent to a considerable degree. 

When I shall now relate to you in detail the charges brought 
against me, you will indeed be surprised that "brethren" could be 
so confused by Satan as to become his tools and to attempt to 
make charges and "bombs" OUT OF NOTHING. I am 

not surprised at Satan; for I well know that he has long sought 
occasion against me, because of my activity against him and his 
works and in the service of the Lord. He has repeatedly set for 
me pitfalls and snares, but by the grace of God I escaped them. I 
am not surprised, therefore, that after besetting me for years and 
finding no real charges to bring against me, the great Accuser of 
the Brethren finally endeavors to misconstrue virtues and make 
them appear to be vices. 

Born in this city of Allegheny, which, with the exception of 
about three years, has always been my home, I should be, and 
am, well known here. My religious views, of course, make me a 
mark, a target; and on this account if anything were known 
derogatory to my character, either in morals or in my business 
dealings, surely there are thousands of tongues in Pittsburg and 
Allegheny that would not hesitate to make abundant use of them 
to oppose my religious teachings. Can any one doubt that if such 
things could be produced, Satan would have found willing agents 
to publish them to the world long ago, to counteract the religious 
truths I publish, which they oppose, yet cannot gainsay nor 
contradict? 

3H118 

But what even the godless world would not do, because too 
honest, Satan now succeeds in getting some "brethren '" to 
attempt. We do not claim that they realize what they are doing;- 
no, we trust that they do not fully realize the atrocity of their 
crime. For, if they have pursued their course for eighteen months 
with a full appreciation of its atrocity there would surely be little 
hope for them. We trust, therefore, that of them as of some of old 
it is true,-"they know not what they do," the god of this world 
having so thoroughly blinded their moral sight. 

Yet while hoping that sometime they may get free from their 
captor, Satan, we cannot think that they have gotten into their 
present dreadful condition inadvertently, or merely by error of 
judgment. If their hearts were right God would not have 



permitted their poor judgment to get them into their present 
plight. We fear, from the bad fruits which they are bearing, that 
ambition and envy have for some time been "roots of bitterness" 
which only recently blossomed, and are quickly yielding the 
fruitage denounced in God's Word as works of the flesh and of 
the devil,-malice, hatred, contentions, envy, strife, back-bitings, 
slanders and every evil work. 

Those whose hearts could treasure up supposed "bombs" for 
eighteen months to explode in the midst of the Church and ruin 
the character of a brother, who meantime did more than a 
brother's part to them (as will be shown later), and who all this 
time called him "dear Brother Russell" and wrote him letters 
expressive of their love and esteem—these have a depth of 
wickedness and deceit which would shock a noble-minded 
worldly man not a professing Christian, and ignorant of the 
great light of present truth. Blasphemous unbeliever as he is, we 
believe that Mr. Robert Ingersoll would have no sympathy with 
such ungodly works of darkness;— he has enough of manhood to 
keep him out of such a snare of the devil. 

BROTHER ROGER'S GRIEVANCES 

We will examine these charges separately. We have already 
referred to Satan as the chief conspirator and it is not difficult to 
judge of his motives. We have also mentioned Bro. Roger's 
grievances-that he was not allowed to overthrow the present 
Colporteur work and substitute his new preference. 

We never forbade Bro. Rogers or others to preach Christ in any 
and every way they can. Quite to the contrary, as many can 
testify, we have always urged upon all the necessity for watching 
for the hearing ears, and that where such are found they do all 
they can to supplement the influence of the DAWNS. But we 
have advised, and do still advise, that it is useless to get into a 
wrangle and dispute and waste time at every house. Far better 
leave the majority of people to fight with DAWN and the 
BIBLE, than for the average colporteur, or indeed any one, to 
attempt it. Stir up the curiosity and interest of the purchaser, so 
that he will surely read, and then endeavor to water and to 
harrow before going to the next field of labor,-has been our 
advise to all colporteurs. And on their Report-blanks we have a 
space left, in which we request that they mention the number of 
persons with whom they have had special talks, and another 
blank in which we request them to state how many they have 
found who seem to be true wheat. Does this look as though we 
endeavored merely to see how many DAWNS could be sold, 
regardless of any work upon the heart? 

Furthermore, several of the Brethren who seemed to have some 
ability for public speaking, have been supplied without charge 
with large charts similar to the one in DAWN, VOL. 1. (which 
cost us eight dollars each, in quantities), to enable them to preach 



when opportunity offers. Bro. Adamson, one of the conspirators, 
has such a chart. Indeed, about two months ago, we contracted 
with a painter in Pittsburg to prepare one hundred cloth charts, 
five feet long, on rollers, suitable for parlor-meetings. These will 
soon be ready and will be supplied to TOWER readers at about 
one-third what they would cost to get them up singly. Thus 
different little groups can edify and instruct each other, as well as 
their neighbors. Already there are two, and I am now making 
arrangements for two more, who seem "apt to teach," to go from 
place to place and hold meetings, public and private, chiefly the 
latter. Do these things look like objections on my part to oral 
teaching? Surely not; and Bro. Rogers knows that he 
misrepresents me, whatever may be his object in so doing. 

We do learn, however, since the publication of the article,-"The 
work in England," — that Bro. Rogers had a very poor plan for 
colporteuring. Brother Utley, to whom Bro. Rogers gave some 
lessons, writes that he could not conscientiously adopt the plan, 
which, while successful as to sales, really did not make any 
opening for the reception of the truth. He describes the method 
thus: Rogers rings bell — servants appears — Rogers says, Please 
tell the lady that a minister wishes to see her. Servant leaves him 
in the hallway and he pushes on into the parlor. The lady enters, 
somewhat indignant at the intrusion, but is awed by the words, "I 
am a minister of the gospel," and readily consents to her name 
being entered for the three books to help on some good work. 

Sister Burroughs writes on the subject as follows: 

"A sister here asked me if I did not think it would be well to let 
Bro. Russell know how much harm had been done here by Mr. 
Rogers in his very disagreeable manner of insulting those who 
refused to buy V DAWN; ' but I thought he was in England and 
beyond giving further offense here, so we would not trouble you, 
but took him to the Lord in prayer-that he might be humbled and 
given a better spirit." 

We can assure Bro. Rogers and others that the trouble is not with 
the colporteur work, but with his methods of doing it. Others are 
still greatly blessed in it, and are a great blessing to the Lord's 
hungry sheep, preaching so much of the plan as the people have 
ears to hear and leaving the books to preach to them many things 
which they would not hear orally. 

Another grievance was that when he came here from England I 
did not show him special attention more than to others, by 
inviting him onto the platform, and to speak to the congregation, 
and to lead a Wednesday meeting. 

Such a complaint surprised me greatly, but gave evidence of a 
root of pride as well as of bitterness. I fear that I have already 
pushed him forward too much, and to his injury. 



Recognizing all of the consecrated as Royal Priests, it has been 
my custom to ignore distinctions, and when 

3H119 

another speaks I myself take a seat with the congregation. Our 
congregation almost every Sunday has from two to five ex- 
ministers of various denominations who at times have addressed 
the congregation,-in my absence. 

BROTHER ADAMSON'S GRIEVANCES 

Bro. Adamson's grievances may be summed up as follows: He 
has for some four years held some views upon some of the 
parables, which I consider incorrect and misleading expositions. 
These he brought forward at the Spring Convention of 1892, in 
connection with a little talk to the colporteurs after the close of 
the meeting proper. Seeing that those who heard him had not 
generally caught the drift of his thoughts, my remarks following 
his were few, because I had no desire to hold up his views to 
ridicule-for some of them were too childish to treat in any other 
manner. I merely remarked that Bro. A's views of these parables, 
they would notice, differed a little from my own view, which I 
stated in a few words. But, said I, since the Lord expounded only 
a few of his parables, and since we know that they do not mean 
what they say, but are figurative, it would not be in order for any 
one to be dogmatic in interpreting them: it is well also to 
remember that no doctrines should be built upon parables; at 
most they may be used to illustrate doctrines made plain by non- 
symbolic scriptures. Thus, kindly, did I push aside,rather than 
crush, what then seemed to me harmless, nonessential 
differences. 

But, alas! how great a flame a little spark may kindle. Had I 
realized, then, how an insignificant difference may be used by 
the Adversary for evil, how gladly I would have spent several 
hours in pointing out what seemed to me to be Bro. A's errors of 
interpretation. But I was busy, and said to myself-"In 
nonessentials charity and liberty." 

I now learn that Brother Adamson, like many others, has been 
under the influence of the Allegheny conspirators for more than 
a year. I noticed a change in his letters and manner, and in his 
zeal for the work, but could not account for it, until I learned of 
the "bombs" conspiracy, a few days ago. 

About a month ago several brethren wrote to me saying that Bro. 
Adamson was preparing and intending to publish a tract, that he 
was writing to them for money to publish it, and that he had 
requested that the matter be kept secret from me, which request 
they felt it a duty to the Lord and his truth to disregard. In some 



of these letters Bro. A. explained that the coming tract would 
contain some of his views on some of the parables, and at least 
one or two parables as treated by Bro. Russell, and some other 
extracts from Bro. Russell's writings. 

Bro. Weber received one of Bro. A's appeals for aid. He 
answered it kindly saying that he hoped to see him soon. Shortly 
after, he came from Maryland to Allegheny at Bro. Bryan's 
request to meet him on very important business, which business 
he found after his arrival was to sit in judgment upon and 
condemn Bro. Russell. After this interview, seeing the evil 
disposition manifested by Bro. Bryan, and his threatening 
attitude (which will be explained later), and knowing that in 
some way he was already influencing Bro. Adamson, and that he 
was about to visit Bro. A., Bro. Weber thought it would be well 
if he and I should visit Bro. Adamson at once, and if possible 
shield him from the subtle and evil influence of Bro. Bryan, who 
had stated his intention of leaving the city for Chicago the next 
day to see Bro. A. We therefore started that evening. 

Our talk with Brother and Sister A. was a kindly one, in which I 
pointed out what I consider to be his errors of interpretation of 
some of the parables, particularly one of them (Matt. 5:25,26), 
which seemed to convey the idea that the world during the 
Millennial age would each man pay the penalty of his own sins 
to the "uttermost farthing"; and I showed that with such a view 
in mind some might draw the conclusion, even if not meant, that 
the death of Christ was not necessary as a ransom price for all. 
We then told him of the unhappy change that had come over 
Bro. Bryan and of his strange and unwarrantable attitude toward 
myself and the work in general, that he might know something of 
the spirit which was prompting a new trial of his faith. 

But Bro. A's manner was not as formerly, and premonitions of 
his present condition of heart and mind were distinctly felt. I 
further stated that his proposition to place his tract in the hands 
of the Dawn Colporteurs for sale (of which he had not informed 
me, but which I learned through others) would be contrary to our 
arrangements with them-that those who handle DAWN should 
do so to the exclusion of everything else. This is a general rule 
among those who employ agents in any business, the object 
being to concentrate the entire effort on the one thing-'This one 
thing I do." and it is largely due to this regulation that the work 
has been so successful thus far. Therefore I had to assure Bro. A. 
that we could not institute any precedent in favor of his tract. 

Bro. A. makes a great mistake in saying, "Bro. Russell's 
spokesman offered me twenty dollars not to print the tract." His 
reference evidently is to Bro. Weber, who was not my 
spokesman. Whatever Bro. W. said he said for himself entirely, 
and he says that what he did was to offer twenty dollars to cover 
certain expenses already incurred if Bro. A. desired to 
discontinue the preparation of the tract, and give his energies as 



formerly in the direction of his special talent-the Colporteur 
work. 

Brother A's grievances are two: (1) We were informed about his 
tract before he got it out. (2) We found that he had on the face of 
his tract the words Old Theology Tracts and Tower Bible and 
Tract Society, Bible House, Allegheny, which deceptions we 
would not permit. After two notifications that we considered 
those references unjust and deceptive, and that he had no legal or 
moral right to so misuse our names to gain credence for his tract, 
he still persisted, and had many of them printed thus, Bro. Zech 
upholding him in it and doing the work. Finally, however, 
threatened Bro. Zech's partner (who although not interested in 
the truth, seemed to have better ideas of moral honesty) with 
damages if they let the tracts go out in that form, and they thus 
were forced to remove the deceptive title pages. 

Seeing him thus out of all harmony with the Tract Society, and 
as he had gotten into debt to the Tower Publishing Co. (not to the 
Tract Society) $218.00, during the time he spent in preparing his 
tract, we offered to credit on his TOWER PUB. CO. account all 
that he ever donated to the Tract Fund — $ 1 39 — if he so desired 
and 

3H120 

would resign the Directorship in the Tract Society, — to which, 
being continually absent from the city, he could not and did not 
give the least attention. This he refused to do; and, from what he 
says, he intends to owe the Tower Pub. Co. its $218.00 balance 
as long as he lives. 

He states that he spent hundreds of dollars and traveled about 
without salary, circulating pamphlets at Camp-meetings, etc. It is 
true that the Tract Fund paid him no stated salary, but the way in 
which he states the matter is calculated to give a false 
impression. The fact is, that money was furnished him for all his 
expenses; and so far as we have any knowledge, he used it for 
all his expenses. Of the $218 now owing to the TOWER PUB. 
CO. (not to the Tract Society) $35 was sent him in cash about 
one month ago to help him make a payment due on some real 
estate in Chicago, purchased last year. 

Bro. Adamson tries his hand at evil surmisings and says, "I 
believe that much more than I owe was expended in attempting 
to thwart Bro. Rogers' work in England." I reply, Aside from my 
time and stationary, I spent only twenty cents for four stamps, 
and this was not charged to the Tract Fund. Two of these stamps 
carried to Bro. Rogers the kindly put suggestions that his talent 
lay not in the direction of public speaking, as mentioned in the 
article "The Work in England;"-the third stamp carried a reply to 
Mr. Elliot Stock, of London, who had complained that Bro. 
Rogers was collecting money under false representations, from 
people who supposed that they were donating funds to the 



British and Foreign Bible Society, but who were finding out, 
from the tracts left them, that they were mistaken. I replied, that 
surely some mistake had occurred, for I knew that Bro. Rogers 
would make no misrepresentations, and that none of our 
colporteurs were authorized to solicit money, directly or 
indirectly, and that I would request Bro. Rogers to call 
personally and explain. The fourth stamp was used to advise Bro. 
Rogers of this, and to caution him that he be very careful that the 
truth be not evil spoken of, and to ask him to see Mr. Stock and 
explain matters, as I felt sure he could do; for his letters stated 
that he represented himself as the agent of our Society. 

This is a dispassionate statement of the injury Bro. A. has 
received at my hands. For all this he and the others reach the 
conclusion that Bro. Russell can only be completely 
overwhelmed by calling him,- "The Man of Sin. " 

Now we come to the consideration of the grievances of the chief 
conspirators-Bro. and Sister Zech whom we shall treat as one, 
including their household, and Bro. Bryan. 

BROTHER ZECH'S GRIEVANCES 

Here, as it relates to this case, it is necessary to give a little 
resume of my business history from '81 onward. I was then 
engaged in mercantile business and had a large store on the 
principle street of Pittsburg, and three branch stores. These were 
chiefly controlled by clerks and merely had my supervision; the 
most of my time being occupied in the publishing of the 
WATCH TOWER, Food for Thinking Christians, etc., which 
was circulated in large quantities. As the literary work increased 
it became necessary to dispose of these stores; and as I found it 
much easier to spend money than to earn it, I concluded that the 
capital formerly invested in the stores should not all be lavishly 
spent even in the good work of circulating the tidings of great 
joy: that the Lord would be better served if it were invested so 
that my time could go to his service, than if all were spent at once 
in his service and I then were obliged to give my entire time to 
business; for my determination has always been that I would 
never beg, either for ourselves or for the Lord's cause; but that 
the same Lord who blessed Peter's fishing and Paul's tent- 
making (Matt. 17:27; Acts 18:3; 1 Thess. 2:9; 2 Thess. 3:8) 
could bless, according to his wisdom, my business talents. 

My money-capital being limited, I saw that it would never do to 
invest the funds in mortgages or in a bank, because the interest 
on the sum would be inadequate to the demands of ourselves and 
the work. Under what seemed to be a providential leading, I 
decided to invest with others in some oil property-oil wells. I 
chose this business because it seemed to be profitable, and 
because it would require little or no time and personal attention; 
for others, interested in looking out for their own interests, 
necessarily looked out for mine also. And this judgment has, on 



the whole, proved correct-several coins have been taken from 
this fish's mouth for our support and for the Lord's cause.-Matt. 
17:27. 

When Bro. Zech received the truth and left the Lutheran church, 
he owned a good property which, aside from being a home free 
of rent, paid his taxes and left him a net income of about ten 
dollars per month. Full of zeal for the newly-found truth, he 
engaged with me to translate articles from the WATCH TOWER 
into German, which I published in great quantities. He also 
proposed to translate M. DAWN, VOL. I., and to do the type- 
setting on same if I would pay for the electro-plates, supply the 
paper, printing and binding, and that we be share-owners in the 
work when completed. 

We agreed to this, and it was begun. But watching the results of 
the circulation of the German TOWERS, and seeing them to be 
very meager, I foresaw that the publication of the German 
translation of DAWN would be very unprofitable, and so pointed 
out to Bro. Zech, urging that his income and the needs of his 
family would not justify him in doing all that his zeal had 
prompted him to propose. At that time he had translated about 
two hundred and fifty pages and had set in type about one 
hundred pages, and my suggestion was: Now, Bro. Zech, 
suppose we reckon that the time already spent by you on this 
volume represents the translation of the whole of it and suppose 
that this be your donation to the German cause, and I will 
proceed with the publishing, paying all of the expenses-what I 
shall pay you for your time in translating the remainder of the 
volume being reckoned as pay for the type-setting already done 
by you. This was mutually agreed to. 

Meanwhile, my early suggestion, that Bro. Zech get at some sort 
of "fishing" or "tent-making," forced itself upon my attention. 
Various occupations were thought of, but none seemed so 
favorable to him as type-setting, and he requested that he be 
permitted to learn English type-setting and have the job of 
preparing the WATCH TOWER every month. I foresaw 
difficulties from his lack of a knowledge of the trade, as well as 
from his lack of knowledge of English, and urged that he choose 
something else. But, as 

3H121 

nothing else so favorable offered, and, as he urged that he would 
see that his blunders should cost me nothing-that the work 
should cost me no more than I was then paying to a Pittsburg 
firm — I consented. Under these arrangements I paid him thirty- 
five dollars a month for a time; afterward when he became more 
expert, and when we began to set up M. DAWN, VOL. II., I 
increased the pay to forty dollars per month, and later, when he 
requested that he be paid by measure for the type-setting, and 
told me that he thought he could earn more money that way 



because he was getting more expert and would work longer 
hours, I consented; but instead of paying him the Union rates, I 
paid him more; namely forty cents per thousand ems, -because 
he was a Brother. 

Later, when Bro. Zech had inherited something like fifteen to 
eighteen thousand dollars, from his father's estate in Germany, 
he thought that he would like to build somewhere near our home; 
and knowing that I owned some lots opposite it he inquired 
whether I would sell to him. I assured him that I would be 
pleased to have him for a neighbor, and gave him a price on 
eight small lots. I told him that I thought them worth four 
thousand dollars at the rate other lots in that neighborhood were 
selling-for him to inquire and thoroughly inform himself-but 
that as a brother in Christ I would give him a discount of $1000. 
So he bought the eight lots and paid me $3000. But he has since 
"whispered" that he was cheated. 

Seeking an investment for some of his money, and knowing that 
I had some interests in the oil business, he asked my advice as to 
investing in that business. Judging that he would be one greatly 
affected by either a loss or a gain I advised him not to engage in 
the oil business. 

My book-keeper and general business representative at that time, 
Bro. Geo. Rindfuss, was very intimate with Bro. Zech. Bro. 
Rindfuss it seems advised Bro. Zech differently, respecting the 
oil business, and Bro. Zech seemed to misunderstand me and to 
imagine that from jealousy I had advised him against his best 
interests, lest he should prosper greatly;-but nothing could have 
been farther from my thoughts. 

About this time Bro. Rindfuss, as my business representative, 
called attention to the fact that I would soon need considerable 
money and suggested that he try and sell an eighth interest in 
some oil property for which not long before I had paid $3500. I 
consented. In a few days he reported that he could get $3300, 
and urged that I accept it as it was for a friend,-Brother Zech. I 
objected that Bro. Zech was unused to business, and if anything 
should go wrong he might reflect upon me for having helped him 
into it. The reply was that the property was as safe as could be 
found, and that Bro. Zech was not a child and knew what he was 
doing; and that besides Bro. Zech had been to see the property, 
while I had never seen it, having bought it on the explanation of 
Bro. Rindfuss and others, without taking time to visit it. So I 
consented, and as a favor to Bro. Zech sold him a one-eighth 
interest in the property for $200 less than it cost me and less than 
Bro. Rindfuss paid for a similar interest purchased from another 
party. I still, however, owned an eighth interest. 

To the complete surprise of all concerned, the property suddenly 
declined in oil production, and hence also in value, until what I 
had paid $3500 for was not worth $700. As we had feared, Bro. 



Zech's feelings suffered severely by the fall from great 
expectation to such realizations; and, although without cause, he 
proclaimed that I was responsible for his loss. I then felt that it 
would be to the brother's benefit spiritually and to the Lord's 
praise, and at the same time to the assistance of the German 
work, that I should help him out of his difficulty. Accordingly, I 
advised him to have nothing more to do with the oil business, 
and I managed to purchase back the said interest, worth at the 
time $700, and another small interest purchased of Bro. 
Rindfuss, and worth at the time $300, and so pay him for these 
their net cost (adding expenses and deducting oil received by 
him), which amounted to $3386. This sum by arrangement was 
paid him with my notes bearing six per cent interest and running 
for some time. They have since been paid in full with interest-$ 
2386 and interest more than we knew the properties were 
worth,-and they never were worth more afterward. 

Meantime Bro. Zech had urged that I go into the printing 
business with him, as a partner; but I refused, and advised him 
that it was a troublesome business. I never advised him to invest 
time or money in the business. On the contrary, I advised him 
against it. However, when he afterward found an partner and 
desired to do our work I promised him an preference over others, 
prices and work being equal; and this preference he has always 
had. Meantime, also, he had desired to have the full control of 
the German work and we sold him the plates, etc., of the German 
DAWN, VOL. I., at cost,-giving him privilege also to translate 
and publish the series, a condition being that he should supply 
the books at the same prices that we had been supplying them to 
the public and to colporteurs, and the promise made that if at any 
time Bro. Zech could not or would not supply the books at the 
same prices, the privilege of publishing them should revert to the 
TOWER PUB. CO. The restriction as to price was afterward 
modified as respects Vols. II and III., and they are now sold at a 
higher price, yet only about cost, because fewer are sold. And to 
meet Bro. Zech's views I agreed to pay him the full retail prices 
on all German Dawns I have occasion to purchase from him. 

Judge of my surprise when, in January 1893, Bro. Zech told me 
and others that I had treated him shamefully, etc. I said to 
myself, If this be bad treatment, what would be considered good 
treatment? A number of the church friends of all concerned were 
called together to hear the matter and advise. 

Brother and Sister Zech and family urged that I should pay more 
to Bro. Zech's firm for the printing and binding of the Dawms 
than responsible firms would charge for the same work. He 
complained, too, about being limited in the selling price of 
Dawm Vol. I; and declared that I had almost starved them at first 
on $35 and $40 per month, etc. I explained our dealings as above 
to the friends present and that we were paying our brother about 
twice as much as he could have gotten elsewhere-if he could 



have gotten any opportunity or pay when new at the business. I 
explained, as I do now, that it was no more my duty to pay a 
brother more than a worldly firm would charge, than it was his 
duty as a brother to do the work for less. Business should be 
done 

3H122 

on the lines of justice: charity and love can find exercise in other 
ways-as, for instance, in our dealing with Bro. Z. in the oil 
transaction, in which we made him and the German work a clean 
present of $2386 with interest. Bro. Zech complained that we 
gave one lot of DAWNS to another firm to print and bind. I 
showed the friends that Bro. Zech's firm was continually 
complaining that they were losing money on the Dawn work, 
while others were bidding lower, and were anxious to get the 
work. Bro. Zech's firm being full of work we finally gave one lot 
to another firm at a saving of $130 on twenty thousand books. 
And then I gave about one hundred dollars of that saving to the 
German cause, by donating the cost of the electro-plates for the 
third volume of German DAWN. 

It is almost needless to say that the friends after hearing us both 
fully-until daylight of Feb. 5, '93-assured Bro. Zech that Bro. 
Russell's course was not only just, but very generous and 
brotherly toward him. His judgment was so warped, however, 
that he could not see the matter at the time; but a day later he 
expressed himself differently by letter to us and to all. The 
following is a verbatim copy of his letter: 

Allegheny, Pa., Feb. 6, '93 

"Dear Brother Russell :-Thinking the matter over since our long 
conference with the different brethren and sisters in your house 
on February 4th, I find that I have erred in my judgment 
regarding the charges made against you, and I therefore express 
my regret for having done so and for the trouble and anxiety 
resulting from it. May the Lord grant us that no such 
misunderstanding will arise again to injure our mutual brotherly 
feeling and fellowship. And since so many of our friends have 
been witnesses, I would be very pleased to express the above 
sentiment in their hearing, or, if you deem it preferable, to have 
them read this letter. In sincere love and fellowship, Your 
brother in Christ, Otto Von Zech. 

"P. S. So far as Sister Zech is concerned, I must state that she 
never agreed with me concerning the right I thought I had to 
claim, but took, so she says, the position she did from a sense of 
wifely duty. O. V. Z." 



This experience led to the preparation of the article entitled, The 
Relative Claims of Love and Justice, which, that it might not be 
construed as a blow at Bro. Zech, was held back and published in 
the Tower of June 1, '93. 

Below is a copy of a letter presented to Sister Russell and myself 
about a month previous: 

Christmas 1892. 

"Dear Brother Russell:-I embrace the opportunity of this 
celebration of our Redeemer's birth to tell you in writing what I 
could not so well express orally. I want to make you the best 
Christmas present I know of in telling you of our deep and ever 
increasing gratitude and love toward you and Sister Russell for 
your work's sake, and for the kindness and love shown and daily 
bestowed upon us. 

"In reading the other day what the Apostle says, that "we all with 
open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord are 
(being) changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as 
by the Lord's spirit, ' and finding that the Apostle spoke thus not 
of the future but of the present, I could not help thinking, Yes, 
that is so. If we look back these seven years since we came into 
this marvelous light by the grace of God, we have experienced 
an ever increasing and burning love toward those who had been 
God's blessed agents to help us see the truth. 

"And I concluded, dear Brother and Sister, to let you know this 
our sentiment as our best gift we possibly could give, and thus to 
thank you from our hearts for your labor of love which our 
Heavenly Father has so abundantly blessed also toward us, and 
at the same time for the firm stand you take and always took in 
the defense of the central truth in our Father's plan-the ransom 
for or instead of us. 

"May our Lord and Shepherd grant us to stand side by side in 
this battle till it is over. In Him we will remain, Your Brother 
and Sister Zech." It seems strange indeed that people could write 
such letters and yet keep "bombs" ready and waiting for 
convenient "explosion." 

This comprises all of Bro. Zech's grievances, except as relates to 
the Wednesday evening prayer and conference meetings, which 
we will now notice. 

A little more than a year ago, studying the spiritual needs of the 
flock, and remembering that our central prayer meeting had been 
a failure, because the friends here are widely scattered, we 
conceived the plan of having meetings in various parts of these 
two cities, not for Bible study, but for prayer and testimony, for 
the cultivation of the fruits of the spirit and the binding together 
of the body of Christ in love and Christian fellowship. I 
suggested to the Church the advisability of such meetings, urging 
that while doctrines are necessary, the cultivation of the fruits of 



the spirit is the real object of all doctrine. I asked those who 
favored the plan to signify it by rising; and almost all arose, Bro. 
Zech and family being conspicuous as voting against the 
meetings,-which they had a full right to do. I was not surprised 
at the matter, however, as I knew that Sister Zech had frequently 
expressed herself as having no confidence in prayer. 

Next we asked for houses to be volunteered in which the 
meetings could be held, and several promptly offered, the object 
of the meetings being clearly understood by all as not doctrinal, 
but social meetings. 

I then appointed leaders of those meetings-asking Bro. Zech 
first, whether he would serve. He declined. Later he started a 
German meeting at his house for doctrinal disputations, which of 
course, was all right; for the appointment of the social meeting 
did not hinder any who pleased from holding or attending other 
meetings. But because I urged that these meetings, appointed for 
social worship, should be held strictly to their object, Bro. Zech 
and his wife complained that I was a pope, and privately, we 
now learn, endeavored to raise a spirit of opposition in others, 
but without success, as the congregation appreciates the 
meetings greatly. Bro. and Sister Zech, after trying for six 
months to discourage the meetings, began to attend them: and we 
were greatly encouraged for two months,-especially when at a 
general church meeting (Dec. '93) Sister Z. testified before all, 
of the benefit she had derived from those meetings. This 
sympathy and interest ceased, and they at once changed their 
plans, when it was known that there would be no general 
Convention here this Spring. 

3H123 

The charge of "bondage" and "under my thumb," etc. which now 
they make public, I find has been a part of their "whisperings" 
for the past four years. They did what they could to prejudice the 
mind of the Tower office helpers: slanderous falsehoods, called 
"revelations" were made to them, to undermine their confidence 
and poison their minds against me; so that when the time for 
"exploding" the "bombs" should come, I should have no friends. 
Three years ago Sister Ball was invited over to their home to 
spend the evening and then advised, confidentially, that she was 
imposed upon by us, etc., etc., etc. Sister Russell and myself then 
visited them, showed the error of this course and they 
apologized. But within a year it now seems that they began 
again: Bro. Henninges was "talked to" about being in bondage to 
Brother Russell; and it was intimated that he was a fool for 
staying here. Bro. Campbell was made a "confidant" before he 
had been here a month, every endeavor being made to prejudice 
him against me. Bro. Abbott was similarly approached; and 
when questioned as to his salary, replied: "I am not sure that Bro. 
Russell would want his private affairs discussed, but I will tell 
you this much: he is paying me more than I asked for." An 



attempt was even made to alienate my wife, and to make her my 
enemy; but praise God it did not succeed. I can now heartily 
thank the Lord that I have such faithful, proved ones so closely 
associated with me in the work. It is strange how blind I must 
have been, not to have noticed what others all around seem to 
have seen and heard. But I placed too high and estimate upon 
those who bear the, to me, sacred name of "brethren." 

Since Bro. Zech has alluded to the events of Christmas evening 
1892, I must give the facts. Sister Russell and I invited Bro. and 
Sister Zech and a few other friends to a six o'clock Christmas 
dinner. After dinner, while in the parlor, Sister R. interrupted me 
in some trivial matter, and then catching herself asked me to 
proceed. I replied, "No; you tell it-you are the head of the 
house." This I admit was sarcastic; and seeing that it hurt Sister 
Russell's feelings and that she at once disclaimed any wrong 
intent, I excused it, and said that I did not mean it literally, that 
indeed Sister Russell is a very model wife, etc., and thus the 
matter ended. 

But Bro. Bryan (who we will see presently is a most peculiar 
person, who fancies himself able, as he is ever willing, to give 
everybody instruction, and whose idiosyncrasies I had put up 
with for several years, as a member of our family and one of the 
office helpers), fancied that the above incident gave him a 
chance to meddle; and so the next morning at breakfast he took 
occasion to insult me. His remarks were ten times as strong as 
mine of the evening before, and wholly inexcusable. Sister 
Russell remonstrated, that his remarks were out of order, and I at 
once told him that I had borne his insolence and meddlesome 
busy-body disposition entirely too long; and now to go at once 
from the home whose head he had not respected and to whose 
every member he had made himself a disturber. 

He went at once to Bro. Zech's where he was made warmly 
welcome as a co-conspirator against Bro. Russell, but their cause 
would suffer if he left the Tower office before the "explosion;" 
so they got up a letter and with one argument or another got 
those who had been present on Christmas evening to sign it. That 
is the letter which Bro. Zech drags into his statements of his 
grievances. But their real object was to get me to take Bro. 
Bryan back into the TOWER office. Of the circumstances under 
which the signatures were obtained the signers themselves have 
something to say below. Those circumstances exonerate all of 
them except the conspirators, Bro. and Sister Zech and Bro. 
Bryan, whose malicious intent seems now very manifest; but of 
course I knew no difference among them at that time. 

I very humbly consented that these friends should help me mind 
my business: and at the request of that letter invited them all to 
meet me at my house. When they arrived, by way of showing 
them that I considered this an interference in my affairs in a way 
that they would not like to have me interfere in theirs, I 



suggested that perhaps the meeting had best be turned into one 
for the investigation and criticism of the private affairs of all 
present. I suggested that I knew considerable of their private 
matters which it would be quite embarrassing to us all to have 
related, even to a small audience (referring specially to Bro. and 
Sister Zech and Bro. Bryan); but that if it was their duty to 
investigate my private affairs it must be equally my duty to 
investigate theirs. 

The three in question got loud and angry and dared me to say 
what I could. But I assured them that I had no thought of telling 
anything-that I had no such misconception of duty, but merely 
wished to remind them of the propriety of not being busybodies 
in other men's matters. We then proceeded to the consideration 
of Bro. Bryan's offense, and the company united in telling him 
that his course was wrong, and advising him to confess it and 
apologize-which he did do that evening. (Judge then of the 
unfairness of Bro. Zech's statement on this subject.) This led to 
the discussion of the subject, Who is the head of the family? 
Sister Zech, who had gotten some extreme ideas on the subject, 
called up the question, and expressed the opinion that the 
Apostle Paul's expressions on the subject were incorrect. My 
views on the subject appeared in print later,-in the Tower of 
May 1, '93, in the article "The Twelve Apostles, " etc., and in 
July '93-a double number-on "Man and Woman in God's 
Order. " 

The following kind letter has just been received, and we make 
room for it as it bears directly on this subject. 

Alleheny, Pa., April 23, 1894. 

"Dear Bro. Russell :-We, as your friends, whose names are 
appended to the portion of a letter published by Otto von Zech, 
feel a deep sense of regret, not only for your sake, but also for 
our own, at the light in which it makes us appear; for we have no 
sympathy whatever with the spirit and intent of his libelous 
circular. 

"We desire, therefore, to acquaint you with the peculiar 
circumstances attending our signing it, which we have not 
previously explained, because of the completeness with which 
the entire matter was BURIED (so far as you were concerned) 
the same week it occurred. The circumstances are as follows: 

"We with others of the Church of Christ here had prepared some 
New Year presents for you and Sister Russell, and Bro. Zech had 
been appointed to make the presentation speech and had 
proffered his home for the 

3H124 

presentation, because so near to your own that the things we 
proposed to present could be readily transferred, after the 
surprise of New Years' night, 1893. 



"When Bryan left your home and went to Zech's they 
commended his conduct, claimed that a great wrong had been 
done him, and prepared the letter in question. The signatures 
were obtained in this way: Mr. Zech with the letter in hand 
called upon each one and in an excited manner represented that a 
great injustice had been done Bro. Bryan-that he had been 
rudely thrust out of his place in the TOWER office and Bro. 
Russell house, through the tyranny of Bro. Russell. He then 
added that Bro. Russell had too much power and ought to be 
taught a lesson; and that although the presents were at his house 
and the congregation were invited to assemble there, he could 
not make the presentation speech with good grace unless this 
matter of Bryan's were settled and he returned to his former 
position. Now, said he, if you add your signatures to this letter, 
requesting a meeting of us all with Bro. Russell, we can have this 
matter settled and then we will carry out the previous 
arrangements. 

"By such talk he obtained our signatures, but not for the object 
apparent in the letter, the language of the letter passing 
comparatively unnoticed, because our attention was specially 
drawn to Zech's excited words with reference to Bro. Bryan. It 
would now appear that this was intentional on his part, and that 
he kept a copy of the letter for its recent malicious use; and on 
the evening appointed, although Bryan and Zechs continually 
persisted in dragging up the little matter about Sister Russell, 
both she and we protested that that was unnecessary and that that 
was entirely settled between you and her. 

"Although feeling the matter was none of our business, we added 
our signatures because we were so anxious to have everything 
smooth and pleasant before the evening of the presentation, then 
so close at hand, and fearing that if we did not there would be 
some unpleasantness with Bro. Zech before the congregation 
which was to assemble for a purpose so different. The letter 
concluded as follows: v May our dear Lord guide and direct your 
judgment or ours, that it may all be to his glory. Yours in the 
Redeemer. (Signed.). ' The signatures were obtained only with 
this object in view, and on condition that the matter should never 
be mentioned outside of the number present that evening. This 
promise they have entirely failed to keep, and ever since have 
talked of it in private; and now, judge of our surprise and chagrin 
on finding a portion of that confidential letter in print and our 
names heralded as busy-bodies in the affairs of one whom we 
love and esteem as a tried and faithful servant of our dear 
Redeemer and Lord and in whose integrity as a Christian brother 
we have full confidence: and as having part in the present 
infamous conspiracy to overthrow him from the place which he 
holds, and that rightly, in the hearts of many of the Lord's 
people. It is an unwarrantable misuse of our names, against 
which we (as the signers) most earnestly protest. 



"At the meeting which resulted, all (including Zechs) admitted 
the justice of your course toward Bro. Bryan, whom we and they 
urged to apologize for his misjudgment (we did not at the time 
doubt his good intention); and he did so in our presence. Thus 
the matter ended, and a pleasant New Year's evening followed. 

"Otto von Zech's conduct and libelous circular remind us of 
Korah, the v ringleader' of the rebellion against Moses and Aaron 
(Num. 16 and 26:9-11), who, with Dathan, Abiram and On, was 
not content with his honorable post, but v sought' the office of 
Moses. From the above reference we discern that Korah with the 
other three charged Moses (without cause) with the very sin 
which he and his associates themselves committed. We find the 
same ambition, jealousy and pride in the conduct of Ahithophel, 
who, being King David's counsellor and friend, became, through 
this same leaven of sin, the most treacherous enemy of the 
servant of God; but David's heart remained loyal, and his prayer 
to the Lord v turned' Ahithophel's bad-intended course into what 
his name signifies, foolishness; for, said David, v O Lord, I pray 
thee, turn the (treacherous) counsel of Ahithophel into 
foolishness. ' (2 Sam. 15:31.) A like conspiracy we find against 
the Apostle Paul, when they banded themselves together to v kill 
him. ' (Acts 23:12.) And a like conspiracy was kindled against 
our dear Redeemer by certain ones of his time; for they 
^consulted that they might take Jesus by subtlety, and kill him. 
' (Matt. 26:4, 5) And again, it is written, s They hated him 
without a cause. ' (John 15:25) May the dear Lord strengthen 
your mind and heart, so that through you, dear Brother, the 
proclamation of the gospel cause may be fully established. 

"Hoping that this explanation will fully clear us in your eyes 
from any connection with the libelous circular, and desiring that, 
if opportunity present itself, you will make this known to any 
who may have seen the present statement of the conspirators, We 
remain, yours in love and service of the truth, J. A. Weimar, 
Elizabeth K. Weimar, John Cromie, Laura J. Raynor, H. C. 
Wolf, Rose J. Ball. 

"P. S. -Brothers Ohlsson and Winter are not now in the city, and 
hence their signatures have not been obtained; but besides them 
the only other signers, exclusive of ourselves, are the 
conspirators." 

Let me here remark, incidentally, that if there are any of God's 
married children whose interests are more thoroughly one, and 
whose esteem for each other is greater than that which exists 
between Sister Russell and myself, we would be glad for them to 
have it so; but we have no present reason for so believing. Ours, 
we feel, is indeed a union in the Lord, which we believe that 
even death will not sever. 

Is it any wonder that, when I came to know the depth of their 
perfidy, I refused to allow Bro. Zech to preach in the chapel-the 



use of which for years I have furnished free of charge to the 
German friends? Could I, in justice, do less than inform those 
German brethren and sisters (about twelve persons), that while 
they were as welcome as ever to use the chapel every Sunday 
morning, Bro. Zech had proved himself wholly unworthy of my 
confidence, and that I felt that it would be wrong to supply him 
the opportunity to attempt a further defamation of my character, 
by misrepresentations slobbered over with protestations of 
brotherly love? Indeed, I am of the opinion that not one man in a 
thousand, professor or non-professor, would have had so little 
shame as to have attempted further 

3H125 

abuse of my generosity, after having publicly done all he knew 
how to defame me. He claims to have been "under bondage" to 
me. So I at once forced him to become a free-man by refusing 
him longer the privilege hitherto enjoyed of speaking to the 
German friends in the chapel. But even this enforcement of 
liberty is one of his charges against me. 

BROTHER BRYAN'S GRIEVANCES 

Bro. Bryan served the cause in the TOWER office for several 
years-well in many respects. But by heredity he has a very 
violent temper, a vindictive disposition and a penchant for 
minding others people's affairs. It is with deep regret that I thus 
write, and now only because it seems a necessary explanation of 
what follows. When I say he evidently inherited these ungainly 
traits I consider that I am making an apology for him. Time and 
again have I helped to settle differences between him and the 
other office helpers, in which he was uniformly to blame- 
generally trying to mind some one else's business; and time and 
again has he repented and lamented his course and promised to 
turn over a new leaf. But his difficulty seemed to grow upon 
him. He got worse and worse. He at least six times during the 
last three years of his stay urged that he should leave the office 
for the relief of others; and each time I persuaded him to try to 
do better: yet, when at last I concluded to let him go, he seemed 
determined to stay. I could not then judge why, but can now see 
that it was because he had become one of the conspirators and 
was waiting for the time to explode the bombs. It was after his 
conduct finally became unbearable, that I wrote him the 
following letters. 

Allegheny, Pa., Mar. 2, '93. 

"Dear Brother Bryan:-Your note, which I requested last evening, 
saying, if there are other matters v that you say would still be 
difficulties, even if you could determine not to meddle with and 
annoy Sister Ball, ' is before me. In reply I must tell you that this 
note manifests still more of the same wrong spirit of which I 
complain on behalf of Sister Ball. 



"It shows that you not only want to annoy and manage her and 
her work, but that you also want to do the same for me and my 
business, and that of the entire office and home. I have assured 
you repeatedly of my Christian love and my care for your every 
concern, and my desire that you enjoy every comfort and 
pleasure which our home and office afford, but you seem to 
think that every thing should be run according to your ideas, 
which is neither possible nor reasonable. 

"For over two weeks (I might almost say three years) you have 
been worrying the office and home circles, and that without any 
justification. You should be conscientious enough to admit that 
you have no right, human or divine, to interfere with Sister 
Ball's rights or business, nor with mine, nor with those of others. 
If, therefore, this matter can be fixed only by your leaving the 
TOWER office, do not persuade yourself to a false view, in 
supposing that you will be going forth for righteousness' sake, or 
for conscience' sake; for, on the contrary, it will be because you 
are a persistent busybody in other people's affairs-and an 
intentional one, since instead of acknowledging the fault you 
attempt to excuse it, and even argue by the hour that you have a 
right to judge the conduct and even the consciences of others, 
and to give them tongue chastisements and other incivilities until 
they adopt your conscience as instead of their own and repent to 
you, etc. I should tell you also that Sister Ball is not the only one 
who has mentioned your interferences. 

"A month or so ago Bro. Henninges said to me:- v Bro. Russell, 
cannot I do some of the work of the composing room, or in some 
way shift so as not to be so much of an annoyance to Brother 
Bryan? ' I replied that I thought I had a plan for dividing the 
work which would harmonize the difficulties peacefully, and to 
wait and see. 

"Within a week Bro. Page said, v Bro. Russell, I feel that I am the 
seat of Bro. Bryan's trouble, and while I came here, as I believe, 
under the Lord's leading, do not let me stand in the way of the 
smooth running of the Lord's work. At the same time I scarcely 
think that you do your duty toward Bro. Bryan and the others, 
and the work, to permit him to interfere with and snap the head 
off everybody and everything. In a worldly office such conduct 
would not be endured five minutes. ' 

"I explained how I believed the trouble to be in part a heredity 
and that I was trying to have you take the right view of it, and 
that if you could see it fully and clearly I had confidence that you 
would do differently. But why you cannot or will not see so plain 
a matter I cannot understand. 

"You know better than any one else, dear brother, how, with 
great patience, prompted by loving interest for you and for the 
work, I have tried to have you see the error of being a busybody- 
especially so when you knew that those you interfered with are 



fully as conscientious as yourself, -and full more so on the 
subject of respecting the rights and liberties of others. 

"I have exhausted every proper means at my command to have 
you see right and DO RIGHT. But you all the more assume a 
self-righteous air and insist that you have a right to be the judge 
of the rights, liberties and consciences of others. 

"This I can no longer permit. It becomes my duty, therefore, dear 
brother, to say, Stop this wrong-doing and uncharitable judging! 
and if you will not stop it you must cease to occupy the place 
you have occupied for so long in the office. 

"Nevertheless, dear brother, it will be in sorrow and not in anger 
that we will part with you. You have many excellent traits to 
which I cheerfully bear witness, and I shall always feel a deep 
interest in your welfare, and should opportunity ever offer I will 
be glad to prove this in some more substantial way. But if 
disposed to see your error and to manifest a reform of your 
course, not only I, but all the ^family' I am sure will be glad, not 
only to have you stay with us in the work, but to assist you and 
bear with you. Please let me have your decision this evening, on 
the lines laid down in this letter. 

"With deep brotherly love and unceasing interest in your present 
and future welfare, I remain your servant in the Lord, C. T. 
Russell." 

March 3, '93. 

"Dear Brother Bryan:-My letter of yesterday was very 

3H126 

plain. While assuring you of my love and interest, it stated the 
necessity and laid down the conditions upon which you should 
have acted pro or con at once. Matters have run along now for 
nearly two weeks in a very unsatisfactory manner and one very 
disadvantageous to the Lord's work. Others are idle while you 
have and hold onto more than you can do. 

"Forbearance longer would not be a virtue. Your letter or note in 
reply to mine of yesterday is not a reply-merely a delay. What 
can be your object? I must insist, dear brother, either that you 
fully consent to all the reasonable requirements of my letter of 
yesterday, and indicate this in no uncertain words, or else that 
you hand over your keys and place, that some one conscientious 
enough to recognize and respect the rights of others may, with 
those who love and make for peace and right, occupy in your 
stead. 

"After reading this letter and communing with the Lord, 
remembering that my course is the one of duty and that I still 



abound with love for you, save me further annoyance by acting 
at once. You had best re-read my letter of yesterday. May the 
Lord guide you, has been my earnest prayer for several days, but 
a conclusion must be reached now. 

"With continued brotherly love and interest, and the hope that 
you may gain the victory over self-will and other foes, and 
humble yourself to be and do what you see to be the right, I 
remain, 

"Your loving servant in Christ, C. T. Russell. 

"P. S.-If you decide to quit the work and need money let me 
know how much." 

Bro. Bryan finally concluded to go into the colporteur work, and 
we parted seemingly warm friends, as the following extracts 
from a letter received later shows; their "bomb" plot seemingly 
having been abandoned for a time. 

Richmond, Va. March 15, '93. 

"Dear Brother Russell:-I feel like giving you a little report of 
myself and my doings, in addition to what I wrote on recent 
postals. 

"The whole situation here seems as favorable as any that could 
have been chosen. To be with your father's family has been most 
helpful. Then I have made a little beginning in canvassing that is 
not discouraging, though not nearly so good as I wish it were. 
Then, through advice from you, three brethren visited us last 
Sunday. I was very favorably impressed by the appearance of — 
-. If I am not mistaken, he is quite able to be a local teacher and 
leader. And he seems to have a beautiful spirit. Some brethren 
here had been meeting with a little group of Adventists; but quite 
lately the latter withdrew to another room. To our great pleasure, 
these brethren said they had already secured a room and arranged 
to have a regular Sunday meeting. They wished they had known 
earlier of the presence of your father's family in Richmond. I 
anxiously await the meeting next Sunday and will tell you how 
things seem. If I had the address of all Tower readers, could call 
on them and judge whether to notify them of the meeting and 
invite them to it. I have reconnoitered a little, and find good, 
long streets of residences evidently of the class where I will get 
access to the husband or wife, and not to the servant alone. I am 
quite hopeful that my record will grow better, as I get into the 
adjoining territory named. 

"I have been out four days-not putting in very full time some 
days. The s score' is: 5, 6, 8, 9-orders taken. 

"Asking to be remembered also to Sister Russell and all, Yours 
in the faith, Elmer Bryan." 

But a little Christmas token, sent him four months ago, seems to 
have been the innocent instrument by which Satan again got to 



work upon his naturally not too well balanced brain, reviving 
and exaggerating previous "evil surmisings" and enlarging his 
"root of bitterness." 

He then began to write frequently about some trifles connected 
with his office experience. I answered these kindly and fully, and 
explained to him that we understood the matter thoroughly and 
that they were all right. However, about six weeks ago he 
concluded to ask two of the brethren to come with him and hear 
his statement of my sins and to reprove me according to Matt. 
18:15-17. Bros. H. Weber and M. M. Tuttle came with him to 
see me and to hear his charges. When these brethren heard the 
charges, they told Bro. Bryan that they were ridiculous; that so 
far from being to my discredit they were to my credit,-every one 
of them. Here they are:- 

Charge l.-Bro. Russell, having the renting of a house, once put 
my (Bryan's) name on the "To let" notice, without my consent. 

Answer.-Bro. Bryan was in the office constantly and could 
better than any one else Answer— the questions of applicants. I 
preferred not to have my own name on the notice (1) because my 
forenoons are usually spent at home, writing, and (2) because my 
name being necessarily prominent, I modestly preferred to avoid 
any unnecessary notoriety. Bro. Bryan's name would be 
unknown. 

Judgment of the Brethren — Perfectly proper and commendable. 

Charge 2.-Once when I was intending to purchase some clothing 
Bro. Russell gave me a letter to one of the prominent Pittsburg 
clothing stores, assuring me that it would secure for me a ten per 
cent, reduction in the price. It made me feel bad to think that 
Bro. Russell would thus deceive and cheat them, and I could not 
use the order. 

Answer.-The letter was entirely proper. I am personally 
acquainted with the proprietors who grant me a discount, and 
invited me to send over any of those connected with the office, 
and that they should have the same. 

Judgment of the Brethren -Proper and commendable. Bro. 
Russell was endeavoring to extend to you, at the expense of his 
own time in writing the note, a privilege which all the large 
stores are glad to give, to get trade. Nearly every one gets a ten 
per cent, discount upon some score: Prices are so arranged as to 
permit of these discounts to customers. You merely did not 
comprehend the matter and thought evil of what was really a 
kindness. 

Charge 3. -Bro. Russell received for many of the Colporteurs 
clerical half-rate arrangements over one of the railroads, and I 
am sure that he got these by deception and fraud ; for I know 
that the R. R. people would not grant those rates if they 
understood that the colporteurs sell books. 



Answer— by Bro. Weber.-A very unjust and uncharitable thought 
on your part, Bro. Bryan; and a very mistaken one. I, myself, 
arranged the matter you condemn; and I did it in a perfectly 
honorable manner. I am 

3H127 

well acquainted with the gentleman in charge of that business, 
and explained that the colporteurs are preachers, ministers of the 
truth, who give their entire time to this work, but that they do it 
in a different manner from the clergy of the nominal church. I 
explained to him that they explained the Scriptures from house to 
house, and sold books which would continue and elaborate the 
preaching after they were gone. 

Judgment of the Brethren.-Proper and highly commendable to 
all concerned except Bro. Bryan. 

Charge 4.-Bro. Russell violated my idea of the law in the 
mailing of Millennial Dawn Vol. II. 

Answer.-(I gave a detailed explanation of the matter, but it 
would be too tedious to relate here.) 

Judgment of the Brethren.-Entirely proper so far as we can 
understand the matter. Anyway, we feel that the United States 
Government is abundantly able to look out for its own rights, and 
that it is very far from the spirit of Christ for you, Bro. Bryan, to 
be surmising evil against the very one through whose efforts God 
sent the truth to you. We could not think you more conscientious 
than Bro. Russell, and as for ability to interpret law, human or 
divine, we consider him entirely your superior. 

Charge 5. I claim that Bro. Russell cheats the government by 
putting only half enough postage upon the Tower binders. He 
made us stamp them at "book rate," while I claim that they 
should be stamped at "merchandise rates." I wrote to the P. O. 
Department at Washington asking whether a Newspaper binder 
should be stamped as book-matter or as merchandise, and they 
replied-" as merchandise." Here is the letter signed by the third 
assistant P. M. General. 

Answer.-The Tower binders were for some time mailed with 
double the proper postage. When I noticed it I had it changed to 
the proper rate. The binders are merely book-backs, and when 
filled with TOWERS constitute a bound volume. It requires no 
great mind to see that a part of a book cannot be rated at a higher 
charge than a whole book; and book-back or binder should 
therefore be mailed at book rates. However, lest some 
uninformed postmaster might not be able to reason properly 
upon the subject we always put one TOWER into each binder. 
Surely, it is then a book of 16 pages to any one capable of sound 
reasoning. 



The Third Asst. P. M. General has been in office only one year, 
while I have had many year's experience in just such questions. 
It was this same gentleman who ruled out the Old Theology 
Tracts some months ago; but I appealed from his decision, and 
the legal department sustained my understanding of the law. 

Bro. Bryan's decision would be binding on himself, but on no 
one else. The law leaves its interpretation to the common sense 
of the reader, except when called in question by the postmaster, 
and then an appeal may be taken if desired. 

Judgment of the Brethren.-Without doubt a binder containing 
sixteen pages of reading matter is a book, and should be stamped 
at book rates. Bro. Russell should be allowed to mind his own 
business, and those who cannot help him should not hinder him. 
If Bro. Bryan thought differently he discharged his duty when he 
told Bro. Russell how he viewed the matter. The P. O. 
Department it seems was not asked about a Magazine-binder 
with one issue enclosed. That would have been a different 
question. 

Charge 6. -On the missionary envelopes recently isued the last 
paragraph is marked, "S. I. Hickey in Christian Herald" but 
those printed some years ago read, "J. E. Jewett in Christian 
Herald." That was a fraud I believe. I have no doubt that was 
written in the WATCH TOWER office. 

Answer.-This is a totally untrue: I first saw the "notice" in the 
columns of the Christian Herald. It appeared upon a page at 
that time controlled by Mr. Jewett, and since it had no name to it, 
I supposed it was Mr. Jewett' s expression. Later, I learned that 
Bro. Hickey had written the commendation; and hence I changed 
the name on the next lot of envelopes printed. 

Judgment of the Brethren. -Bro. Bryan, as only an impure 
fountain sends forth impure water, so only a wrong condition of 
heart could send forth such uncharitable thoughts, and these 
without any foundation except your "evil surmisings." Do not 
forget that evil surmisings, envy, strife, malice and hatred give 
evidence of a wrong spirit, little like the spirit which "thinketh 
no evil" and much akin to the spirit which "loveth and maketh a 
lie." 

Charge 7.-Bro. Russell violated the U. S. postal laws by 
occasionally putting in amongst the Towers some Pittsburg 
papers for relatives in the South. 

Answer.-Yes; it had been our custom for some time to send 
some of our exchanges and an occasional Pittsburg paper to 
friends; and these all being "second-class matter" were thrown in 
with the TOWERS when being sent to the post office. This 
continued until about six years ago. Somewhere about that time 
the rate of postage on second-class mail matter was reduced from 
two cents per pound to one cent per pound and postmasters were 



notified to be more than ever particular. Our Allegheny 
postmaster notified us that the German Tower could not 
henceforth be mixed with the English Tower, and that no other 
papers must be mixed in along. We called his attention to 
another part of the law in which it is specially stated that news 
agents may send out second-class matter at the same rates as the 
publishers, and showed that news agents do not keep different 
papers separate. The reply was that the post office department at 
Washington had made a ruling on that point, to the effect that 
publishers could send out other papers only when they sent them 
to all of their subscribers, and hence that publishers have less 
liberty than news agents. We accepted this ruling, and have 
never since, to my knowledge, mailed other than our own 
publications at "pound rates." 

Judgment of the brethren.-A most reasonable and consistent 
explanation of a trifle. It is not within the range of reason, Bro. 
Bryan, to suppose that one who is giving his time and energy to 
spread of the truth and the inculcation of righteousness, and 
spending thousands of dollars to that end, as you and we well 
know, would be dishonest for a few penny stamps. But it does 
look to us as though your object in even mentioning such a 
matter can be nothing less than a malicious spirit, a desire to 
injure Bro. Russell in our esteem; but we know him too well for 
that. His Answer—is more than a sufficient exoneration. 

(We since learn that some (at least one) of the slanderous 
circulars sent out by the conspirators went unstamped. Do we 
evilly surmise that this was cheating the government? No, 

3H128 

we thank God that neither our heads nor our hearts are so 
deranged as to get us into such nonsense.) 

Charge 8.-Bro. Russell some six years ago loaned hundreds of 
DAWNS, under the name of Mrs. C. B. Lemuels, which I hold 
was wrong-a deception. 

Answer -No wrong was done to any one by the use of the name; 
but, on the contrary, much good was accomplished. Many 
readers will remember seeing Mrs. C. B. Lemuels' 
advertisements in different newspapers, all over the United 
States, offering to loan free of charge a book that would be very 
helpful to honest skeptics and infidels. Many of you first learned 
of the truth by this means. The book was The Plan of the Ages- 
DAWN, VOL. I, and the name Mrs. Lemuels represented Mrs. 
Russell. I esteemed that the matter would be better received from 
a lady than from a gentleman. I could have arranged for the use 
of Mrs. Russell's name, or the name of some other sister, but 
reflected that a confusion of letters might result and prove 
inconvenient. Besides, I bring my own name as little into 
prominence as possible. This will be noticed in connection with 
everything I have published-the O. T. Tracts, the DAWNS, etc. 



The name Lemuel is from the Hebrew and signifies Son of God. 
The initial letter C. stands for Christ, and B. for before; hence 
the whole name signifies, a son of God, after Christ. I consider 
the using of the name for a good purpose entirely proper and not 
a deception, in the proper meaning of that term; for it could 
make no difference to the party blessed whether the instrument 
of his blessing had the name of Smith, Brown, Lemuels or 
Russell. Indeed, our Lord was known by a variety of names, 
other than the name of Jesus, given by the angel. He is called 
also Immanuel, the Son of Man, the Redeemer, the Good 
Shepherd, Lord of Glory, Prince of Peace, Prince of Life, the 
Word of God, the Lamb of God, the Just One, the King of Israel, 
Living Stone, the True Vine, Wonderful, Counselor, Savior, 
Mediator, the Amen, the Alpha and Omega, the Second Adam, 
the Messiah. Our Lord and the Apostles and the Prophets, did 
not think it a deception to apply these various names and titles, 
nor do I. Had I used the name for a wrong purpose, the entire 
transaction would have been sinful; but as it is conceded that it 
was used for a good purpose the entire transaction is faultless. 
Many eminent writers for the press cover their identity under a 
nom de plume, and justly without reproach. 

Judgment of the Brethren -Legitimate and praise worthy. We 
wish that more of God's children had the same singleness of 
purpose to do good to others and serve God and the truth to the 
disregard of their own name or fame. You, Bro. Bryan might far 
better be spending your time in holding up Bro. Russell's hands, 
than in seeing how you can annoy him with such quibbles and 
disturb the work he is doing. 

Charge 9.-Bro. Russell once advised a man to send addressed 
tract wrappers to the Tower office enclosed in a newspaper; 
whereas they should be sent at letter rates of postage, "two cents 
for each ounce." He also published the wrong rate of postage in 
the TOWER for May 1, '93, page 130. 

Answer.-My reason for advising thus was, that I did not want 
the brother to pay more postage than the law requires. (It 
certainly made not one cent difference to me. ) I know that many 
understand as little about the law as does Bro. Bryan, and 
country postmasters generally ask, Does this contain writing? If 
the Answer —is, Yes, he charges letter rates, two cents for each 
ounce, which in the case of addressed wrappers is contrary to the 
law. The law specifically provides that written addresses may be 
enclosed in newspapers without adding to the rate of postage, 
provided no other writing accompanies. But to add one other 
word such as "Well" or "All are well," would make the postage 
rate the same as on a letter, two cents for one ounce. If one 
address can be so sent so can two or five or ten. Indeed, written 
wrappers sent alone, without a newspaper, are subject to no 
higher rate than printed circulars according to law,-one cent for 
two ounces-Bro. Bryan to the contrary notwithstanding. 



Judgment of the Brethren.-Evidently a case of insufficiency of 
knowledge on your part, Bro. Bryan; and one easily rectified if 
you had been controlled by a proper Christian spirit. 

Charge lO.-Bro. Russell, it seems to me, uses language in a 
"double dealing" manner. When I attempt to show something 
wrong in what he has said, he explains it all away and would 
convince any one it was all right. 

Answer.-If I use ambiguous language it is wholly unknown to 
me; but since much of it is in print some one ought to be able to 
point it out, if this charge has any foundation. 

Judgment of the Brethren.-This charge is in harmony with all the 
others, and shows that for nearly six years Bro. Bryan abused his 
position and the confidence reposed in him by Bro. Russell, that 
he was all the while hunting for a flaw in his words or character, 
and that he was disappointed when his evil surmisings of either 
were corrected. And, because Bro. Russell cleared the matter 
entirely, it is called "double dealing." Shame! There are broad, 
medium and narrow minds and hearts. Bro. Russell's is one of 
the broad and unsuspicious. His poorest judgment, it seems to us, 
was in not seeing long ago the difference between an office- 
helper and an office-hinderer. The Dawn and the Towers are 
witnesses to the fact that he uses language with a directness that 
is seldom equalled except in the Scriptures and in law books. 
The message from his lips, as well as from his pen, has "no 
uncertain sound" to those who really have "ears to hear." 

Charge 1 1 .-I once found some four hundred and fifty dollars 
placed to my credit on the Tract Fund account. I remonstrated 
and it was taken off; but sums credited to other of the office 
helpers, not so conscientious, still stand. This shows that Bro. 
Russell's ideas are peculiar and I should say dishonest. 

Answer.-At the close of each year we generally find that we 
have expended more than the Tract Fund receipts from various 
sources, and we generally balance the account by donating 
whatever the receipts are behind, so as to let the fund begin the 
New Year without back debts. In the case mentioned I thought it 
would be well as an encouragement to the office helpers to share 
with them the credit for this sum and the voting shares which it 
represented. Accordingly the amount was divided with Mrs. 
Russell and the faithful office helpers. This was certainly not a 
crime; and indeed it is partly because of their consecration to the 
work that the expenses of the work are kept low. At all the 
events the office helpers are in and of our family, and I had 
pleasure in sharing 

3H129 

the credit on the Tract Fund records, although none outside the 
office would have known these matters had it not been for Bro. 
Bryan's peculiar view of them. 



Judgment of the brethren.-Bro. Bryan, the more of such charges 
you bring the more you reflect to Bro. Russell's honor. Where 
was the wrong, the sin, in Bro. R's giving you and the others 
credit on the Tract Fund? Had he not a right to do what he 
pleased with his own? Suppose he had deposited that four 
hundred and fifty dollars to your credit in some bank,-would that 
have been sinful? If not, how could it be wrong to use it in the 
Lord's service and then give you the credit and the voting- 
shares? But you admit that he did not insist on your having the 
credit when you objected. Where, then, is the room for 
complaint? If your own judgment is confused, do at least try to 
let other people of sounder judgment mind their own business. 
Discourage in yourself the disposition to be a busybody. 

Finally, we must say to you that this whole matter is simply 
ridiculous and gives evidence of a very unchristlike spirit. You 
called us to reprove Brother Russell after hearing your charges; 
but we find nothing to condemn and much to praise in all that 
you charge. Study and pray over the matter, and the Lord grant 
you needed help by his word and providence. Otherwise your 
present spirit is likely to lead you into "every evil work," and 
into outer darkness; for if any man have not the spirit of Christ 
he is none of his. 

But Bro. Bryan had not come to be convinced; but said, "I will 
press this to the utmost, so help me God!" He had merely taken 
this as a preliminary step to his "telling it to the Church," at 
which time he, with the other conspirators, had arranged to 
explode the "bombs" that "would knock this thing (Brother 
Russell and the work) sky high." 

The Brethren expostulated and showed that the very object of 
calling in two brethren for witnesses was to make sure that 
which ever one was in error should have the error pointed out to 
him, and that it was the one who would not hear the other three 
that was to be reported to the Church; and that, accordingly, Bro. 
Russell might, if he chose, report him (Bryan) to the Church as a 
busy body, if he refused or neglected now to heed the counsel of 
Bro. Russell and themselves. 

But the Arch-conspirator, Satan, had evidently determined that 
the present would be his most auspicious moment, and that he 
should probably never find any more substantial charges. So he 
brought Bro. Rogers here; and his arrival, and disaffection 
because his schemes were not praised, accepted as the Lord's 
message, and generally substituted for present methods, together 
with Bro. Adamson's disaffection on account of his tract, 
seemed to make the present a most favorable time for the firing 
of the "bombs" that he had been kept waiting for about two 
years. 

However, as before stated, the meeting called by them by 
personal invitation, and composed of a large number of the best 



brethren, and sisters of the Church at Allegheny (and which 
Sister Russell and myself did not attend), was rendered 
disorderly by the frantic efforts of the conspirators make sure 
that Brother Russell should have no defenders. But it seems that 
the bombs and fireworks charges had been entrusted to Bro. 
Bryan, to be fired with tragic effect, and that they were 
smothered, when, because of his spiteful, angry and disorderly 
manner and refusal to recognize the chairman, it was decided by 
vote of the congregation not to hear him, but to proceed to hear 
the others. 

Having since learned what the "bombs" are, we must now 
explode them, and show that they are as untruthful as were the 
other Zech and Bryan charges, and similarly "evil surmisings." 
We find that while only some of these have been mentioned in 
the printed circular, others of them have been circulated privately 
by word of mouth and by letter; and hence we clean up all that 
we can learn anything about. 

Bomb I.-Several years ago Brother Russell bought and sold 
some oil through a broker, a member of the Pittsburg Oil 
Exchange. This, we believe, is what people call "gambling," and 
is therefore dishonest and wicked. 

Answer.-As before stated, I was in the oil-producing business, 
and all the conspirators knew this. It is nothing to be ashamed of, 
and I never kept it a secret. This is a way in which I have done 
some "tent-making" and "fishing;" and the coin from this fish's 
mouth supports me and mine, so that we are not chargeable to 
any, and so that we can help along the work. Some years ago my 
monthly share of the oil produced by well in which I owned 
interests was considerably more than it is at the present. The 
price of oil seemed likely to go lower, so I not only sold all the 
oil I had on hand, but through a broker I sold in advance oil that 
I knew I had in the ground, but which it would take time to have 
pumped out. In due time the oil was produced and the broker 
closed the contract, earning his commissions for his trouble and 
securing me a better price for the oil. 

This is the legitimate use of the Oil Exchange. The misuse of it, 
called "gambling," is where people have no oil and merely bet so 
much money that the price will go up or that it will go down. 
Only obtuse heads or evil-thinking hearts reach the conclusion 
that there is no honest use of the great commercial Exchanges of 
the world. There is genuine and a counterfeit in everything that is 
worth counterfeiting. The finding of a counterfeit proves the 
existence of a genuine, in business as well as in money. My 
transactions were on the genuine, legitimate basis, as any 
business-man of honor and judgment will declare. 

Bomb Il.-Some one told Brother Bryan that he thought that 
another person surmised that Bro. Russell had cheated a man in 
Pittsburg as follows: Brother Russell owned a quarter interest in 



a small business venture, another man named Dubbs owned a 
quarter, and a man named Boyd owned the remaining half; that 
Bro. Russell had transferred his interest to Bro. Sweet and got 
Bro. Sweet to buy Mr. Dubb's interest for "a mere song," and 
afterward Bro. Russell got back his own quarter, and evidently 
Mr. Dubbs had been cheated. 

Answer.-This, another case of "evil surmising," can be easily 
explained and would have been explained to anyone. Evidently 
they all knew this and did not wish to have an explanation, 
preferring to believe it, so that they could conscientiously throw 
it as a "bomb" when they got ready. 

The business in question is so small as not to be worthy of the 
name business. I did purchase a quarter interest in it of Mr. 
Dubbs, the inventor. Mr. Boyd managed the business and Mr. 
Dubb's nephew was the only workman. One day Bro. Sweet 
came into the TOWER office and told 

3H130 

me that he was out of work and nearly out of money. He could 
make no success at colporteuring and was no hand at writing 
wrappers in the office, so I thought of the fact that Mr. Dubbs 
was anxious to sell his interest in the little venture, and that if he 
sold there would be a place for Bro. Sweet instead of Mr. Dubb's 
nephew. I told Bro. Sweet of it, and advanced him the full value 
of Mr. Dubbs' interest so that he could buy it, if Mr. Dubbs still 
wished to sell. But I realized that Mr. Dubbs who had sold me 
my interest, and was the inventor of the commodity, might feel 
under obligation to me, not to sell-so long as I held an interest- 
and especially as he had charged me more for my interest than 
we afterward found it to be worth-therefore, to let Mr. Dubbs 
feel entirely free to act as he pleased, I transferred my interest to 
Bro. Sweet who then bought Mr. Dubbs' interest with money I 
had advanced and Bro. Sweet got the situation. But as the 
business was not a success he never paid me back the money 
advanced. I took back the entire interest and since paid out some 
money on the same as my share of the loss. And Bro. Sweet's 
wife being ill, he removed to their old home in Virginia. 

Everything connected with this matter is straight-forward and 
honorable. Mr. Dubbs is still a Pittsburger and a warm business 
friend, who would take my word on a par with my bond. How is 
it that these evil surmisers are "brethren," who, while confessing 
that I never wronged them, but on the contrary, that they are all 
more or less my debtors, imagine that I have done wrong to 
some one else? Is it likely that the world, the devil and opposing 
nominal church people would pass by even slight transgressions 
of business etiquet or morals, if they could find them? On the 
contrary, my character, my word and my credit stand high 



amongst intelligent people whose only objection to me is, "his 
religious views"-which of course they generally misunderstand, 
because they have been misrepresented by both friends and foes. 

The following letter explains itself. 

Allegheny, Pa., April 25, 1894. 

"Mr. C. T. Russell., My Dear Sir:-My attention has just been 
drawn to certain charges, made against you by a busybody 
named Bryan, in the matter of a little business between you and 
me relating to my boiler-compound discovery, and the transfer of 
interests in the same to yourself and Mr. Sweet. I have also been 
shown a proof of your reply to the charge; and I desire to say to 
you that your conduct in that whole matter was entirely 
honorable, and quite satisfactory to me. My only regrets in the 
matter are that it has been the innocent cause of your being 
subject to such a v charge. ' 

"By the way, I notice that you refer to the slanderer as v Brother 
Bryan. ' I advise that you have a little as possible to do with that 
sort of brothers. In business parlance we call such folks v skunks, 
' and keep them at a distance. 

"In conclusion let me say that your business associations with 
me have all been most honorable in every respect, and I know 
that your business integrity stands too high in Pittsburg to be 
injured by such senseless calumnies. Abroad, however, where 
you are unknown, your reply may be needed. Sincerely yours, 
J. A. Dubbs." 

Since receiving this kind note from Mr. Dubbs, he tells me that 
Bro. Bryan called upon him some time before, and inquired 
whether he had been wronged in any manner in the matter of the 
sale of the said interest in the boiler-compound; and he was 
answered that everything was satisfactory to Mr. Dubbs. Yet, in 
the face of that, his conscience was so asleep or dead, and his 
malice so alive, that he still clung to his evil thought and used it 
as a dagger to strike down one of his best friends-who had 
always shielded his weaknesses, and spoke so well of him that 
his present course is a surprise to all except our immediate 
household. 

On the Sunday on which I refuted these charges before the 
Church here, I was afterward informed that Mr. Geo. Rindfuss 
(who was present), who had been my book-keeper for several 
years, and who was quite familiar with the above transaction, 
was claimed by the conspirators as in some degree associated 
and in sympathy with them. I therefore sent Sister Ball to see 
him the next morning with very satisfactory results. The 
following is her written report of her interview with him. 

The following are the sentiments of Mr. George Rindfuss, 
expressed to me in a special interview on the subject, at the 
office of Mr. John A. Snee, Ferguson Block, Pittsburg, Pa.-on 



Monday morning, April 9th, 1894, the day after Bro. C. T. 
Russell's public refutation, to the Church at Allegheny, of the 
charges privately and otherwise circulated by Otto von Zech, 
Paul Koetitz, Elmer Bryan, J. B. Adamson and S. D. Rogers. 

"The relations existing between Bro. Russell and myself have 
been uniformly pleasant. A report is being circulated that I lost 
money through him; but it is untrue. I never lost any money 
through him; and to my knowledge he never lost any through 
me. 

"I am Bro. Russell's friend, and I never wittingly said anything 
to damage his character or credit. Viewed from the standpoint of 
a business man of knowledge, experience and integrity, all his 
transactions and business dealings, so far as I am aware, are 
honest, fair and aboveboard-not shady, nor dishonorable, nor 
derogatory to his character-perfectly legitimate. 

"I do not believe in gossip, and if I had not been drawn into this 
affair, not only this time but several times before, I would have 
said nothing. These people (Otto von Zech, et al) may as well 
jump into the sea as to endeavor to do Bro. Russell injury. They 
will suffer the most. The truth will prosper and the work go on as 
the Lord sees proper, and they cannot hinder it. I have no 
sympathy whatever with their position. The trouble with them is 
they imagine and misconstrue and brood over little things until 
their minds are confused and they do not know where they are. 

"As I said on the evening of the meeting at Bro. Russell's house 
(about Feb. 15, 1893), these matters are no one's business, any 
more than my private business or any other man's. It is 
ridiculous to bring such charges. I never brought any because I 
have none to make. And I have testified to this in public. I love 
and respect Bro. Russell and shall do all I can to clear him of 
these misrepresentations." 

These sentiments are all those of Mr. Geo. Rindfuss, and in the 
majority of sentences I have used his own words; and this I do 
solemnly, sincerely and truly affirm. Witness, James C. Ewing. 
[Rose J. Ball. State of Pennsylvania, ss. County of Allegheny] 
Personally came before me the 

3H131 

deponent, Rose J. Ball, who being duly affirmed, testified to the 
truth of the foregoing statement. Witness my hand and seal at 
Allegheny, (seal) this 9th day of April, 1894. James C. Ewing, 
Notary Public. 

"Evil be to him who evil thinks," is an old proverb and a true 
one. These conspirators have treasured up evil thoughts and 
suspicions until they have injured themselves thereby, and are 
fast bringing forth "every evil work," as might be expected. -J as. 
3:16. 



ATTACK ON THE Z. W. T. TRACT SOCIETY 

I have now concluded the matter, except one item. The 
conspirators seem full of Bro. Rogers' idea that the saints are the 
fish, and that as Peter was sent to catch the fish and take the 
money out of its mouth, so they must take what money they need 
from believing saints-not even thanking them for it, but 
regarding it as a matter of duty on their part. And as some of the 
saints are already doing what they can through the Tower Tract 
Fund, and now-hoping perhaps that some of the donations to it 
would then fall to them individually— it seems policy to attack it. 
This they have done, declaring that Zion's Watch Tower Tract 
Society is a myth: it is merely Bro. Russell. Bro. Adamson 
declares that although a director he has never attended a meeting 
and knows nothing about the Society. Altogether, they evilly 
surmise again that something is wrong, and that they will see 
whether they can have the charter of the Society annulled, etc. 

What are the facts? It is necessary that they be clearly stated that 
not a doubt may find footing-that not a soul who has given a 
dollar to this fund may have any room to question the proper 
application of every penny of it. Even money stated by the 
donors to be for my personal use has all gone into the Tract 
Fund. The facts are as follows: 

The Society was formed in 1881, at the time of the free 
distribution of 1,400,000 copies of the pamphlet, "Food for 

Thinking Christians "-now out of print. It consisted of five of the 
Lord's children, and its affairs were entirely in my charge. 
Later, in 1884, at the instance of friends of the cause, who 
advised that matters be put upon a legal footing so that the work 
might not be interrupted in case of my sudden death, the Society 
applied for a charter under the laws of the State of Pennsylvania, 
and received one dated December 13, 1884-a copy of which we 
present, - 

CHARTER OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
TRACT SOCIETY 

Be it known that the subscribers, having associated themselves 
together for the purpose of the dissemination of Bible Truths in 
various languages, and being desirous of becoming incorporated 
agreeably to the provisions of the Act of the General Assembly 
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, entitled "An Act to 
provide for the Incorporation and Regulation of certain 
Corporations," approved the twenty-ninth day of April, Anno 
Domini, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-four, and its 
supplements, do hereby declare, set forth and certify that the 
following are the purposes, objects, articles and conditions of 
their association for and upon which they desire to be 
incorporated: 

I. The name of the Corporation shall be Zion's Watch Tower 
Tract Society. 



II. The purpose for which the Corporation is formed is, the 
dissemination of Bible Truths in various languages by means of 
the publication of tracts, pamphlets, papers and other religious 
document's, and by the use of all other lawful means which its 
board of directors, duly constituted shall deem expedient for the 
furtherance of the purpose stated. 

III. The place where the business of the said corporation is to be 
transacted is the City of Allegheny, in the County of Allegheny, 
and State of Pennsylvania. 

IV. The Corporation is to exist perpetually. 

V. The Corporation has no capital stock. Each donation of ten 
dollars to the funds of said corporation shall entitle the 
contributor, or his assigns, to one non-forfeitable, non- 
assessable, and non-divided bearing share, and to one vote for 
every such share in said corporation. Certificates of membership 
so acquired shall be issued by the Secretary, countersigned by 
the President, to the persons entitled thereto. 

VI. The Corporation is to be managed by a Board of Directors 
consisting of seven members, and the names and residences of 
those already chosen directors are (we given names of the 
present board and officers) as followsr-Charles T. Russell, 
President, W. C. McMillan, Henry Weber, Vice President, J. B. 
Adamson, Maria F. Russell, Sec'y & Treas, Simon O. Blunden. 
Rose J. Ball. 

VII. The said Corporation by its Board of Directors, a majority 
of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of 
business, shall have full power and authority to make and enact 
by-laws, rules and ordinances, which shall be deemed and taken 
to be the law of said Corporation, and do any and every thing 
useful for the good government and support of the affairs of the 
said Corporation; provided the said by-laws, rules and 
ordinances, or any of them, shall not be repugnant to this charter, 
to the constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania, and the Constitution of the United States. 

VIII. The said Corporation shall have as officers a President, 
who shall preside at the meetings of the Board of Directors; a 
Vice President, who shall preside in the absence of the President, 
and a Secretary, who shall also be Treasurer; and these officers 
shall be chosen from among the members of the Board of 
Directors annually on the first Saturday of each year, by an 
election by ballot, to be held at the principal office of the 
Corporation in Allegheny City, Pennsylvania. The members of 
the Board of Directors shall hold their respective offices for life, 
unless removed by a two-thirds vote of the shareholders, and 
vacancies in the Board occasioned by death, resignation or 
removal shall be filled by vote of a majority of the remaining 
members of the Board, who shall meet for that purpose within 
twenty days from the time when such vacancy or vacancies shall 



occur, and in the event of failure to fill such vacancy or 
vacancies, in the manner aforesaid, within thirty days from the 
time such vacancy or vacancies shall occur, then the said 
vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by the appointment of the 
President, and the person or persons so appointed shall hold his 
or their office or offices until the next annual election of officers 
of the Corporation, when such 

3H132 

vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by election, in the same 
manner as the President, Vice President, and Secretary and 
Treasurer are elected. The persons entitled to vote at annual 
elections of the Corporation shall be those who hold certificates 
of membership acquired in the manner aforesaid. 

IX. The said Corporation, under the name, style and title 
aforesaid, shall have full power and authority to make, have and 
use a common seal, with such device and inscription as they may 
deem proper, and the same to alter and renew at their pleasure; 
and by the name, style and title aforesaid, shall be able in law 
and equity to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded in any 
Court or Courts, before any Judge or Justice of the Peace, in all 
manner of suits and complaints, pleas, causes, matters and 
demands whatsoever, and all and every matter or thing therein to 
do in as full and ample a manner, and as effectually as any other 
person or persons, bodies politic or corporate within the 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, may or can do. 

X. The said Corporation, by the name, style and title aforesaid, 
shall have the right, power and authority to take, receive and 
hold in fee simple, or any less estate, all such messsages, lots, 
lands, buildings, tenements, rents, annuities, franchises and 
hereditaments as may be necessary and proper for its purposes; 
and to sell, lease, mortgage or otherwise dispose of the same or 
any part thereof; and it shall have the same right, power and 
authority to take, receive and hold, and to sell, lease or dispose 
of any and all kinds of personal property and money. 
(Acknowledged and Recorded in due form of law.) 

The object in taking out a charter is succinctly stated in the 
Watch Tower for January 1891, page 16, as follows: 

"This is a business association merely. It was chartered as a 
corporation by the state of Pennsylvania, and authorized to hold 
or dispose of property in its own name as though it were an 
individual. It has no creed or confession. It is merely a business 
convenience in disseminating the truth. Any one subscribing to 
one copy or more of the Society's quarterly, styled Old Theology 
Tracts (6 cents a year), is considered an active member of this 
Society-but not a voting member. Any one subscribing for $10 
worth or more of the O. T Tracts, or any one donating $10 or 
more to the funds of the Society for the spread of the Truth, is a 
voting member and is entitled to one vote for each $10 he or she 



may have donated. The affairs of the Society are so arranged that 
its entire control rests in the care of Brother and Sister Russell as 
long as they shall live. In fact, the only objects in having the 
corporation are:- 

"First, To provide a channel or fund through which those who 
wish can employ their money talent, whether small or great, to 
better advantage for the spread of the Truth than if each 
interested one acted and published independently of the others. 
Secondly, The corporation was called for by reason of the 
uncertainty of the lives of those at present managing the fund. 
Some wrote that they were doing all that their present necessities 
permitted but at their death they desired to do more; and urged 
the necessity of a legal corporation, as Brother and Sister Russell 
also might die, and they wanted their donations to go to the 
spread of the Truth. 

"The Society owns nothing, has nothing, pays no salaries, no 
rent or other expenses. Its policy is to use in the work every 
dollar received, to the best advantage, and as speedily as 
possible. Its success in publishing and circulating among the 
right kind of readers tons of Old Theology Tracts, is 
phenomenal alike to its friends and its enemies. The latter 
imagine there must be great wealth connected with the concern, 
whereas there is really very little. Few of the friends of this cause 
are able to do much financially; but what money there is, under 
economy and the divine blessing, is like the widow's cruise of 
oil: it accomplishes about a hundred times as much as other 
Tract Societies, which spend most of their receipts upon 
salaries." 

It will be seen from this and other mentions of the subject in the 
Watch Tower that I have never intimated otherwise than that the 
management of the Tract Society would probably rest entirely in 
the hands of myself and Sister Russell as long as we live, as 
provided by the regulations of the charter,-that the majority of 
voting-sharers elect the executive officers. Our reasons for 
expecting to control the Society while we live, we did not state, 
because of modesty and a desire not to seem to boast of our good 
works. But now it is necessary to state matters plainly in order 
that our good deeds be not evil spoken of and misunderstood, 
and thus become a stumbling-block to others.-Rom. 14:16. 

The fact is that, by the grace of God, Sister R. and myself have 
been enabled not only to give our own time without charge to the 
service of the truth, in writing and overseeing, but also to 
contribute more money to the Tract Society's fund for the 
scattering of the good tidings, than all others combined. If I were 
selling my services for money, the Tract Fund receipts could not 
secure them, as my business ability would command a large 
renumeration. 



God forbid that we should boast of this, or reckon ourselves on 
this account worthy of more honor than others of the Lord's 
servants who have been equally faithful in the use of the various 
opportunities or talents entrusted to them as stewards by the 
same Lord. The statement is forced from us. 

We realize, too, that even should one give all his goods to feed 
the poor hungry sheep and have not love, it is nothing. We are 
glad to know that what we have done was not done for vain- 
glory, but has all been done in love, -love for the Lord, love for 
his sheep and love for his Truth. Indeed it would be our joy to 
have done many times as much as we have done; and we could 
and would have done more than we did during the past two 
years, had it not been that we seemed to see a necessity for 
"setting our house in order" financially, and because the "Good 
Hopes" plan, introduced two years ago, has brought assistance 
from others of the household who we know have also been 
blessed by that systematic plan of "laying aside on the first day 
of the week according as the Lord hath prospered"-as directed 
by the Apostle. 

Having, up to Dec. 1, '93, thirty-seven hundred and five (3,705) 
voting shares, out of a total of sixty-three hundred and eighty- 
three (6,383) voting shares, Sister Russell and myself of course 
elect the officers, and thus control the Society; and this was fully 
understood by the directors from the first. Their usefulness, it 
was understood, would come 

3H135 

to the front in the event of our death. But, be assured, we shall 
take pleasure in sharing the responsibilities of the place we 
occupy with any one whose interest in the mission of the Tract 
Society shall by his donations to its funds relegate our voting 
shares to the place of a minority. And such a one would, no 
doubt, be well qualified to direct in the expenditures, etc. 

For this reason, also, formal elections were not held; because it 
would be a mere farce, a deception, to call together voting-share- 
holders from all over the world, at great expense, to find upon 
arrival that their coming was useless, Sister Russell and myself 
having more than a majority over all that could gather. However, 
no one was hindered from attending such elections; and all who 
desired to take part should have kept themselves informed as to 
their date -the first Saturday in each year. 

We have regularly printed certificates, which for a time we sent 
out to those who contributed ten dollars or multiples thereof. But 
they made trouble and extra letter writing, because many of the 
Lord's sheep have little knowledge of business. Some supposed 
that the certificates were appeals for money; others could not tell 
what to make of them, and wrote for full particulars as to how 
they should vote, etc. Others feared that the owning of the 
certificates brought them into liability for any debts which the 



Society might contract, etc. (We here remark that no liability is 
incurred by any share-holder.) 

It required patience and took time from more important work to 
Answer— scores of such letters; and we concluded that we had 
made a mistake so far as the certificates were concerned. 
However, a faithful record is kept of all donations and of all 
voting-shares, and the books are open to the inspection of all 
who have ever given one penny to the fund. 

Since the adoption of the "Good Hopes" method we credit the 
voting-shares at the close of each year, so that if a contributor 
gave a total of ten dollars during the year he would have a 
voting-share, even though no one of his donations amounted to 
ten dollars. Thus, if a friend sent in "Good Hopes" of seventy- 
five cents per week or nine dollars per quarter, he would have no 
voting-share if reckoned by the quarterly receipts, but if 
reckoned by the year his four remittances, $36, would represent 
three shares. 

We have plenty of blank Certificates and an accurate record of 
every dollar you have sent in, as we will take pleasure in making 
our Certificates for all who, understanding the matter, would like 
to have them. If you have old certificates issued years ago and 
have contributed more money since, so as to have more shares 
now, please send back the old certificates so that the new one 
when issue will show your full credit up to the end of our fiscal 
year, December 1, last or, if preferred, up to date. 

REPORTS OF THE TRACT SOCIETY 

Reports of the receipts and expenditures of the Society since its 
charter, can be found in Zion's Watch Tower issues of the 
following dates: For 1885, in Tower, Jan. 1886. "1886 to 1891" 
Jan. 1892. "1892 Dec. 1" Dec. 15,1892. "1893 Dec. 1" Dec. 15, 
1893. 

The donations for the six years 1886 to 1891, aside from my 
own, were very meager. So little interest being manifested I 
scarcely thought worth while to make a yearly report. Besides, 
during that time the inauguration of the colporteur work took 
considerable time and attention, which continues as the work 
enlarges. The increase of contributions since 1892, incident to 
the adoption of the plan called "Good Hopes," led to the return 
to yearly reports. 

In the foregoing extract from our issue of January 1891 (and 
which appeared in eight issues of the Tower for 1891) we say, 
"The Society owns nothing, has nothing, pays no salaries, etc." 
Lest some should misunderstand this, we will explain. The 
Tower Pub. Co. (which in a financial way represents 
myself)owns the Bible House, buys the paper, pays for the 
printing, binding electro-plates, etc., and keeps a large stock of 
Dawns and Tracts on hand and fills the orders of the Tract 



Society at any time, and at much lower prices than any worldly 
firm would charge for much poorer service. To do this requires 
that thousands of dollars lie idle continually, in electroplates, 
books, colporteurs' dues, tracts, etc; and as a consequence the 
Tower Pub. Co., is now a borrower to the extent of over twenty 
thousand dollars (the interest on which is over $1200.00 yearly), 
all of which, however, is amply secured by other property which 
I own. 

The Tract Society's funds are usually spent before received, as 
under the "Good Hopes" plan we know about what to expect. It 
runs a yearly account with the Tower Pub. Co., paying over 
moneys as received and balancing the account at the close of the 
year. 

Is it asked why the Tract Society does not do its own publishing? 
We reply, because it has neither capital nor credit. No banks 
would want the Tract Society's note. There are two ways in 
which it could do its own publishing: (1) By doing no work for a 
while, it could save up the yearly donations until it had a capital 
with which to purchase or rent a building, buy type, make 
electrotypes, and pay in advance for paper, printing, binding, and 
have capital with which to give colporteurs some starting credit, 
etc.; but this surely would not be as advantageous a way as the 
present one. (2) I could make a donation to the Tract Society of a 
part or all of the Tower Pub. Co's. outfit, and take that many 
more voting-shares. This I no doubt would have done had it not 
been for the greater caution of my esteemed help-mate, Sister 
Russell. Her advice was,-That would be no real benefit to the 
work, and you may be sure that if the Society really had any 
assets or property, some would soon begin to interfere with its 
management, or at least try to. So long as we live we had best 
keep matters as they are, and at our death put the Tract Society 
and the Lord's work in general on the best possible footing, and 
in the most consecrated hands we can find. I followed this advice 
rather reluctantly; but now, in the light of the slanders herein 
discussed, I see it to have been the very essence of wisdom. 

WHAT COULD HAVE BEEN THEIR OBJECT 

Such a conspiracy, so deeply laid and extending over eighteen 
months at least, must have had an object; and after-sight often 
makes known what foresight could not have even suspicioned. It 
is clear, now, that Bro. and Sister 

3H136 

Zech have long felt envious of Bro. and Sister Russell. We can 
see now the meaning of their desire to get full control of the 
German work, which we so readily surrendered, and their 
anxiety to get the German paper forced into the hands of all the 
Tower readers. They knew that a good many of them could read 
German, and they were anxious to exercise a rival influence over 
them. Had they been more moderate in their efforts I might have 



granted all they desired; but their repeated, extreme and 
unreasonable demands made me feel cautious, although I knew 
not of what. I felt that I must not trust them absolutely. But never 
for one moment did I suspicion that it was a disease of the heart, 
as now seems evident: I attributed it merely a differences of 
heads. 

We repeat that the evidence is strong that what has just occurred 
was planned to occur one year ago; and to use the expression of 
one who knew of this feverish condition of things before we had 
the least intimation of it, "the pot was kept boiling, ready for the 
explosion." And true enough the pot has been boiling, and many 
of the church here, especially of the new and weaker ones have 
been forced into it, while myself and Mrs. Russell were in 
blissful ignorance of it. Some stopped their ears and said, We 
will not hear this unrighteous gossip; others heard and 
disbelieved, and covered what they could not understand with 
the mantle of charity; while with a few others it has acted like 
venomous poison, prejudicing their minds so that they have no 
ear for the truth on the subject. 

Yes, the explosion has at last come;-but it is the explosion of 
their malice, hatred, envy and evil surmises. No doubt it will do 
some damage; for the fallen human mind is much more attracted 
to evil things than to good things, and more readily surmises evil 
than good. Only the pure in heart and considerably developed in 
Christian character are ruled by the love that "thinketh 
(surmiseth) no evil." (1 Cor. 13:5) No doubt the "explosion" will 
kill the interest of some of the new born lambs; and many will be 
wounded by it. But what cared the conspirators for such 
considerations, Brother Russell's character must be killed 
somehow, or else the work so successfully managed by him as 
the Lord's steward would not be wrecked. And only by wrecking 
the present work could they hope to gather some of its fragments 
into their "bag" (John 12:6), to start up a new work -a new 
paper, a new tract fund, etc., etc. 

Yes, that is manifestly the secret of it all: the conspirators 
managed ably; and Brother Adamson, with a large bundle of the 
assassinating circulars, went to work at once to take the money 
out of the mouths of the "fish" in Ohio and elsewhere-to start a 
new paper, in which, if they do as they desire me to do in the 
TOWER, all who will may publish truth and untruth ad libitum. 

Here I dismiss this painful subject, which has weighed heavily 
upon our hearts for three weeks past. In various ways it has 
greatly interfered with the Lord's work. And it has, no doubt, 
greatly disturbed the whole Church, and caused some at least-we 
know not yet how many-to turn aside from the way and work 
which God has seen fit to permit Satan to thus trouble and shake. 



The two weeks intervening between the receiving of the libelous 



circular of our enemies and the preparation and sending out of 
this defense, has doubtless been a period of severe testing to 
many of you, especially those young in the truth; but all who 
have been slow to believe evil, and who have determined to wait 
patiently and prayerfully until the right and the truth should be 
vindicated, have doubtless been drawn closer to the Lord, and 
made to feel yet more their dependence upon him. I know that 
many have been praying for me the Lord's grace and strength; 
for many have so written, and I am sure that others did who did 
not write it. I rejoice to tell all such that I have been wonderfully 
blessed and kept in the peace of God which passeth all 
understanding. And as a consequence of recent experiences I am 
sure that I can appreciate and sympathize with the Master's 
experiences as never before. I have learned to appreciate true 
friends, and the spirit of Christ as never before. Of course the 
tendency of the fallen minds is to believe any evil report; and in 
the present case this tendency would be backed by the fact that 
the very brethren who bring these charges were lifted up to 
notice and commended to your confidence by myself. We cannot 
wonder, then, if a considerable number will have their minds 
defiled, and be themselves "sifted as wheat" (Luke 22:31), and if 
some be taken entirely out of sympathy with the truth and its 
service. All that we could do we have done for these: we have 
prayed for them that their faith fail not, and we have published 
for them this lengthy explanation of the false charges. 

In writing this explanation, I have avoided making any 
countercharges or dragging in any of the personal affairs of the 
conspirators, except such fragments as touched upon their 
charges against me and were necessary to give you the true view 
of the matter. I thus avoid their affairs, not because I lack ability 
to surmise, suggest and hint evil of them, but because I hate such 
works of the flesh and the devil, and by the Lord's grace am 
seeking more and more the mind of the spirit-the mind of Christ, 
which "thinketh (surmiseth) no evil," but suffers long and is 
kind. 

But, dear brethren and sisters, we must beware lest the sacred 
title of brother and sister be abused and all its meaning lost. 
There are limits on this subject fixed in God's Word, and it 
behooves us to notice them and to act accordingly. 

First, any one who does not fully and heartily confess the Lord's 
death as his ransom-price, paid once for all eighteen centuries 
ago, should not be recognized as a brother or sister, however 
honorable his conduct, or respectable his manner and 
appearance. 

Secondly, the brother or sister (believer in the ransom), who, by 
a disorderly walk and conversation, brings reproach upon the 
cause of Christ, is to be withdrawn from and to be treated "as 
a heathen man and a publican, " that is, in all respects as though 
he were not a brother-as an erring brother disowned and 



disfellowshipped until such time as he shall fully and freely 
confess his fault and ask forgiveness. 

The question therefore is, what should be our attitude toward 
these conspirators? Would the Lord have us continue to 
fellowship them and think and speak of them as "Brethren," or 
not? They have not yet denied the ransom, although some views 
expressed by two of them, recently, look as though they were 
getting onto dangerous ground, in their endeavor to find 
something that they can present as strictly new and original. And 
to our knowledge they are 

3H135 

soliciting financial aid from the "no-ransom" folks who "walk no 
more with us," and are "enemies of the cross of Christ;" and it is 
but reasonable to suppose that they will seek to please those 
who will aid them, and that those who give aid will expect favor 
at their hands. 

For my own part I have concluded that it is our duty to 
fellowship them as brethren no longer; and that each may be able 
to decide the question for himself, I will lay before you all the 
Scriptural reasons, as follows: 

(1) Read what the Apostle Paul says the true Church should do 
respecting "unreasonable and wicked men." (2 Thess. 3:1-6.) 
Question- Are these conspirators unreasonable and wicked? Each 
must judge for himself according to the evidence; and I have laid 
it before you very carefully. The evidence proves that they are, 
all of them, unreasonable; and the facts of this conspiracy of 
several years-this attempted assassination of the character of one 
who always did them good and never did one of them the least 
harm,-is as strong evidence of wickedness of heart as we need 
ever expect to find. "Disorderly" does not fit this case: it is a 
thousand times worse than the disorderly conduct mentioned by 
the Apostle as a ground for withdrawing of brotherly regard, etc. 
(Verses 8-15.) This case is more nearly described in 1 Tim. 6:4,5 
and Rom. 16:17. 

(2) In our Lord's instructions, in Matt. 18:15-17, he gives us a 
rule for such cases. Has it been followed? Yes, we have here 
related how the conspirators themselves brought the brethren to 
hear and to join with them, and how their unjust thoughts and 
evil surmisings were rebuked by those whom they sought to 
poison and make my enemies. We have also related how some of 
the best representatives of thought in the congregation were 
twice called "to hear," and judge as you now have fully heard. 
Yet notwithstanding all, they will hear nothing but the voice of 
Satan, urging them on to more envy, malice, hatred and strife, 
publicly and privately expressed. Henceforth, such men should 



be to all who love righteousness, and obey the Lord's command, 
"as heathen men and publicans" until such times as they shall 
fully and humbly repent and reform. 

(3) The Apostle gives us a sure rule forjudging who are and who 
are not "brethren." He says, "If any man have not the spirit of 
Christ he is none of his"-no matter what he believes, and no 
matter what he may formerly have been or believed or done. The 
spirit manifested by these conspirators is far from the spirit of 
Christ-meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness and 
love which surmises no evil. And those who are none of his 
should, surely, be none of ours. Every branch in the Vine that 
beareth not fruit (the fruit of the spirit), God, the great 
husbandman, will take away (cast off).-John 15; 2. 

The violation and loss of the spirit of the truth generally comes 
first, but the loss of the letter of the truth, the true doctrine, is 
sure to follow, ere long. "If any man will do my Father's will he 
shall know of my doctrine," said the Master. And it is consistent 
to reason to the contrary, that those who have the doctrine, but 
fail to grow its proper fruits will lose the doctrine. 

This sudden and venomous attack upon my reputation by those 
who professed, even to the very date of the outbreak, the 
warmest of friendship-this search for years for something that 
could be misconstrued and made unto slander,-this berating of 
the colporteurs as my slaves, by the very men who (more than 
myself) urged all who could do so to engage in this service, and 
who denominated it the highest and best service of the Truth,- 
this attempt to apply to me all the vile names they can think of, 
such as "pope," "Man of Sin," "Saul," "King of Babylon," etc., 
may deceive some, but not those who have the spirit of the truth 
and who as true sheep know the voice of the Shepherd. Such will 
recognize it as the voice of a stranger, and will flee from its 
influence-John 10:5. 

The Lord who saw fit to permit the great Enemy to bring this 
storm upon his disciples, purposed not only the shaking out of all 
not worthy of the truth, but also the greater strengthening of faith 
and closer binding together of all who are truly his. He is able to 
say now, as of yore (Matt. 8:26), Peace, be still; and to give us a 
great peace and renewed confidence in him and in each other in 
whom we see his spirit. 

Just a word upon another matter. Slighting remarks have been 
made respecting the Dawns, and other of our publications, to the 
effect that these teachings are really old and merely restated 
therein. I reply: It is well known to all of our readers that we do 
not claim that our teachings are new; that, on the contrary, we 
specially designate them "the old theology;"-the teachings of 
Christ and the apostles and prophets. 

If it be true, that the same truths are taught in books published by 
others, I would be glad to know it; but I regret that I have never 



seen them. These who profess to know of such publications have 
evidently gotten as little good from them as they got from mine,- 
none. For he who gets not the spirit of the truth gets no blessing 
from the letter of the truth. 

That isolated parts or features of the truth are to be found in the 
various writings of the past three centuries is unquestionably 
true. Our Presbyterian friends have precious truth in the doctrine 
of election. Our Methodist friends have long held the blessed 
doctrine of free grace; our Universalist friends have long 
preached a false view of restitution; and almost all have held 
some truth with some error. The special blessing of the present 
harvest message is that it clarifies, harmonizes and systematizes 
all these fragments of truth, and brings order out of confusion,- 
rightly dividing the Word of Truth. 

Respecting the steps of the divine leading in reaching the present 
development of the truth, I refer the reader to three articles which 
appeared in Zion's Watch Tower for May, 1890, entitled "Perils 
Amongst False Brethren," "Harvest Gatherings and Siftings" and 
"Sifting the Wheat." These were published with reference to a 
previous sifting; but as many of our readers are new since then, 
we think well to let these articles form a conclusion to this paper. 

We know of no other publications than MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
etc., which teach an opportunity of restitution based upon a 
ransom- price given for all on Calvary; no others that distinguish 
between the human and the divine natures, showing the latter to 
be the heritage of the elect Church and the former the blessed 
hope set before the world; no others that teach distinctly the 
presence of our Lord, beginning in the Fall of 1 874; no others 
that 

3H136 

show the real cleansing of the Sanctuary; no others that 
harmonize all these doctrines (election, free grace, the "little 
flock," the "great company," the restitution class, etc., etc.,) in 
the one grand, beautiful, divine, Plan of the Ages. 

We could wish that there were many and abler pens than ours, to 
portray a message so worthy of the sublimest expression. But we 
rejoice, nevertheless, that we have a share in the work; and we 
remember always that not unto the human instruments, but to 
God, the divine author of the plan of the ages, belongs the honor. 
And we remember that in this, as in all things, God's Word is 
fulfilled which declares that "God hath chosen the weak things 
of the world and the things that are naught." 

But whoever might have been the instrument in the Lord's 
hands, in bringing to light the harvest message, we well know 
from the assurances of God's word that he could only expect as 
his present reward, that which the Master also received, when 
after opening the eyes of one born blind, they said, "Give God 



the praise: we know that this man is a sinner." John 9:16,24. 
Surely the disciple is not above his Master. 

I take this occasion to thank those of charitable judgment who by 
letter and in person have expressed their confidence and 
sympathy in this trial, and who have steadily held us, and all the 
interests of this harvest work, before the throne of grace. 
Continue to do so, dear brethren and sisters: "Watch and pray!" 
Watch, that no criticizing, evil-surmising spirit may find a place 
among you; and if any such appear in your midst, promptly 
check the tendency by refusing to be a party to any secret, 
underhanded slander; bring all such and their charges to the light 
at once; and if they refuse to state publicly to the accused, what 
they would hint and insinuate privately, reckon that such persons 
have not the spirit of Christ, but the reverse, the disposition of 
Satan, the accuser of the brethren: for the poison of asps is under 
the lips of the evil-surmising, backbiting gossip. (Rom. 3:13-18.) 
But cultivate rather the fruits of the spirit of love and peace, and 
seek to adorn the profession of godliness with a consistent walk 
and conversation. 

We quote below a few of the letters received. 

Your brother in Christ,-abiding under the shadow of the 
Almighty, C. T. Russell. 

To The Church of Christ, Greetings! 

I take this opportunity to speak in defense of my husband against 
the bold attack of our enemies in maligning his character and 
misrepresenting our domestic relations. Our household is 
composed only of ourselves and our esteemed and beloved 
helpers in the WATCH TOWER Office, all of whom gladly bear 
witness to the tranquility and happiness of our home, save as 
intrusions of false brethren and busybodies occasionally disturb 
it. 

Our home, so far from being a discordant one, is the very 
reverse,-most happy. I could, indeed, pray for no greater 
blessing upon all of the dear saints, than that their home-life 
might be as peaceful and happy as ours. The liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free is enjoyed by all who are of our household or 
in any way connected with the work;-not the liberty of anarchy, 
however, but of subjection to the spirit and Word of God. 

To the above answers of my beloved husband to the charges of 
his slanderers I give my unqualified endorsement in every 
particular. Although such calumnies are severe, and doubly hard 
to bear when they come from those whom we had supposed to be 
friends, but who, we now find, have been plotting these wicked 
deeds for several years, I assure you all that God has sustained us 
and given us his peace through it all. At first it came with almost 
the force and suddenness of an avalanche, both upon us and upon 
the Allegheny Church; and although we feared for the stability of 



some, we felt sure that it was permitted of the Lord for the 
purpose of what he saw to be a necessary sifting. But, thank 
God, the Church here has weathered the storm well; and now 
letters from some of the stronger ones abroad, who have 
received the libelous circulars are coming in, expressing 
continued confidence, and showing that Satan's arts are 
recognized; and these are further encouraging our hearts and 
answering our prayers, though we are still solicitous for many 
who are yet young in the truth, and who may be unprepared to 
withstand such a shock; for we well know that the time 
intervening between receiving the slanderous report and this 
reply is one of suspense and severe trial to all. 

We reflect, however, that "The Lord knoweth them that are his," 
and that he is able and willing to keep them from falling; and 
that, as with Gideon's band, some must needs be turned back. 
Who is on the Lord's side?-the truth's side? "Who shall be able 
to stand?"-"Who shall ascend into the hill (the Kingdom) of the 
Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?" "He that hath clean 
hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto 
vanity, nor sworn (a solemn covenant) deceitfully. " 

Having committed our way unto the Lord, we are not fretting 
ourselves because of the evil doers, whose time is short, but we 
are trusting in the Lord, whose promises will in due time be 
fulfilled-"He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and 
thy judgment as the noonday" (Psa. 37); and until such time we 
will try to be patient, and will count it all joy to be esteemed 
worthy to suffer reproaches and afflictions for the name and 
cause of our beloved Lord. 

Oh! what are all earth 's gilded toys, 
Compared with heaven 's eternal joys, 
Or even to the feast now spread 
For pilgrims through the desert led? 

In Christian love and fellowship with all who love our Lord 
Jesus Christ and his truth in truth and sincerity, and who have 
no disposition to make merchandise of either the truth or the 
character of any of God's chosen instruments, I am Yours in the 
faith and hope of the Gospel, Mrs. C. T. Russell. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH RESOLUTIONS 

At a meeting of the Church of Christ, of Allegheny, Pa., held in 
Bible House Chapel, following the preaching services, over one 
hundred being present, a Chairman and Secretary were elected, 
and a committee presented the following Resolutions, which 
were unanimously adopted. 

Whereas, It has come to our knowledge that certain persons, viz., 
Elmer Bryan, Otto von Zech, S. D. Rogers 



3H137 

and J. B. Adamson, have been for some time circulating verbal 
and printed reports concerning our pastor, Brother Charles T. 
Russell, which are derogatory to his character as a Christian 
gentleman, as a business man, and as our pastor; and 

Whereas, We have heard the reports and Brother Russell's 
answers to the same; therefore be it 

RESOLVED, That we, the congregation meeting at Bible House, 
Allegheny, Pa., place no confidence in the aforesaid reports 
which are being disseminated by the above-named persons, but 
consider them slanderours, and entirely unworthy of persons 
professing to be brethren in Christ; and be it further 

Resolved, That we take this opportunity to express, to Brother 
Russell and to all whom it may concern, our great regard for him 
as a Christian gentleman, our unshaken confidence in his 
integrity as a business man, and our ever-increasing love and 
appreciation of him as our pastor (not our pope, as they falsely 
allege); and to acknowledge that, to him, under God, we owe a 
debt of gratitude for fifteen years' faithful services as our pastor, 
in ministering to us the Truth, which has made us free, and 
whereby we have been and are growing in knowledge, grace and 
steadfastness; and for encouraging us to the use of the talents of 
which we are severally the stewards; and for providing a 
commodious and centrally-located meeting-place for us; all of 
which he does voluntarily, and without a penny of remuneration; 
and be it further 

Resolved, That we assure him of our sincere sympathy and 
earnest prayers on his behalf in this hour of trial, and that we 
commend him to the God of all comfort; and be it further 

Resolved, That the Chairman and Secretary of this meeting be 
and they are hereby authorized and instructed to sign these 
resolutions on behalf of the congregation, and to convey the 
same to Brother Russell. 

[Signed] The Congregation At Allegheny. [By] M. M. Tuttle, 
Chairman. April 22, 1894. Jennie Vero. Secretary. 

Allegheny, Pa., April 7, 1894. 

Dear Brother Russelh-Various reports having been circulated by 
persons, viz.: Elmer Bryan, S. D. Rogers, Mr. and Mrs. Otto von 
Zech, J. B. Adamson and Paul Koetitz, whose conduct shows 
them to be the enemies of the truth as well as of yourself, to the 
effect that those working in the office under your supervision are 
in bondage to you, "under his thumb," "dare not to call their 
souls their own," "slaves," etc., etc., without liberty to think or 
act according to the dictates of their own consciences and 
judgments, we desire to express ourselves positively in the 
matter, in writing, so that these reports may be understood in 



their true light, not only by yourself, but by others who have 
heard these rumors, and by whomsoever else you may wish to 
acquaint with the contents of this letter. 

We desire to state first, that we are not in bondage, nor 
oppressed, nor caused to say or do anything in any matter which 
is contrary to our wills. We are in the office from choice, as the 
part of the Lord's work in which, in our opinion, we can serve 
most fully and most to the Lord's praise. We are at liberty to 
exercise all our functions as members of the body of Christ, and 
we do so, not only with your consent, but with your approval and 
encouragement. In fact, far from exhibiting a desire to suppress 
any of us, we have found you always desirous of enlarging our 
field of usefulness as much as possible; and we would say 
further that you have our esteem and love as a servant of the 
Lord, and as one in whom his likeness is largely developed. 

But in several other respects we are in bondage. We were first 
the servants of Sin, "sold under Sin," receiving the daily wages- 
pain, sorrow, discontent, disease-of that inexorable master; and 
we found ourselves "under his thumb," fearing the death which 
we realized would finally be inflicted upon us. 

But, thanks be to God, we escaped before he had fully wrought 
out his evil purposes. We learned that we had been "bought with 
a price, even the precious blood of Christ;" and with you we fled 
to this new Master, to yield our members servants of 
righteousness, as we had formerly yielded them to the service of 
our old master, Sin. And did we count ourselves free? out of 
bondage? Free from Sin, yes; but not absolutely free. We had 
merely transferred our allegiance. We had now become the 
bond-servants or slaves of Christ, of righteousness, of truth. We 
were bound by our covenant of consciences; by the dictates of 
our consciences; by our judgments; by God's command, through 
the Apostle, that all we do, to the smallest item, should be to the 
glory of God (1 Cor. 10:31); and consequently we were obliged 
to bear the fruit of the spirit; for we recognized as binding upon 
us our Master's words: "In this is my Father glorified-that ye 
bear much fruit." 

We found that our new Master was not selfish in demanding this; 
for the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, 
kindness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control, all of which 
redound to our own benefit; and we realized that He could not be 
selfish in demanding this exhibition of un selfishness 
from us, especially as this is his own disposition.-Phil. 2:5. 

We were also bound in other ways, and more and more so as we 
studied the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, and saw how 
one after another of the desires and liberties of the flesh must be 
restrained, bound, in order that we might the more closely walk 
up to the requirements of that law. We found limitations, 
prohibitions, counsels, warnings, applicable to every walk in life; 



and we found some of them very crucial tests, dividing even 
"between the soul (the human instincts) and the spirit (the intents 
of the new mind)." "Let every man please (not himself, but) his 
neighbor unto edification; for even Christ pleased not himself." 
"Judge not, that ye be not judged;" but "judge this, rather, that no 
man put a stumbling-block or an occasion to fall in his brother's 
way." "Lie not against the truth." "Lie not one to another." "Put 
off the former conversation, and be renewed in the spirit of your 
mind." "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath." "Let no 
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth." "Grieve not 
the holy spirit." "Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and 
clamor and evil-speaking be put away from you, with all malice; 
and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one 
another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." "Let 
no man deceive you with vain words." "Have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them." 
"Walk circumspectly." "Redeem the time." "Submit yourselves 
one to another." "Put on the whole armor of God." "Beware of 
dogs and evil workers." "Continue 

3H138 

in prayer, and watch with thanksgiving." "Walk in wisdom 
toward them that are without." "See that none render evil for 
evil." "Avenge not yourselves." "Abstain from all appearance of 
evil." "Be not weary in well doing." "The love of money is the 
root of all evil." "Preach the word, be instant in season and out 
of season." "Avoid foolish questions." "Speak evil of no man." 
"In honor prefer one another." 

Yes, the more we study the law of the spirit of life, the more we 
find that it means death to self; so that we would "endure grief, 
suffering wrongfully," humiliation, pain, death itself, rather than 
displease our present Master, or allow the old autocrat, Sin, to 
gain the least ascendancy over us. Yea, we count all things as 
loss and dross, if we may but remain in Christ. 

In yet another way are we in bondage. We found that our new 
Master did not consult us as to what position in his household we 
would like to occupy: he arbitrarily appointed us our places, and 
we were thankful, oh, so thankful, to be used at all, that we were 
not very particular. We were glad to be used in any capacity. We 
found that "God hath set the members in the body as it hath 
pleased him. " Realizing this, we are content. He knows best how 
to use us; he has used us in the past and we trust him to use us 
more effectively in the future. 

But we are bound-bound to the body; and, being bound, we are 
endeavoring to supply that strength and stability, that grace, 
which will tend to the increase of the spirit of love, and to the 
effectual service of the entire body.-Eph. 4:15, 16. 

We are bound in still another way: "We can do nothing against 
the truth." The unenlightened world, the entire nominal church, 



some who once loved us, principalities and powers, seen and 
unseen, Satan with all his hosts, are arrayed against the truth, to 
destroy it if possible, to drag in the dust its most earnest 
advocates; but we, we can do nothing against the truth. The very 
thought is pain. Rather let all the anathemas pronounced by 
Papacy against heretics be upon us. We can do nothing, we will 
do nothing against the truth. "Let God be true, though it prove 
every man a liar." 

Glorious bondage! Glorious liberty from Sin, from death, from 
self. Glorious liberty in Christ! Glorious bondage to Christ! 

"Not my own!" Oh, "not my own!" 
Jesus, I belong to thee! 
All I have and all I hope for, 
Thine for all eternity. 

These, dear Bro. Russell, are the sentiments of our hearts toward 
the Lord and his work, and we believe them to be also the 
sentiments of your own heart. We want to assure you of our 
oneness of purpose with you in the forwarding of the work, over 
which we believe the Lord has made you overseer, and in which, 
by his grace, we are glad to be accounted "helps." (Can it be that 
the Apostle referred to us when he used that peculiar term?) This 
is a trying hour to you; and perhaps you feel a little as the Lord 
did, when some walked no more with him-" And will ye, too, go 
away?" So we want to sustain you by our love and sympathy and 
co-operation, as well as by our prayers, and to give you every 
reason to believe that we are your friends, as well as friends of 
the truth. 

We know not what to say concerning those who malign your 
character; but we fear for them the retribution of those who 
spoke evil of another to whom the Lord had given a special 
charge.-Num. 16:1-35. 

With this assurance of our sentiment, we are, Your servants in 
Christ, Edward F. Abbott, Wm. L. Campbell, Rose J. Ball, E. 
C. Henninges, James A. Weimar. 

New York, April 16, 1894. 

My Dear Brother And Sister Russell:-It is now near midnight, 
but I cannot retire without first trying to express (for words fail 
me to express fully) our deep love and sympathy to you both. 

This A. M. we received a "circular letter," which I take the 
liberty to enclose to you, believing you ought (if you do not) to 
know its contents. Truly it has been a sad day to us, more like a 
house of mourning. Mrs. G. is almost prostrated over it, but 
thank the good Lord, we have not read the Tower for over twelve 
years in vain. By God's grace, we can see the sophistry and 
detect the wolf beneath the covering of wool. Mr. Rogers is 
greatly mistaken in supposing that none who read the Dawn 
without the preached word can come into the Truth; for, thank 



the dear Lord, sister G. and myself were led into the light by it. 
Sisters Erlenmeyer and Clark were the first we met and talked 
with, and that is less than three years ago; and they will 
doubtless testify to our having considerable light. I have humbly 
done what I could to circulate Dawns and Tracts. 

But, dear brother and sister, I will not weary you; only be 
assured that you are always remembered in our prayers; and may 
the dear Lord be ever present with you in this your especial time 
of need. We shall ever trust in Christ, our ransom price, and 
strive to be led by the "spirit of truth." 

Pray for us, and do not fear. We are striving to be ever on the 
alert for Satan, come in what form he may, but we trust solely in 
Jesus; for if he be for us, who can be against us? 

God bless and keep you both is our constant prayer. 

Yours in the Truth, Mr. and Mrs. H. P. Ganoung. 

Ohio, April 15, 1894. 

Dear Sister Russell:-In writing you a few days ago I expressed 
great surprise at the course Bro. Rogers had taken. Judge my 
further surprise when yesterday I received a circular containing 
the letters of four brethren. Of course you know to what I refer. 
What can this mean? 

It takes no keen discernment to discover that they were not 
written in the spirit of meekness and love, the Christ spirit. The 
venom with which they seem to be permeated must certainly 
neutralize their effect. One of the writers in his anxiety to make 
out a case, by making public that which he had better wrapped in 
a mantle of charity and consigned to forgetfulness, has, in my 
estimation, violated his Christian honor. I honestly believe that I 
express the sentiment of the whole true church when I say that 
we still esteem our Brother Russell very highly in love for his 
work's sake, and sincerely believe that he will be able to clear 
himself of each and every charge, and come forth from this fiery 
trial 

3H139 

unscathed as he has done from former ones. He never to my 
knowledge claimed infallibility or wished to assume either office 
or title of "pope." Nor can I see how any member of the church 
possessed of intelligence and sanctified common sense can 
accuse him of this. 

I have written, dear sister, to express to you my continued love 
and confidence, also my sympathy in this trial. 'Tis doubtless a 
well-laid scheme of the adversary to shake your faith. Recall 
your own words in your last letter to me: "We are in the shaking 
time when all that can be shaken will be, and only that which 
cannot be shaken will remain," and, holding fast your 
confidence, go on, looking unto Jesus. Please express my 



Christian love and sympathy to Bro. Russell, and tell him to fear 
none of these things which he shall suffer. 

I commend you both to the "Father of mercies and the God of all 
comfort." In Christian loyalty and love. Sincerely yours, M. J. 
Tucker. 

Bro. W. E. Page, for some time a member of an office force and 
of our family, writes a few kind word and encloses a copy of a 
letter sent to Bro. Gilruth, as follows:- 

Des Moines, April 18, '94. 

Dear Brother Gilruth:-Yours of 6th inst. came duly. I am grieved 
that the Rogers, Zech, Bryan, Adamson manifesto must now 
arise to stumble some, though, since the Lord permits it, I am not 

dazed by it; nor do I let it worry me At the meeting that 

continued until 4 o'clock, A. M., to which Zech refers, I presided 
as chairman. When first going into the work Zech had no money, 
but later was left some by German relatives. He was anxious to 
invest it and finally conceived the idea of establishing a printing 
plant and doing Bro. Russell's work. Bro. Russell discouraged 
the idea, though, through regard for Zech and to aid him, he 
finally consented to give him the work, advising against the 
scheme; and Zech knows this, though stating to the contrary. 
Zech insisted on Bro. Russell treating him in all things on the 
principle of "love," as he put it, i. e., that he do everything he 
could for him and pay the highest price for all work done, while 
he, Zech, act wholly on the principle of avarice-get all you can- 
with Bro. Russell. 

I do not think that Zech saw the point on this plainly, his 
financial interests and lack of business ability keeping the fear 
that he might lose money constantly in the foreground. His 
money has proven a snare to him. I have been all over this 
ground with both parties, and am sure Brother Russell has done 
Zech no injury. 

Bryan is a very peculiar man, and always has been-by heredity, I 
judge, assisted by training. He must needs have the care of every 
conscience subject to his observation, demanding that all 
conform to his views of right and wrong. To an insane degree he 
constantly exhibited the determination during the last of his 
connection with the office, to make Bro. Russell acknowledge to 
him that he was a wrong-doer, and especially in doing contrary 
to Bryan's judgment. His insinuations and intimations regarding 
the boiler cleaning compound are, / am sure, more the result of 
prejudice than fact; though this particular thing was not 
canvassed when I was in Allegheny. Similar and even worse 
charges were, and found groundless. 



My knowledge of the weaknesses, prejudice, poor judgment, 
lack of discernment, etc., of Zech and Bryan, with the 
information I have proving the most of these charges groundless, 
leads me to give but little if any weight to their criticism. 

Rogers has stumbled over having a special mission to convert 
everybody to his methods. No one can or will object to his living 
according to it; and he might be blessed in some ways by so 
doing. Surely you and I prefer to earn our own bread, that we 
may be chargeable to none, and have to give to him who is in 
necessity;-not who supinely puts himself in a dependent 
condition. 

I have had a long correspondence with Adamson regarding his 
tract, and refused to contribute toward the expense of printing, 
not knowing what it would teach. He abused me roundly for this 
and severely criticized my free-will offering to the Tract Fund, 
indicating a perverse spirit. However, we can and I do leave the 
quartet in God's hands. He knows their weaknesses and how 
much perverseness is mixed up in their courses. 

We know that God's plan will be fully accomplished in due time 
and that any and all who resist the truth, even as Jannes and 
Jambres did Moses, will gain a full recompense of reward (2 
Tim. 3:8,9) and in no way prevent the full setting up of the 
Kingdom. Then, too, we know that wicked servants are sent into 
outer darkness by the Master, and he is managing the harvest 
work. We can abide in him, and have our weakness turned into 
strength. Yours in service, W. E. Page. 

W. Virginia, April 17, 1894. 

Dear Brother Russell:-"Be not weary nor faint in mind." May 
you be delivered out of every trouble. "Think it not strange." 
Yours in the Lord, H. L. Gillis. 

Illinois, April 24, 1894. 

Dear Brother Russell :-I want you to understand how we regard 
the trouble. Your friends will court an investigation. Better wait 
until A., B., R. and Z. have something more definite than their 
very gauzy manifesto to offer. Do not, please do not, make the 
same mistake of haste and anger which characterizes their 
villainous letter. Sorry you did not mention the Adamson matter 
when you were here with us, on your return from your visit to 
him, as only a few days after I sent a small subscription for his 
tracts. 

Careful study of the manifesto shows that it covers considerable 
time, during which the four signers were in intimate 
communication with you. Suddenly they change, and with haste 
and irritation describe troubles already examined and decided 
against them; and they wantonly villify one whom within the 
present month they loudly proclaimed as their trusted leader and 
friend. 



Our only information is gleaned from the bare, cold, 
unsympathetic black and white of the printed page,-evidently 
hastily written, under the stress of strong excitement, couched in 
language vague and ambiguous, hinting at things to us unknown 
but presumably dreadful, and all better calculated to whet the 
appetite of a scandal-monger than to enlighten the saint. 

Referring to the circular alphabetically, we note that it extends 
from A to Z — Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the 
beginning to the end: and, indeed to cover the entire ground. If 
the desire to bring Bro. Russell to the varying standards of 
excellence in the minds of the four writers has been unwarranted 
by the facts, none should 

3H139 

more regret it than themselves. Such however being the case, we 
appear to have four popes instead of only one. 

Bro. Adamson's tract begins-"Introductory. This outline of 
God's plan in the ages is designed to be an introduction to the 
volumes of the Millennial Dawn." He says, "Concerning 
parables heard, while the author of Dawn is not responsible here, 
we believe it is in harmony with Millennial Dawn teaching." 
From this the reader might fairly infer at least that the "author of 
DAWN" does not disagree. While the truth is the very reverse, 
this tract is now being shamelessly foisted upon the public. More 
than this, Brother Adamson endeavors to throw the responsibility 
on the author of Dawn by failing to note any other possible 
author, and by announcing himself under the title of 
"Distributor." 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, when read in the order in which it is 
written, the order intended by its author, is as plain as the 
alphabet, and no more needs an introduction, or explanation than 
do our A. B. C's. To write an alleged introduction, supposedly 
on behalf, but without the request, of the author of the book, is to 
insinuate obscurity and incapacity in the author, and is to him a 
gratuitous insult. To insist on publishing such an introduction 
regardless of the author's repeated protests, would even in civil 
courts, subject such publisher to heavy penalties. How much 
more, then, should such conduct be reprobated by those who will 
judge, not only the world, but angels. 

Without at present charging error, it is only just to say that in 
many instances Bro. Adamson's writings are hopelessly 
ambiguous, and therefore dangerous. 

Several of Bro. Bryan's charges have already to my knowledge 
been tried impartially in a manner and by a tribunal of his own 
Scriptural choosing; but he forgets that their findings in each 
instance supported you, Brother Russell, and were unfavorable to 
himself. That he should now drag forth these once disposed of 
matters, without honestly advising his readers of the fact, seems 



to argue a decidedly drowsy condition of his once so vigilant 
conscience. 

Brother Rogers is plainly guilty of a shameful waste of printers' 
ink, blank paper, and his readers' time, in requiring two full 
pages closely packed, on which to confess that while a duly 
accredited agent, under the instructions and at the expense of the 
Tower Tract Society, he disobeyed orders, violated his 
agreement, and returned to England expecting to persuade you 
that he knew more about your purpose and plans than you did 
yourself. 

Bro. Zech in his attempt to describe a family difficulty, said to 
have occurred as long ago as Christmas, '92 has failed; hence we 
have only his word that there was an "insult." If there really were 
one, it has doubtless long since been forgiven. The demand for a 
public apology was not called for according to its own showing; 
and in publishing the names of its signers he has probably no 
more consulted their wishes than those of the other parties 
concerned. 

Our confidence in you remains unshaken, and our sympathy is 
most hearty and sincere. Your brother in Christ, WM. M. 

Wright. 

Ohio, April 24, 1894. 

Dear Brother Russell :-My heart has been exceeding sad for the 
last two weeks. Because I would not condemn you unheard, I 
have been abused and likened to an idol worshiper, been told to 
repent and be converted and it has even been hinted to me that I 
am not consecrated. This dreadful thing (the defamatory circular) 
came on us in Columbus like a flash of lightening from a clear 
sky. Bro. Adamson never hinted to me that there was the least 
inharmony between yourself and him when he asked me to 
subscribe for his tracts. 

I wrote Bro. A. as follows: 

"I cannot judge Bro. Russell from the standpoint of your four 
witnesses. He has three witnesses in his favor now,-Food For 
Thinking Christians, Millennial Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower, 
besides brethren yet to hear from. If Bro. Russell has erred, the 
Lord will judge him for it. I cannot condemn him unheard." 

I hope dear brother, that you may be able to refute the slander of 
your enemies. I cannot believe that the Father would reveal his 
plans and truths to one so wicked as your enemies would make 
you out to be. I feel that the Lord will be with you. "For God is 
not unrighteous to forget your labor of love, which ye have 
showed toward His name, in that ye have ministered to the saints 
and do minister." 

This morning I got from Bro. A. the enclosed unkind letter, 
accusing me of something that I have not done, as follows; 



"Bro. Zech wrote me that Bro. Russell had tasked me with 
changing an order from Sister McOmber from 100 Ingersoll 
tracts to s my' tracts; accusing me of scratching out the 
v Ingersoll' and putting v my' above it. I suppose you sent the 
letter to Bro. Russell as an evidence of my rascality. " 

It is very evident that Bro. Adamson is jealous of the amounts, 
small as they are, that I send to the Tract Fund, which has 
become so hateful to him that he will even accuse me falsely. 

Hoping that all things may abound to the glory of God, I remain 
your sister in Christ our Redeemer, Belle F. Miller. 

[Reply: The only letter of the kind referred to by Bro. A., that I 
know of, was one sent to him by Bro. Sherman. In it Bro. S. 
enclosed $5.00 for one hundred Ingersoll tracts. Bro. A. crossed 
off the words "Ingersoll tracts" and wrote above "your new 
tract." Bro. A. sent that altered letter to a friend, from whom he 
desired a like amount, and in due time it came to me. I do not 
believe, however, that it was done fraudulently ; nor that it was 
a misapplication of funds. I merely say that he should first have 
assured himself, beyond all question, as to Bro. Sherman's real 
intention: knowing that so intelligent a penman is not likely to 
misstate himself; especially, too, as Bro. A. was a Director in the 
Tract Society.] 

New Albany, April 19, '94. 

Dear Brother Russell:-It is with heaviness of heart that we write 
you these few lines. Without taking sides on the merits of the 
case as the trouble now stands, and as viewed from the circular 
letter of Bros. Zech, Rogers, Bryan and Adamson, we must 
protest against their course of procedure against you as unworthy 
of brethren. We extend to you and Sister Russell our sympathy. 
Your labor in the cause of present truth deserves better treatment 
than these men would mete out to you. 

3H141 

If you have done wrong, may the dear Lord help you to see your 
error; and I believe in such event you would cheerfully 
acknowledge it. Your brother and sister in Christ, F. J. & Alice 
E. Bourquin. 

The following is a copy of a letter sent by same mail to Brother 
von Zech. Dear Brother:-It is in great sorrow and heaviness of 
heart that I acknowledge receipt of your circular letter. 

Myself and wife have made it a subject of prayer, as we did 
when we first read DAWN, and we feel that we cannot wait one 
mail longer without writing and apprising you of our disapproval 
of your course, which we believe is very unscriptural and 
involving terrible consequences to yourselves, the body of Christ 
at large, many private individuals, and many who may now be 
just receiving the lights. It seems to us that Satan could not, with 



all his cunning, conceded ingenuity and ability, have concocted a 
scheme by which he could have injured more the cause of 
present truth than thus to deceive you and inspire you to do this 
thing as you have. 

Should all you claim be true, which I do not admit to believe, 
then you still have not done as the Lord has instructed his 
followers to do. We have not conferred with flesh and blood-we 
passed that point long ago; but we have conferred with our 
Heavenly Father, and we take our stand on what we believe to be 
the right and truth and do not desire to injure the least one of 
those who believe in Christ. Others may do as they see right in 
the matter, but for our part we need not wait to see what step 
others may take or what they may say: we are willing to assume 
the responsibility thrust upon us by your very unwise, unkind 
and wicked letter. The course you have taken is certainly not the 
result of any inspiration received in communion with the Father 
in your private closet: no, dear erring brother, it must come from 
another source. The course pursued would kill the brother if 
guilty of all you claim, instead of reclaiming him. 

For our part, we do not own one "pope;" if we did, we think we 
would prefer Bro. Russell to either of the four writing the 
circular letters; neither do we want two, three or four popes, and 
we confess that the said letters do smack of popery. You ask too 
much entirely, after failing to do as our Lord directed (Matt. 
18:15-17.) You with three others set yourselves up as judges, 
witnesses and jury, and I might also add, without drawing too 
much on the imagination, as executioners. Now I wish to say to 
you that I know enough of the law of the world to know that this 
is very unlawful. No accused is to be adjudged guilty on ex parte 
testimony; even an accused criminal is to be presumed innocent 
until proven guilty by witnesses put under the testing fire of 
cross examination, all in the presence of the "accused," a phrase 
you use repeatedly. 

Bro. Zech, this letter is unworthy of you; and if my finances 
were as at one time, I would hasten to you, and talk to you face 
to face, for I would ten thousand times rather say this to you than 
to write it. I do not wish to evade responsibility when the cause 
of truth and the Master is at stake and in peril by false brethren, 
deceived and ignorant, as I believe, but false nevertheless, 
through the wiles of Satan. 

Before I was a Christian I would never have betrayed such a 
secret, obtained as guest in a family, under any circumstances; if 
not from pure motives, I would have feared to be despised and 
distrusted by those to whom I should have revealed my perfidy 
and infidelity. 

Why did you not wait until after to-day (the Anniversary of 
Christ's death) before sending out your miserable stuff? This 
seems to be the time, though, for Satan to manifest himself, and 



it does look to me that this time he has taken four men who 
might have made good "shoemakers" and made Judges and 
lawyers of them, and they have "butchered" the job for 
everybody. I cannot express my indignation in words, at such 
audacity and assumption of power. After carefully rereading the 
letter I am convinced the writers are incompetent to try such a 
case, even if asked to do so by the congregation. The personal 
grievances are too prominent. Having confidence that our Lord is 
able to overrule the machination of the powers of darkness and 
make the wrath and wickedness of men to praise him and serve 
His good purpose, I am striving to be a faithful servant of the 
Lord. F. J. Bourquin. 

Dear Brother and Sister Russell:-This last month has been, in 
my experience, a very sad one. The printed circular, coming 
from parties from whom we expected better things, has troubled 
me and made me very sad. 

But after some mature reflection, and when I discovered from 
whom it emanated, I was not so surprised; for I have long ago 
seen that there was a Korah in the camp, who was soon joined by 
Dathan and Abiram. As they were the ringleaders in the 
rebellion against Moses and Aaron, so likewise those you have 
made confidants and entrusted with your private affairs,-who 
have sat at your table, as one of your family and been made 
partakers together of spiritual as well as natural things, little 
thinking you were nourishing a viper of the most poisonous 
nature, as it were in your bosom. 

The three Spring Meetings previous to the Chicago Convention, 
notwithstanding the great good I received while there, were 
somewhat marred with what I saw and heard by three of the 
same parties now prominent in this disruption; and I was many 
times tempted to give you a hint on the subject, but I quieted my 
conscience by attributing it to their weakness. These are the three 
stones that in my dream I saw hurled at you while you were 
ministering to us the Word of Life, that caused blood to flow 
from your temples. Do you remember my mentioning it to you 
about three years ago? Oh! it makes me sad indeed. Anything 
from the outside world I can endure-as David expresses it "Had 
it been an avowed enemy, I could have borne it." 

Oh, may this dark hour of trial draw us closer, and closer, under 
the sheltering arms of our Heavenly Father! May God bless you 
with the riches of his grace, and the fulness of His spirit, is the 
earnest prayer of your brother in Christ, John W. Mason. 

"A little while, our fightings shall be over; 
A little while, our tears be wiped away; 
A little while, the power of Jehovah 
Shall turn our darkness into gladsome day. " 



HARVEST SIFTINGS 

PERILS AMONG FALSE BRETHREN 
2 Cor. 11:26 

Our Christian experiences differ; no two exactly the same, 
because our temperaments and talents differ as well as our 
surroundings. But we may rely upon it that no real son of God is 
exempted from the needed trials of patience, faith and love. No 
matter how strong the character, or how seemingly impregnable 
to the ordinary besetments, we may rely upon it that such have as 
great trials and crosses as others-perhaps greater; perhaps such 
as would prostrate weaker ones, whom the Lord will therefore in 
love and mercy not suffer to be tempted above that they are able 
to bear.- 1 Cor. 10:13. 

Even our blessed Lord Jesus, though perfect, had to pass through 
an experience to test and prove his complete submission to the 
Father's will. Looking at our Lord's testing, we cannot doubt 
that his strong character was measurably unmoved by the 
sarcastic, bitter words and threats of the Scribes and Pharisees, 
and that likewise he speedily and firmly settled Satan's 
temptations negatively. None of these things, which would have 
been the greatest temptations to others, seemed to move or even 
to greatly annoy him. He answered coolly and often ironically 
the attacks of open enemies, and was comparatively unmoved by 
them; but it was when those who dipped in the dish with him 
lifted up the heel against him (Psa. 41:9; Matt. 26:23) and left 
him, that his heart was troubled;-wounded by professed friends. 
The only discouraged expression recorded, relative to his work, 
was toward the close of his ministry when the test became more 
and more severe, and "many went back and walked no more in 
his company," saying of his doctrines, "This is a hard saying; 
who can hear it?" His unreproachful but sorrowful words, then 
expressed to the twelve specially staunch disciples, were full of 
pathos and disappointed grief: "Will ye also go away?" The 
prompt response of Peter-"Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou 
hast the words of lasting life"-must certainly have come as a 
comforting balm to that noble, loving heart, whose only impulse 
was to do good and to bless others. 

And yet as he approached the close of his ministry, the time 
came that he must still further suffer wounds from those he most 
loved. No wonder that, catching a clear view of how his sacrifice 
was to be completed, how all his bosom disciples would forsake 
and disown him, and how one of them would betray him with a 
kiss, he was sorrowful, troubled in spirit, and testified, "Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me." And 
though Peter courageously said, "Though I should die with thee, 
yet will I not deny thee"-and so said they all-Jesus saw that all 
would be scattered, forsaking him in his most trying hour, and 
that courageous Peter would be so terribly sifted of Satan and 



prove so weak that he would even swear that he had never 
known him. Truly these trials from "brethren," some of whom 
were only weak, and one false at heart, must have been among 
the sorest of our Lord's experiences, during his period of trial. 
Yet none of these things moved him or for a moment influenced 
him to choose another course. He cheerfully followed the narrow 
path and left it for God, in his own time, to bring forth his 
righteousness as the light of noonday. (Psa. 37:6). He was 
obedient to God, and faithful to the truth, and it was thus that he 
suffered, not only at the hands of evil men, but also from the 
misunderstandings of his closest friends, who did not clearly 
grasp the situation, nor see how needful it was that he should 
first be Redeemer before he could become Restorer and King. 

The same lesson of perils among false brethren, and among 
brethren who had not so fully as himself grasped the Truth, was 
also the Apostle Paul's experience. 

We never hear from him a complaint about the way the world 
rejected his message, spoke evil of him and maltreated him as 
the leading exponent of the unpopular doctrine of the cross of 
Christ, which was opposed both by the stumbling blinded Jews 
and by the worldly-wise believers in the philosophies of the 
Gentiles. Indeed, instead of being downcast or discouraged at his 
past experiences, or in the prospect of bonds and imprisonments 
awaiting him in the future, he boldly and cheerfully declared, 
"But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear 
unto myself."-Acts 20:19-24 

But, like the Lord Jesus, Paul had his severest trials from "false 
brethren"; who, instead of being faithful yoke-fellows and co- 
workers, as good soldiers of the cross, became puffed up, heady, 
and anxious to be leaders. These, being unwilling or unable to 
see the truth as fully and clearly as did Paul, because of their 
wrong condition of heart, and being envious of his success and 
the results of his zeal and labor, followed after him in the various 
cities where he had labored, and by misrepresentation of his 
character as well as of his teachings, sought to lower him in the 
esteem of the household of faith, and thus to open the way for 
various sophistical theories which would reflect honor upon 
them as teachers of what they claimed were advanced truths, 
though actually subverting the real truth in the minds of many. 

The only annoyance ever manifested by the Apostle Paul, in any 
of his letters, was upon this subject of his misrepresentation by 
false brethren. Referring to these false apostles by name, that 
they might be known and recognized as such (See 1 Tim. 
1:19,20; 2 Tim. 4:10, 14-17; 2 Cor. 11:2-23), he clearly exposed 
their unholy motives of pride, ambition and envy, which 
scrupled not to make havoc of the Church and of the truth. 



Especially did he point out that, in their attempt to be leaders, 
they had manufactured a different gospel, built upon a different 
foundation than the only true foundation-the death of Christ as 
man's ransom-price. 

Paul was zealous for the truth's sake, lest these false apostles 
should use smooth words and misrepresentations of his character 
and of the truth as a lever to turn men aside from the true gospel. 

He warns them against those teachers, not to keep himself 
uppermost in their hearts, but to put them on their guard, lest 
receiving the new teachers, they should be injured by the false 
teachings they presented, and lest in rejecting him and losing 
confidence in him as an honest and true man and teacher they 
should discard his teachings, which were the truth. Hence his 
reference to himself was not in self-defence and self-laudation, 
but in defence of the truth and an endeavor to have them see that 
his character 

3H143 

and career as a true teacher comported well with the true 
message he bore to them. 

And he fearlessly pointed out that men might claim to present 
the same Jesus, the same spirit and the same gospel, and yet be 
false teachers and deceitful workers, transforming themselves 
into apostles of Christ. And, he says, marvel not at such a thing 
as that men should be great workers in the name of Christ from 
ambitious motives: "No marvel, for Satan himself fashioneth 
himself into an angel of light. It is no great thing, therefore, if his 
ministers also transform themselves as ministers of 
righteousness." 

Paul's letter to the Galatians was written evidently to counteract 
the misrepresentations of false brethren. (Gal. 1:6; 3:1.) To re- 
establish confidence in the gospel message he had delivered, it 
was needful that he should rehearse to them something of his 
history. In doing so it was necessary to refer again to the false 
brethren (Gal. 2:4), who claimed to be of the same body and who 
yet, in opposition to the truth, brought again upon God's 
children the bondage of errors already escaped from. 

HARVEST GATHERING AND SIFTINGS 

A BRIEF SKETCH OF THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF PRESENT TRUTH 

Many are the inquiries relative to the truths presented in 
Millennial Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower, as to whence they 
came and how they developed to their present symmetrical and 
beautiful proportions- Were they the results of visions? Did God 
in any supernatural way grant the solution of these hitherto 



mysteries of his plan? Are the writers more than ordinary 
beings? Do they claim any supernatural wisdom or power? or 
how comes this revelation of God's truth? 

No, dear friends, we claim nothing of superiority, nor 
supernatural power, dignity or authority; nor do we aspire to 
exalt ourselves in the estimation of our brethren of the household 
of faith, except in the sense that the Master urged it, saying, "Let 
him who would be great among you be your servant." (Matt. 
20:27.) And our position among men of the world and of the 
nominal church is certainly far from exalted, being everywhere 
spoken against. We are fully contented, however, to wait for 
exaltation until the Lord's due time. (1 Pet. 5:6.) In the apostle's 
words we therefore answer, "Why look ye upon us, as though by 
our own power we had done these things? We also are men of 
like passions with yourselves-of like infirmities and frailties, 
earnestly striving, by overcoming many besetments, dis- 
couragements, etc., to press along the line toward the mark of the 
prize of our high calling, and claiming only, as faithful students 
of the Word of God, to be index fingers, as we have previously 
expressed it, to help you to trace for yourselves, on the sacred 
page, the wonderful plan of God-no less wonderful to us, we 
assure you, than to you, dearly beloved sharers of our faith and 
joy- 
No, the truths we present, as God's mouthpieces, were not 
revealed in visions or dreams, nor by God's audible voice, nor 
all at once, but gradually, especially since 1 870, and particularly 
since 1880, a period of above twenty years. And this present 
clear unfolding of truth is not due to any human ingenuity or 
acuteness of perception, but to the simple fact that God's due 
time has come; and if we did not speak, and no other agent could 
be found, the very stones would cry out. 

We give the following history, not only because we have been 
urged to give a review of God's leadings in the path of light, but 
specially because we believe it to be needful that the truth be 
modestly told, that misapprehensions and prejudicial mis- 
statements may be disarmed, and that our readers may see how 
hitherto the Lord hath helped and guided us. In so far as the 
names and views of others, who have parted company with us, 
may be associated with this history, we shall endeavor to bring 
forward only such points as are necessary to an understanding of 
our position and of the Lord's leadings. Nor can we name all the 
little points of divine favor in which faith was tested, prayers 
were answered, etc., remembering that our Master and the early 
church left no such example of boasting faith, but rather 
admonished otherwise, saying, "Hast thou faith, have it to 
thyself." Some of the most precious experiences of faith and 
prayer are those which are too sacred for public display. 

We will not go back to tell how the light began to break through 
the clouds of prejudice and superstition which enveloped the 



world under Papacy's rule in the dark ages. The reformation 
movement, or rather movements, from then until now, have each 
done their share in bringing light out of darkness. But we will 
here confine ourselves to the consideration of the harvest truths 
set forth in Millennial Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower. 

We begin the narrative at the year 1 868, when the editor, having 
been a consecrated child of God for some years, and a member 
of the Congregational Church and of the Y. M. C. A., began to 
be shaken in faith regarding many long accepted doctrines. 
Brought up a Presbyterian, and indoctrinated from the 
Catechism, and being naturally of an inquiring mind, I fell a 
ready prey to the logic of infidelity as soon as I began to think 
for myself. But that which at first threatened to be the utter 
shipwreck of faith in God and the Bible, was, under God's 
providence, overruled for good, and merely wrecked my 
confidence in human creeds and systems of misinterpretation of 
the Bible. 

Gradually I was led to see that though each of the creeds 
contained some elements of truth, they were on the whole, 
misleading and contradictory of God's Word. Among other 
theories, I stumbled upon Adventism. Seemingly by accident, 
one evening I dropped into a dusty, dingy hall, where I had heard 
religious services were held, to see if the handful who met there 
had anything more sensible to offer than the creeds of the great 
churches. There, for the first time, I heard something of the 
views of Second Adventists, the preacher being Mr. Jonas 
Wendell, long since deceased. Thus, I confess indebtedness to 
Adventists as well as to other denominations. 

Though his Scripture-exposition was not entirely clear, and 
though it was very far from what we now rejoice in, it was 
sufficient, under God, to re-establish my wavering faith in the 
divine inspiration of the Bible, and to show that the records of 
the apostles and prophets are indissolubly linked. What I heard 
sent me to my Bible to study with more zeal and care than ever 
before, and I shall ever thank 

3H144 

the Lord for that leading; for though Adventism helped me to no 
single truth, it did help me greatly in the unlearning of errors, 
and thus prepared me for the truth. 

I soon began to see that we were living somewhere near the close 
of the Gospel Age, and near the time when the Lord had declared 
that the wise, watching ones of his children should come to a 
clear knowledge of his plan. At this time, myself and a few other 
truth-seekers in Pittsburgh and Allegheny formed a class for 
Bible study, and from 1870 to 1875 was a time of constant 
growth in grace and knowledge and love of God and his Word. 
We came to see something of the love of God, how it had made 
provision for all mankind, how all must be awakened from the 



tomb in order that God's loving plan might be testified to them, 
and how all who exercise faith in Christ's redemptive work and 
render obedience in harmony with the knowledge of God's will 
they will then receive, might then (through Christ's merit) be 
brought back into full harmony with God, and be granted 
everlasting life. This we saw to be the Restitution work foretold 
in Acts 3:21. But though seeing that the Church was called to 
joint-heirship with the Lord in the Millennial Kingdom, up to 
that time we had failed to see clearly the great distinction 
between the reward of the Church now on trial and the reward of 
the faithful of the world after its trial, at the close of the 
Millennial age-that the reward of the former is to be the glory of 
the spiritual, divine nature, while that of the latter is to be the 
glory of restitution-restoration to the perfection of human nature 
once enjoyed in Eden by their progenitor and head, Adam. 

However, we were then merely getting the general outlines of 
God's plan, and unlearning many long-cherished errors, the time 
for a clear discernment of the minutiae having not yet fully 
come. And here I should and do gratefully mention assistance 
rendered by Brothers Geo. Stetson and Geo. Storrs, the latter the 
editor of The Bible Examiner, both now deceased. The study of 
the Word of God with these dear brethren led, step by step, into 
greener pastures and brighter hopes for the world, though it was 
not until 1872, when I gained a clear view of our Lord's work as 
our ransom price, that I found the strength and foundation of all 
hope of restitution to lie in that doctrine. Up to that time, when I 
read the testimony that all in their graves shall come forth, etc., I 
yet doubted the full provision-whether it should be understood 
to include idiots or infants who had died without reaching any 
degree of understanding, beings to whom the present life and its 
experiences would seem to be of little or no advantage. But 
when, in 1872, I came to examine the subject of restitution from 
the standpoint of the ransom price given by our Lord Jesus for 
Adam, and consequently for all lost in Adam, it settled the 
matter of restitution completely, and gave me the fullest 
assurance that ALL must come forth from their graves and be 
brought to a clear knowledge of the truth and to a full 
opportunity to gain everlasting life in Christ. 

Thus passed the years 1869-1872. The years following, to 1876, 
were years of continued growth in grace and knowledge on the 
part of the handful of Bible students with whom I met in 
Allegheny. We progressed from our first crude and indefinite 
ideas of restitution to clearer understanding of the details; but 
God's due time for the clear light had not yet come. 

During this time, too, we came to recognize the difference 
between our Lord as "the man who gave himself," and as the 
Lord who would come again, a spirit being. We saw that spirit- 
beings can be present, and yet invisible to men, just as we still 
hold and have set forth in Millennial Dawn Vol. II., Chap. V. 



And we felt greatly grieved at the error of Second Adventists 
who were expecting Christ in the flesh, and teaching that the 
world and all in it except Second Adventists would be burned up 
in 1873 or 1874, whose time-settings and disappointments and 
crude ideas generally of the object and manner of his coming 
brought more or less reproach upon us and upon all who longed 
for and proclaimed his coming Kingdom. 

These wrong views so generally held of both the object and 
manner of the Lord's return led me to write a pamphlet-'T/ie 
Object and Manner of The Lord's Return," of which some 
50,000 copies were published. 

It was about January 1876, that my attention was specially drawn 
to the subject of prophetic time, as it relates to these doctrines 
and hopes. It came about in this way; I received a paper called 
The Herald of the Morning, sent by its editor, Mr. N. H. Barbour. 
When I opened it I at once identified it with Adventism from the 
picture on its Cover, and examined it with some curiosity to see 
what time they would next set for the burning of the world. But 
judge of my surprise and gratification, when I learned from its 
contents that the editor was beginning to get his eyes open on the 
subjects that for some years had so greatly rejoiced our hearts 
here in Allegheny-that the object of our Lord's return is not to 
destroy, but to bless all the families of the earth, and that his 
coming would be thief-like, and not in flesh, but as a spirit- 
being, invisible to men; and that the gathering of his Church and 
the separation of the "wheat" from the "tares" would progress in 
the end of this age without the world's being aware of it. 

I rejoiced to find others coming to the same advanced position, 
but was astonished to find the statement very cautiously set 
forth, that the editor believed the prophecies to indicate that the 
Lord was already present in the world (unseen and invisible), 
and that the harvest work of gathering the wheat was already 
due,-and that this view was warranted by the time-prophecies 
which but a few months before he supposed had failed. 

Here was a new thought: Could it be that the time prophecies 
which I had so long despised, because of their misuse by 
Adventists, were really meant to indicate when the Lord would 
be invisibly present to set up his Kingdom-a thing which I 
clearly saw could be known in no other way? It seemed, to say 
the least, a reasonable, a very reasonable thing, to expect that the 
Lord would inform his people on the subject-especially as he 
had promised that the faithful should not be left in darkness with 
the world, and that though the day of the Lord would come upon 
all others as a thief in the night (stealthily, unawares), it should 
not be so to the watching, earnest saints.-l Thess. 5:4. 



I recalled certain arguments used by my friend Jonas Wendell 
and other Adventists to prove that 1873 would witness the 
burning of the world, etc.-the chronology of the world showing 
that the six thousand years from Adam 

3H145 

ended with the beginning of 1873-and other arguments drawn 
from the Scriptures and supposed to coincide. Could it be that 
these time arguments, which I had passed by as unworthy of 
attention, really contained an important truth which they had 
misapplied? 

Anxious to learn, from any quarter, whatever God had to teach, I 
at once wrote to Mr. Barbour, informing him of my harmony on 
other points and desiring to know particularly why, and upon 
what Scriptural evidences, he held that Christ's presence and the 
harvesting of the Gospel age dated from the Autumn of 1874. 
The Answer—showed that my surmise had been correct, vis: that 
the time arguments, chronology, etc., were the same as used by 
Second Adventists in 1873, and explained how Mr. Barbour and 
Mr. J. H. Paton, of Michigan, a co-worker with him, had been 
regular Second Adventists up to that time; and that when the date 
1874 had passed without the world being burned, and without 
their seeing Christ in the flesh, they were for a time dumb- 
founded. They had examined the time-prophecies that had 
seemingly passed unfulfilled, and had been unable to find any 
flaw, and had begun to wonder whether the time was right and 
their expectations wrong,-whether the views of restitution and 
blessing to the world, which others were teaching, might not be 
the things to look for. It seems that not long after their 1874 
disappointment, a reader of the Herald of the Morning, who had 
a copy of the Diaglott, noticed something in it which he thought 
peculiar, -that in Matt. 24:27, 37, 39, the word which in our 
common version is rendered coming is translated presence. This 
was the clue; and, following it, they had been led through 
prophetic time toward proper views regarding the object and 
manner of the Lord's return. I, on the contrary, was led first to 
proper views of the object and manner of our Lord's return and 
then to the examination of the time for these things, indicated in 
God's Word. Thus God leads his children often from different 
starting points of truth; but where the heart is earnest and 
trustful, the result must be to draw all such together. 

But there were no books or other publications setting forth the 
time-prophecies as then understood, so I paid Mr. Barbour's 
expenses to come to see me at Philadelphia (where I had 
business engagements during the summer of 1 876), to show me 
fully and Scripturally, if he could, that the prophecies indicated 
1874 as the date at which the Lord's presence and "the harvest" 
began. He came, and the evidences satisfied me. Being a person 
of positive convictions and fully consecrated to the Lord, I at 
once saw that the special times in which we live have an 



important bearing upon our duty and work as Christ's disciples; 
that, being in the time of harvest, the harvest-work should be 
done; and that present truth was the sickle by which the Lord 
would have us do a gathering and reaping work everywhere 
among his children. 

I inquired of Mr. Barbour as to what was being done by him and 
by the Herald. He replied that nothing was being done; that the 
readers of the Herald, being disappointed Adventists, had nearly 
all lost interest and stopped their subscriptions; and that thus, 
with money exhausted, the Herald might be said to be practically 
suspended. I told him that instead of feeling discouraged and 
giving up the work since his newly found light on restitution (for 
when we first met, he had much to learn from me on the fullness 
of restitution based upon the sufficiency of the ransom given for 
all, as I had much to learn from him concerning time ), he 
should rather feel that now he had some good tidings to preach, 
such as he never had before, and that his zeal should be 
correspondingly increased. At the same time, the knowledge of 
the fact that we were already in the harvest period gave to me an 
impetus to spread the truth such as I never had before. I therefore 
at once resolved upon a vigorous campaign for the truth. 

I determined to curtail my business cares and give my time as 
well as means to the great harvest work. Accordingly, I sent Mr. 
Barbour back to his home, with money and instructions to 
prepare in concise book-form the good tidings so far as then 
understood, including the time features, while I closed out my 
Philadelphia business preparatory to engaging in the work, as I 
afterward did, traveling and preaching. 

The little book of 196 pages thus prepared was entitled The 
Three Worlds; and while it was not the first book to teach a 
measure of restitution, nor the first to treat upon time-prophecy, 
it was, we believe, the first to combine the idea of restitution 
with time-prophecy. From the sale of this book and from my 
purse, our traveling expenses, etc., were met. After a time I 
conceived the idea of adding another harvest laborer and sent for 
Mr. Paton, who promptly responded and whose traveling 
expenses were met in the same manner. 

But noticing how quickly people seemed to forget what they had 
heard, it soon became evident that while the meetings were 
useful in awakening interest, a monthly journal was needed to 
hold that interest and develop it. It therefore seemed to be the 
Lord's will that one of our number should settle somewhere and 
begin again the regular issuing of the Herald of the Morning. I 
suggested that Mr. Barbour do this, as he had experience as a 
type-setter and could therefore do it most economically, while 
Mr. Paton and I would continue to travel and contribute to its 
columns as we should find opportunity. To the objection that the 
type was now sold, and that the few subscriptions which would 
come in would not, for a long time, make the journal self- 



sustaining, I replied that I would supply the money for 
purchasing type, etc., and leave a few hundred dollars in bank 
subject to Mr. Barbour's check, and that he should manage it as 
economically as possible, while Mr. Paton and I continued to 
travel. This, which seemed to be the Lord's will in the matter, 
was done. 

It was after this, while on a tour of the New England states, that I 
met Mr. A. P. Adams, then a young Methodist minister, who 
became deeply interested and accepted the message heartily 
during the week that I preached to his congregation. 
Subsequently, I introduced him to little gatherings of interested 
ones in neighboring towns, and assisted otherwise, as I could, 
rejoicing in another one who, with study, would soon be a co- 
laborer in the harvest field. About this time, too, I was much 
encouraged by the accession of Mr. A. D. Jones, then a clerk in 
my employ in Pittsburgh-a young man of activity and promise, 
who soon developed into an active and appreciated co-laborer in 
the harvest work, and is remembered by some of our readers. Mr. 
Jones ran well for a time, 

3H146 

but ambition or something eventually worked utter shipwreck of 
his faith, and left us a painful illustration of the wisdom of the 
Apostle's words: "My brethren, be not many of you teachers, 
knowing that we shall have the severer judgment"-Jas. 3:1.- 
Diaglott. 

SIFTING THE WHEAT 

"Satan hath desired to have you, that he might sift you as 
wheat. "-Luke 22:31. 

Thus far all had run smoothly and onward: we had been greatly 
blessed with truth, but not specially tested in our love and 
fidelity to it. But with the Summer of 1878, the parallel in time 
to the Lord's crucifixion and his utterance of the above quoted 
words, the sifting began, which has continued ever since, and 
which must, sooner or later, test every one who receives the light 
of present truth. "Marvel not, therefore, concerning the fiery trial 
which shall try you, as though some strange thing happened unto 
you;" for this "fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it 
is"-whether he has built his faith flimsily of wood, hay and 
stubble, instead of with the valuable stones of God's revealed 
truth, or whether he has built it upon the shifting sands of human 
theory-evolution, etc., -or upon the solid rock, the ransom, the 
only sure foundation, which God has provided. They who build 
upon the rock shall be safe personally, even though they may 
have built up an illogical faith which the "fire" and shaking of 
this day of trial shall overthrow and utterly consume; but they 
who build upon any other foundation, whether they use good or 
bad materials, are sure of complete wreck.-Luke 6:47-49; 1 Cor. 
3:11-15. 



The object of this trial and sifting evidently is to select all whose 
heart-desires are unselfish, who are fully and unreservedly 
consecrated to the Lord, who are so anxious to have the Lord's 
will done, and whose confidence in his wisdom, his way and his 
Word is so great, that they refuse to be led away from the Lord's 
Word, either by the sophistries of others, or by plans and ideas of 
their own. These, in the sifting time, will be strengthened and 
shall increase their joy in the Lord and their knowledge of his 
plans, even while their faith is being tested by the falling into 
error of thousands on every hand.-Psa. 91:7. 

The sifting began thus: Regarding Paul's statement (1 Cor. 
15:51, 52), "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed- 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," etc., we still held the 
idea which Adventists, and indeed all Christians hold, that at 
some time the living saints would be suddenly and miraculously 
caught away bodily, thenceforth to be forever with the Lord. 
And, now, our acquaintance with time-prophecy led us to expect 
this translation of the saints at the point of time in this age 
parallel to the Lord's resurrection; for many of the parallelisms 
between the Jewish and Christian dispensations were already 
seen by us, and formed one of the features of the little book 
above referred to-The Three Worlds. 

We did not then see, as we now do, *that that date (1878) 
marked the time for the beginning of the establishment of the 
Kingdom of God, by the glorification of all who already slept in 
Christ, and that the "change" which Paul mentions (1 Cor. 15:51) 
is to occur in the moment of dying, to all the class described, 
from that date onward through the harvest period, until all the 
living members ("the feet") of the body of Christ shall have been 
changed to glorious spirit beings. But when at that date nothing 
occurred which we could see, a reexamination of the matter 
showed me that our mistake lay in expecting to see all the living 
saints changed at once, and without dying-an erroneous view 
shared in by the whole nominal church, and one which we had 
not yet observed or discarded. Our present clear view as the 
result of the examination thus started. I soon saw that in the 
Apostle's words, "We shall not all sleep, " the word sleep was 
not synonymous with die, though generally so understood; that, 
on the contrary, the expression sleep, here used, represents 
unconsciousness; and that the Apostle wished us to understand 
that from a certain time in the Lord's presence, his saints, 
though they would all die like other men (Psa. 82:6, 7), would 
not remain for any time unconscious, but in the moment of dying 
would be changed and would receive the spirit body promised. 
Throughout this Gospel age, dying has been followed by 
unconsciousness, "sleep." This continued true of all saints who 
"fell asleep in Jesus" up to the time when he took the office of 
King (Rev. 11:17), which we have shown* was in 1878. 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. Ill, chapter 7. *Millennial Dawn, 
Vol. II, pages 218, 219. 

Not only did the King at that date "awaken in his likeness" all 
the members of his body, the Church, who slept, but for the 
same reason (the time for establishing his Kingdom having 
come) it is no longer necessary that the "feet" or last remaining 
members should go into "sleep" or unconsciousness. On the 
contrary, each now, as he finishes his course, faithful unto death, 
will at once receive the crown of life, and, being changed in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, cannot be said to sleep, or to 
be unconscious at all. Here-1878-Rev. 14:13, is applicable, 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. " 

So this re-examination showed further light upon the pathway 
and became a good cause for encouragement, as evidencing the 
Lord's continued leading. 

But while I was thus helped to clearer views and brighter hopes, 
and while I diligently endeavored to help others, the Spring of 
1878 proved far from a blessing to Mr. Barbour and to many 
under his influence. Rejecting the plain, simple solution 
presented above, Mr. B. seemed to feel that he must of necessity 
get up something new to divert attention from the failure of the 
living saints to be caught away. 

But, alas! how dangerous it is for any man to feel too much 
responsibility and to attempt to force new light. To our painful 
surprise, Mr. Barbour soon after wrote an article for the Herald 
denying the doctrine of the atonement-denying that the death of 
Christ was the ransom-price of Adam and his race, saying that 
Christ's death was no more a settlement of the penalty of man's 
sins than would the sticking of a pin through the body of a fly 
and causing it suffering and death be considered by an earthly 
parent as a just settlement for misdemeanor in his child. I was 
astonished, supposing that Mr. B. had a clearer understanding of 
the work of Christ as our sin-offering, our willing Redeemer who 
gladly, co-operating in the divine plan, gave himself as the 
ransom or corresponding price to meet the penalty upon Adam, 
that Adam and all his posterity 

3H147 

might in due time go free from sin and death. A totally different 
thing indeed was the willing, intelligent, loving offering of our 
Redeemer, according to the plan devised and revealed by infinite 
wisdom, from the miserable caricature of it offered in the above 
illustration. I had either given Mr. B. credit for clearer views 
than he ever had, or else he was deliberately taking off and 
casting away the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness. The 
latter was the only conclusion left; for he afterward stated that he 
had previously recognized Christ's death as man's ransom-price. 



Immediately I wrote an article for the Herald in contradiction of 
the error, showing the necessity "that one die for all"-"the just 
for the unjust;" that Christ fulfilled all this as it had been written; 
and that consequently God could be just and forgive and release 
the sinner from the very penalty he had justly imposed. (Rom. 
3:26) I also wrote to Mr. Paton, calling his attention to the 
fundamental character of the doctrine assailed, and pointing out 
how the time and circumstances all corresponded with the 
parable of the one who took off the wedding garment when just 
about to partake of the wedding feast. (Matt. 22:11-14.) He 
replied that he had not seen it in so strong a light before, that Mr. 
Barbour had a strong, dogmatic way of putting things which had 
for the time overbalanced him. I urged that, seeing now the 
importance of the doctrine, he also write an article for the 
Herald, which, in no uncertain tone, would give his witness 
also for the precious blood of Christ. This he did. These articles 
appeared in the issues of the Herald from July to December, 
1878. 

It now became clear to me that the Lord would no longer have 
me assist financially, or to be in any way identified with, 
anything which cast any influence in opposition to the 
fundamental principle of our holy Christian religion; and I 
therefore, after a most careful though unavailing effort to reclaim 
the erring, withdrew entirely from the Herald of the Morning and 
from further fellowship with Mr. B. But a mere withdrawal I felt 
was not sufficient to show my continued loyalty to our Lord and 
Redeemer, whose cause had thus been violently assailed by one 
in position to lead the sheep astray-and in that position, too, very 
largely by my individual assistance and encouragement when I 
believed him to be, in all sincerity, true to the Lord. I therefore 
understood it to be the Lord's will that I should start another 
journal in which the standard of the cross should be lifted high, 
the doctrine of the ransom defended, and the good tidings of 
great joy proclaimed as extensively as possible. 

Acting upon the leading of the Lord, I gave up traveling, and in 
July, 1879, the first number of Zion's Watch Tower and Herald 
of Christ's Presence made its appearance. From the first, it has 
been a special advocate of the ransom, and by the grace of God 
we hope it will ever be. 

For a time we had a most painful experience: the readers of the 
TOWER and of the Herald were the same; and from the time the 
former started and the supply of funds from this quarter for the 
Herald ceased, Mr. B. not only drew from the bank the money 
deposited by me and treated all he had in his possession as his 
own, but poured upon the Editor of the Tower the vilest of 
personal abuse in order to prevent the Tower and the doctrine of 
the ransom from having due influence upon the readers. This of 
course caused a division, as such thing always do. The personal 
abuse, being regarded by some as true, had its intended effect of 



biasing the judgments of many on the subject of the ransom; and 
many turned from us. 

But the Lord continued his favor, which I esteem of more value 
than the favor of the whole world. It was at this time that Mr. 
Adams espoused the views of Mr. Barbour and likewise forsook 
the doctrine of the ransom. And, true to our interpretation of the 
parable of the wedding garment as given at the time, Mr. 
Barbour and Mr. Adams having cast off the wedding garment of 
Christ's righteousness, went out of the light into the outer 
darkness of the world on the subjects once so clearly seen- 
namely, the time and manner of the Lord's presence; and since 
then, for twelve years, they have been expecting Christ, Spring 
or Fall, down to the Spring of 1892, which was their latest 
disappointment, so far as we have heard. 

During the ordeal, or we might truly call it battle, for the cross of 
Christ, we had the earnest co-operation of Mr. Paton, who, up to 
the summer of 1881, was an appreciated co-laborer and defender 
of the doctrine of coming blessings through Christ, based upon 
the ransom for all given at Calvary. The book, The Three 
Worlds, having been for some time out of print, it seemed as if 
either another edition of that, or else a new book covering the 
same features, should be gotten out. Mr. Paton agreed to get it 
ready for the press, and Mr. Jones offered to pay all the expenses 
incident to its printing and binding and to give Mr. Paton as 
many copies of the book as he could sell, as remuneration for his 
time spent in preparing the matter, *provided I would agree to 
advertise it liberally and gratuitously in the TOWER-well 
knowing that there would be a demand for it if I should 
recommend it, and that his outlay would be sure to return with 
profit. (For those books did not sell at such low prices as we 
charge for MILLENNIAL DAWN.) I not only agreed to this, but 
contributed to Mr. Paton' s personal expenses in connection with 
the publishing, as well as paid part of the printer's bill at his 
solicitation. 

In the end, I alone was at any financial loss in connection with 
that book, called Day Dawn, the writer and publisher both 
being gainers financially, while I did all the introducing by 
repeated advertisements. We need to give these particulars, 
because of certain one-sided and only partial statements of facts 
and misrepresentations, which have recently been published and 
circulated in tract form by Mr. Paton, who is also now an 
advocate of that "other gospel" of which the cross of Christ is 
not the center, and which denies that he "bought us with his own 
precious blood." Mr. P. has since published another book, which, 
though called by the same name as the one we introduced, being 
on another and a false foundation, I cannot and do not 
recommend, but which I esteem misleading sophistry, tending to 
undermine the whole structure of the Christian system, yet 
retaining a sufficiency of the truths which we once held in 



common to make it palatable and dangerous to all not rooted and 
grounded upon the ransom rock. 

The false foundation which it presents is the old heathen doctrine 
of evolution revamped, which not only denies the fall of man, 
but as a consequence, all necessity for a redeemer. It claims, on 
the contrary that not by redemption and restitution to a lost 
estate, but by progressive evolution or 

3H148 

development, man has risen and is still to rise from the lower 
condition in which he was created until, by his own good works, 
he ultimately reaches the divine nature. It claims that our blessed 
Lord was himself a degraded and imperfect man, whose work on 
earth was to crucify a carnal nature, which, it claims, he 
possessed, and to thus show all men how to crucify their carnal 
or sinful propensities. 

*For this reason Mr. Jones' address, was, properly, the only one 
mentioned in our advertisement of it. 

'''Millennial Dawn, Vol. 1, page 162. 

And here we remark that the darkness and degradation which 
came upon the whole world in its fallen, cast-off condition, and 
which was only intensified by Papacy's priestcraft during the 
dark ages, when contrasted with the light of intelligence, which 
God is now letting in upon the world, have gradually led men to 
esteem present intelligence as merely a part of a process of 
evolution. This view, as we have shown, *though quite incorrect, 
is nevertheless the occasion of the predicted great falling away 
from the faith of the Bible during the harvest period. (Psa. 91:7.) 
And a few Christian people seem to be well enough grounded in 
the truth to be able to withstand this trial of the evil day, in 
which many will fall while only the few will stand. For this 
cause we use great plainness of speech. 

The little history of the way in which Mr. Paton came to turn 
from us and from the ransom, to oppose that which he once 
clearly saw and advocated, is important, as it became the 
occasion of another sifting or testing of the Watch Tower 
readers, by that time a much larger number (because Mr. Paton 
had been a respected brother and co-workers with us, and 
because as a traveling representative of the TOWER and its 
doctrines, his expenses being met in part by TOWER 
subscriptions and renewals, as well as by money from me, he 
was personally known to a larger number of the readers than 
was the editor of the Tower). It came about thus:- 

In the year 1881, Mr. Barbour, still publishing the Herald, and 
still endeavoring to overthrow the doctrine of the ransom, 
finding that on a preaching tour I had used a diagram of the 
Tabernacle to illustrate how Christ's sacrifice was typified in the 
sacrifices of typical Israel, wrote an article on the Atonement, in 



which he undertook to show that the sacrifices of the Day of 
Atonement typified almost anything else than what they do 
typify. I could readily see through the fallacy of his presentation, 
which made of the bullock a type of one thing in one verse and 
another thing in each other verse in which it was mentioned, and 
so too with the goat. But I well knew that people in general are 
not close reasoners, and that, with the cares of life upon them, 
they are too apt to accept a seeming interpretation, without a 
critical examination of the words of Scripture and their context. 

I thought the matter all over. I examined the chapter (Lev. 16), 
but while seeing the inconsistency and error of Mr. Barbour's 
interpretation, I could only confess that I did not understand it 
and could not give a connected interpretation which would fit all 
the details so plainly stated, and all of which must have a 
particular meaning. What could I do? Those reading the Herald 
as well as the TOWER would probably be misled if not helped 
out of the difficulty; and to merely say that the Herald's 
interpretation was inconsistent with itself, and therefore a 
misinterpretation, would be misunderstood. Many would surely 
think that I opposed that view from a spirit of rivalry; for there 
are always people with whom everything resolves itself into 
personality, rivalry and party spirit, and such cannot understand 
others who take a higher and nobler view and who think always 
and only of the truth, regardless of persons. 

I went to the Lord with this as with every trial, told him just how 
it seemed to me, how anxious I felt for the dear sheep, who, 
having their appetites sharpened by some truth, were by their 
very hunger exposed to Satan's deceptions. I told him that I 
realized that he was the Shepherd, and not I, but that I knew also 
that he would be pleased at my interest in the sheep and my 
desire to be his mouthpiece to declare the truth, the way and the 
life to them; that I felt deeply impressed that if the time had 
come for the permission of a false view to deceive the unworthy, 
it must also be his due time to have the truth on the same subject 
made clear, that the worthy ones might be enabled to stand, and 
not fall from the truth. Believing that the due time had come for 
the correct understanding of the meaning of the Jewish 
sacrifices, which all Christians see were typical of "better 
sacrifices," and that the Lord would grant the insight as soon as I 
got into the attitude of heart best fitted to receive the light, I 
prayed with confidence that if the Lord's due time had come, and 
if he were willing to use me as his instrument to declare the 
message to his dear family, that I might be enabled to rid my 
heart and mind of any prejudice that might stand in the way and 
be led of his spirit into the proper understanding. 

Believing that the prayer would be answered affirmatively, I 
went into my study next morning prepared to study and write. 
The forenoon I spent in scrutinizing the text and every other 
Scripture, likely to shed light upon it, especially the epistle to the 



Hebrews, and in looking to the Lord for wisdom and guidance; 
but no solution of the difficult passage came. The afternoon and 
evening were similarly spent, and all of the next day. Everything 
else was neglected, and I wondered why the Lord kept me so 
long; but on the third day near noon the whole matter came to 
me as clear as the noon-day sun-so clear and convincing and so 
harmonious with the whole tenor of Scripture, that I could not 
question its correctness; and no one has ever yet been able to 
find a flaw in it. (This has been published in several editions in 
pamphlet form under the title, "The Tabernacle Shadows Of The 
Better Sacrifices," and can still be had by addressing the Watch 
Tower office.) 

Then I knew why the Lord had led me to it so slowly and 
cautiously. I needed a special preparation of heart for the full 
appreciation of all it contained, and I was all the more assured 
that it was not of my own wisdom; for if of my own why would 
it not have come at once? I found that the understanding of that 
subject was bound to have a wide influence upon all our hopes 
and views of all truths-not in that it overturned old truths or 
contradicted them, but, on the contrary, in that it set them all in 
order and harmony and straightened out little knots and twists. 
For instance, the doctrine of justification by Faith had always 
been more or less confused in my mind, as it is in every mind, 
with the doctrine of sanctification which calls for self-sacrifice 

3H149 

and works. This was all made clear and plain at once; for the 
types showed that we all, as sinners, needed first of all Christ's 
ransom sacrifice, that we appropriate its merits (justification- 
forgiveness) to ourselves by faith, and that thus we are justified 
(reckoned free from sin) when we by faith accept of Christ's 
sacrifice on our behalf. The type showed, too, that it is only after 
being thus cleansed in God's sight (by our acceptance of Christ's 
finished work as our ransom-sacrifice) that God is willing to 
accept us as joint sacrifices with Christ, and that if faithful to the 
end, following in his footsteps, we should be granted the favor of 
joint-heirship with him. 

Here I first saw that the great privilege of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ and partakers with him of the divine nature was 
confined exclusively to those who would share with him in self- 
sacrifice in the service of the truth. And here, too, I saw for the 
first time that the Lord was the first of these sacrifices, the Sin- 
Offering; consequently, that none of God's servants, the 
prophets, who lived and died before Christ, were priests after his 
order, nor sharers in sacrifice with him, even though some of 
them were stoned, others sawn asunder and others slain with the 
sword, for the cause of God; that though they would get a good 
and great reward, they would belong to a separate class and order 
from those called to sacrifice and joint-heirship with Christ on 
and since Pentecost. Here, too, I first saw that the acceptable 



day of the Lord signifies this Gospel Age-the time during which 
he will accept the sacrifice of any who come unto God through 
Christ, the great Sin-Offering; that when this acceptable day 
ends, the reward of joint-heirship and change to the divine nature 
ends; and that when this great day of sacrifice, the Gospel age 
(the real day of Atonement), has closed, when all the members of 
the body of Christ have participated with him in the sacrifice of 
their rights as justified men, and been glorified, then the blessing 
will begin to come to the world-the Millennial blessings 
purchased for men by their Redeemer, according to the grace of 
God. 

This first brought us to a clear recognition of the distinction of 
natures-of what constitutes human nature, what constitutes 
angelic nature and what constitutes divine nature, as shown in 
Millennial Dawn, Vol. I, Chapter X. And whereas we formerly 
used the word Restitution in a general way to mean some sort of 
blessed change, now, under a clearer light, we began to see that 
the great work of restitution could only mean what the word 
implies-a restoration of that which was lost (Matt. 18: 1 1)— a 
restoration to the original condition from which man once fell. 
Then I saw that God's plan, when carried out, would not bring 
all his creatures to the one level of the divine nature, but that he 
purposed to have an order of creatures called Angels, who, 
though perfect, would always be of a different order, or nature, 
from the divine nature, and he likewise purposed to have a race 
of beings of the human nature, of whom Adam was a sample or 
pattern and whose future earthly home, Paradise, Eden was a 
sample or pattern. I also saw that God purposed that Christ and 
his joint-sacrificers and joint-heirs are to be God's instruments 
for blessing the fallen race and restoring them to the condition of 
perfection enjoyed by Adam in Eden-a condition which God 
said was "very good," and an image of himself. And these joint- 
heirs with Christ, I saw, were to be highly exalted to a nature 
higher than restored and perfect manhood, higher, too, than the 
angelic nature-even to be partakers of the divine nature. When 
all these things so unexpectedly shone out so brightly and 
clearly, I did not wonder that the Lord gave me several days of 
waiting and preparation for the blessing, and to him I rendered 
praise and thanks. All my faintness of heart and fear of the bad 
effect of the wrong view fled before this evidence of the Lord's 
leading in the pathway that "shines more and more unto the 
perfect day." I saw at once that these new developments would 
probably prove a stumbling block to some, as well as a great 
blessing to others who were ready for it. Instead, therefore, of 
publishing it in the next TOWER, I determined to first present 
the matter privately to the more prominent brethren;- 
remembering Paul's course in a similar matter-Gal. 2:2. 

Accordingly I sent invitations and the money necessary for 
traveling expenses to four of the more prominent brethren, 
requesting a conference. Mr. Paton from Michigan was one of 



the four, and the only one who rejected the fresh rays of light. 
Nor could he find any fault with the exegesis, though urged, as 
all were to state anything which might seem inconsistent, or to 
quote any passages of Scripture thought to be in conflict. But 
there were none; and every question only demonstrated more 
fully the strength of the position. I therefore urged that what was 
beyond the criticism of those most familiar with the plan of God 
must be the truth, and ought to be confessed and taught at any 
cost, and especially when it arranged and ordered all the other 
features of truth so beautifully. I pointed out, too, how necessary 
it was to a logical holding of the ransom, to see just what this 
showed; viz.: the distinctions of nature-that our Lord left a 
higher nature, and took a lower nature, when he was made flesh, 
and that the object in that change of nature was, that he might, as 
a man, a perfect man, give himself a ransom for the first perfect 
man, Adam, and thus redeem Adam, and all lost in him. I also 
showed how, as a reward for this great work, he was given the 
divine nature in his resurrect! on-a nature still higher than the 
glorious one he had left, when he became a man. But either Mr. 
Paton's mental vision or heart was weak; for he never took the 
step; and before long he, too, forsook the doctrine of the ransom. 
Yet he still used the word "ransom," while denying the idea 
conveyed by the word; nor can he give the word any other 
definition, or otherwise dispute the correctness of the meaning 
which we attach to it-which may be found in any English 
dictionary and is true to the significance of the Greek word 
which it translates. 

Notwithstanding our best endeavors to save him he drifted 
farther and farther away, until I was obliged to refuse his articles 
for the Tower for the same reason that obliged me to refuse to 
longer spend the Lord's money entrusted to me to assist Mr. 
Barbour to spread the same pernicious theory. 

It was about this time that Mr. Jones informed me that the copies 
of the book Day Dawn which I had purchased last were all that 
were left; and, announcing it so that no more orders for it might 
come to the TOWER office, I took occasion to promise 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, which 

3H150 

should present the Plan of the Ages in the clearer more orderly 
manner made possible by the new light shed upon every feature 
of it by the lessons from the Tabernacle. About this time Mr. 
Paton concluded that he would publish another book under the 
name Day Dawn, revised to harmonize with his changed views, 
which ignored the ransom, ignored justification and the need of 
either, and taught all men will be everlastingly saved-not in any 
sense as the result of any sacrifice for their sin by Christ, but as 
the result of each one's crucifying sin in himself-the law under 
which the poor Jew tried to commend themselves to God, but 
which justified none. Many and severe were the calumnies 



heaped upon me, because I exposed this change, told that the 
original was out of print and that the new book was on a 
different foundation from the one I commended. 

During this time I was busied by an immense work known to 
many of you-the issue and circulation of over 1,400,000 copies 
of two pamphlets, entitled FOOD FOR THINKING 
CHRISTIANS and TABERNACLE TEACHINGS, whose united 
matter was about the same as that of Dawn, Vol. 1; and besides 
this I was flooded with thousands of joyous and joy-giving 
letters, from those who had received and were reading the 
pamphlets thus distributed, and asking questions and more 
reading matter. To add to our throng, financial complications 
came; and thus for four years I was hindered from fulfilling my 
promise of Millennial Dawn. Nor will our promise of the 
complete set be fulfilled for some time yet; for though three 
volumes are now out and a fourth on the way, I purpose several 
more, as the Lord shall give grace and strength, in connection 
with the other features of his work entrusted to my care. But 
during those four years we were struggling through an immense 
amount of labor and many draw-backs (all cheerfully 
undergone for the sake of the Lord and his saints), and each year 
we hoped afresh to be able to gather the hours necessary to 
complete the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. And the 
same great Adversary of the truth still hinders each volume-the 
fourth volume being now retarded by these latest agencies of 
Satan-the conspirators. 

Some who have The Three Worlds or the old edition of Day 
Dawn would perhaps like to know my present opinion of them- 
whether I still think them profitable books to loan to truth- 
seekers. To this I reply, Certainly not; because the very immature 
views of God's truth therein presented fall far short of what we 
now see to be God's wonderful plan. Things which are now clear 
as noonday were then cloudy and mixed. The distinctions 
between the perfect human nature to which the obedient of the 
world will be restored during the Millennium, and the divine 
nature to which the little flock, the sacrificing elect of the Gospel 
age, are soon to be exalted, were then unnoticed. All now so 
clear was then blurred, mixed and indistinct. Neither had we then 
seen the steps or planes, shown upon the Chart of the Ages, 
Millennial Dawn, Vol. I, which have assisted so many to 
distinguish between justification and sanctification, and to 
determine their present standing and relationship to God. 

And the time reckonings which those books present, lacking 
point and leaving the reader in doubt as to what the author is 
attempting to prove by them, tend only to confuse the mind and 
to give the impression that time prophecies are merely clues and 
serve no definite purpose or object. Hence, I Answer— most 
decidedly, I would not recommend nor use either of those books 
to-day. Once I was much less careful about what I circulated or 



commended, but I am learning every day to be more careful as to 
what sort of food I put before any of the Lord's hungry sheep. 
The Lord has taught me that it is a responsible matter to be a 
teacher, even to the extent of circulating a book or a paper. Even 
Food for Thinking Christians (now also out of print), I no longer 
commend because it is less systematic and therefore less clear 
than later publications. 

Another chapter in our experience needs to be told, as it marks 
another shaking and sifting. Mr. A. D. Jones proposed to start a 
paper on the same line as the WATCH TOWER, to republish 
some of the simpler features of God's plan and to be a sort of 
missionary and primary teacher. Knowing him to be clear on the 
subject of the ransom, I bade him God speed and introduced a 
sample copy of his paper, Zion's Day Star (now for some years 
discontinued), to our nearly ten thousand readers-only, as it soon 
proved, to stumble some of them into rank infidelity and others 
into the rejection of the ransom; for though the Day Star for a 
few months steered a straight course and maintained the same 
position as the Tower with reference to the ransom, and for the 
same reason refused the no-ransom articles sent for its columns 
by Mr. Paton, yet within one year it had repudiated Christ's 
atoning sacrifice, and within another year it had gone boldly into 
infidelity and totally repudiated all the rest of the Bible as well as 
those portions which teach the fall in Adam and the ransom 
therefrom in Christ. 

All this meant another strain, another sifting, another cutting 
loose of friends, who erroneously supposed that our criticisms of 
the false doctrines were prompted by a spirit of rivalry, and who 
did not so soon see whither his teachings were drifting, nor how 
great the importance of holding fast the first principles of the 
doctrines of Christ-how Christ died for our sins and rose again 
for our justification. 

This brings the history down close enough perhaps to the present 
time; but we want to put you all on notice that the shaking and 
sifting process, so far from being over and past, is bound to 
progress more and more until all have been tried and tested 
thoroughly. It is not a question of who may fall,but of "Who 
shall be able to stand?" as the apostle puts it. And we have need 
again to remember the admonition, "Let him who thinketh he 
standeth (who feels very confident, as did Peter when he said 
v Lord, though all deny thee, yet will not I') take heed lest he 
fall." 

This doctrine of another way of salvation (and salvation for all, 
too) than by the cross of Christ, is not only the error which is, 
and has been since 1874, sifting all who come into the light of 
present truth, but it is the trial that is to come upon the whole of 
so-called Christendom to try them. (Rev. 3:10.) It is already 
spreading among all classes of Christian people, especially 
among ministers of all denominations. The number who believe 



that Christ's death paid our sin-penalty is daily getting smaller, 
and before very long 

3H151 

there will be a regular stampede from the doctrine of man's fall 
in Adam and his ransom from that fall by "the man Christ 
Jesus." (1 Tim. 2:5,6.) As the Psalmist prophetically pictured it, 
a thousand will fall to one who will stand.-Psa. 91:7. 

The time has come for each one to declare himself boldly. He 
who is not for the cross and the ransom there effected is against 
it! He that gathereth not scattereth abroad! He who is silent on 
this subject, when it is being assailed by foes on every hand, 
whether it be the silence of fear, or of shame, or of indifference, 
is not worthy of the truth, and will surely be one to stumble 
quickly. He who from any cause sits idly by, while the banner of 
the cross is assailed, is not a soldier of the cross worthy of the 
name, and will not be reckoned among the over-comers who 
shall inherit all things. And God is permitting these very siftings, 
in order to sift out all who are not "over-comers," and to test and 
manifest the little flock, who, like Gideon's final army, will, 
though few, share the victory and honors of their Captain in 
glory. 

Are you prepared for the issue, dear brethren and sisters? The 
armor of truth has been given you for some time past; have you 
put it on? have you made it your shield and buckler? your 
defense against all the wily arts of the evil one? 

Do not be deceived by the agents he often makes use of. In this 
he will be as cunning as in his presentation of the deceptive 
misrepresentations of truth, making unwitting use of many a 
weaker brother, and to some extent of every stumbling and 
deceived one, to spread farther the infection of false doctrine. 
And while every child of God should take earnest heed, that he 
prove not an occasion of stumbling to any, we cannot doubt that 
every one, through some instrumentality, will be assailed. 

Aptly indeed did the Prophet liken it to a pestilence. (Psa. 91:6.) 
A pestilence spreads because people are in a physical condition 
which renders them susceptible to disease. Physicians say that 
those whose systems are in good, healthy order are in little 
danger of any disease. So it is with a spiritual pestilence: it will 
flourish not only because all will be exposed to it who have not a 
clear intellectual appreciation of the doctrines of Christ, but from 
another cause also. Out of the heart are the issues of life, and 
most needful of all to be in right condition is the heart. How is 
your heart? is it proud, boastful, independent, self-conscious and 
self-willed? If so, take care; you will be very liable to this 
epidemic, no matter how far from it you may seem to be. Pray 
for 



"A heart resigned, submissive, meek, 
The dear Redeemer's throne, 
Wire re only Christ is heard to speak, 
Where Jesus reigns alone. " 

With such a heart you are safe. In meekness and lowliness, you 
will never think of redeeming yourself from the condemnation 
that you inherited through Adam, by sacrificing present sinful 
desires, but you will flee to the cross, where God himself opened 
the fountain for sin and uncleanness, present as well as past. 

DOTH THIS OFFEND YOU 

We presume that it will offend some, though it is not designed to 
offend any. It is written for the defense of the meek against the 
sophistries of error. "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord 
(into the Kingdom offered)? or who shall stand in his holy place? 
He that hath clean hands and a pure heart (who is diligently 
fashioning his life after the principles of holiness); who hath not 
lifted up his soul unto vanity (who cultivates no earthly 
ambitions or pride, but patiently waits for the glory to follow the 
course of present self-sacrifice), nor sworn deceitfully (ignoring 
or despising his covenant with God): He shall receive the 
blessing of the Lord (the Kingdom glory and joint-heirship with 
Christ), and righteousness (perfection-full deliverance from 
present infirmities, etc.) from the God of his salvation." (Psa. 
24:3-5.) "Seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall 
be hid in the day of the Lord's anger (in this "evil day'-this day 
of snares and pitfalls and flying arrows and destructive 
pestilences)." "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into 
temptation"-that "your minds be not corrupted from the 
simplicity that is in Christ." Let all the meek fully awake to the 
trial of the hour; and while many are putting stumbling blocks in 
the way of the "feet" of the body of Christ, let each soldier of the 
cross be vigilant, not only to stand, but to assist others-bearing 
up the "feet." -Psa. 91:11,12 

A CONCLUDING WORD 

It is proper here to state that in the article foregoing, A 
Conspiracy Exposed, we used the term "brother" with reference 
to the conspirators in deference to our readers. We have not 
recognized these men as "brethren" since we discovered their 
deeply laid and murderous plan for the assassination of my 
character. But we could not expect our readers to cut them off 
from fellowship until they too had seen the evidence of their 
terrible fall. 

While ready and anxious to forgive and, so far as possible, forget 
their great sin if repented of, I have little hope that any of them 
will repent. If it were a blunder of the head, we might have hope; 
but it seems like a disease of the heart, which has been 
developing for years. 



Their reaping will correspond to their sowing. The fruitage of 
their malice, envy and misrepresentation will surely be a 
whirlwind of evil, which will damage others as well as 
themselves. 

What can be expected from such men, actuated by such a spirit? 
Grapes cannot be gathered from thorn-bushes. The Voice of the 
Reaper may indeed "gather out of his Kingdom the things 

which offend and them that do iniquity;" but the Voice of the 
Good Shepherd will lead the true sheep,-a stranger they will not 
follow. "The Lord knoweth them that are his," and no man can 
pluck them out of his hand;-they "shall never fall. "-John 10:28; 
2 Tim. 2:17-21; 2 Pet. 1:5-11. 

3H152 

Tower Publishing Co., Allegheny, Pa. 

THREE DISCOURSES 

EXPLANATORY OF 

THE CHART OF THE AGES 

Dear Friends, we are met together as a company of the Lord's 
people-all interested, we trust, in God's great Plan of Salvation- 
THE PLAN OF THE AGES. From the fact of our presence here 
we assume that all accept the Bible as God's Word. We will 
consider now such portions of the Word as outline the DIVINE 
PLAN OF THE AGES. Our talk on the Plan of God will be 
illustrated by this Chart. The Chart is designed as an aid to the 
mind through the eye in grasping the subjects to be presented. 

We believe in the old theology of the Lord and the Apostles and 
Prophets. We have no new thing to present to you-no plan or 
theory of our own; and we do not wish you to receive anything 
that the speaker says simply because he has said it,but because 
he has shown it to you in the Word of the Lord. Much that we 
have to say we trust you will recognize as old and familiar truths, 
while some things will be recognized as truths forgotten or 
overlooked or never noticed heretofore; but we believe that all 
will be ready to accept without equivocation whatever shall be 
shown from the Scriptures to be the Word of the Lord-whatever 
has been "written for our learning," as the Apostle suggests.- 
Rom. 15:4 

It is in order that we may be "thoroughly furnished" that we are 
told to "search the Scriptures" (John 5:39); and if we wish to be 
wise toward God, we must come as learners and receive the 
instruction which God gives us in His Word, which is "able to 
make us wise unto salvation," with the "Wisdom that cometh 
down from Above." (2 Tim. 3:15; James 3:17,18.) We want to 
put on the "whole Armor of God."-Eph. 6: 1 1 



page 130 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



page 130 

YOUR LETTER RECEIVED,-THANKS! 



Please accept our thanks for your hundreds 
of letters received recently, and know of our 
hearty appreciation of your sympathy and confidence. 
The fact that you were slow to believe 
an evil report, and that you waited 
patiently for our reply, speaks well for your 
spiritual condition;— "thinketh no evil," being 
one of the fruits of the spirit of Christ, just 
as "evil surmisings" evidence a carnal mind. 
Cultivate in yourselves more and more the 
spirit of the truth you enjoy. So your hearts 
will be in that healthy condition which neither 
breeds a spiritual pestilence, nor is susceptible 
to its contagion from others. 

Our thoughts were more with you than for 
ourselves, we feared for the younger and the 



weaker ones, and prayed for you all,— that 
your faith fail not, and that you cast not away 
your confidence which hath great recompense 
of reward. The letters referred to came as 
answers to our prayers, as assurances that the 
Lord knoweth them that are his and that none 
are able to pluck them out of his hand. Sister 
Tucker's letter came first, and was specially 
acknowledged at the throne of grace. This 
trial by which the great Adversary sought to 
disrupt the Lord's work and scatter the Lord's 
sheep is really drawing the true hearts nearer 
to each other and to the Lord. We realize 
afresh that all things are working together for 
good to them that love God, the called ones 
according to his purpose. The Lord will not 
forget this, your ministry of love toward us. 
(See Heb. 6: 10; 10:32-39.) Even a cup of 
cold water given in the name of a disciple will 
in due time receive a reward from the King. 
Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of 
his disciples, ye did it unto him. 

Please accept this as a reply to your kind 
letters, as we are just now pressed with work, 
cannot conveniently answer each personally. 

WALL CHARTS FIVE FEET LONG. 

We contracted with a first-class painter, 
during his dull season last winter, for one hundred 
copies of The Chart of the Ages on cloth, 
five feet long, mounted on a spring roller, 
suitable for little parlor gatherings. These 
would ordinarily cost about $5.00 each, for the 
painting alone, but by reason of the quantity, 
etc.,— we are enabled to offer them to you at 
$ 1 .50 each, delivered, at your nearest Express 
office. 



Please remember that Canadian and all 
other Foreign stamps are useless to us. 



R1647:page 131 
