VOL. XIII. JANUARY 15, 1892. NO. 2. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THINGS TO COME-AND THE PRESENT EUROPEAN SITUATION. 

"The Spirit of truth. ..will guide you into all truth, 
...and will show you things to come."— John 16:13. 

While a part of the work of the Holy Spirit, 
or Spirit of Truth, is to guide the children of 
God into a clear apprehension of present duty 
and privilege and to give them such knowledge 
of things past as is needful, another of its 
offices is here stated to be that of showing them 



"things to come;" for the things to come, as 

well as things past and present, are of great importance 

to the Church. Such knowledge is not 

given merely to gratify curiosity, but for a definite 

and worthy purpose. It is wisely hidden 

from the merely curious and graciously revealed 

to the meek disciple who seeks to know the 

divine mind more perfectly, in order that he 

may the more fully conform to it. 

It is only such truth seekers that are ever rewarded 
with the knowledge of the things to 
come and of the relationship of things past and 
present to those which are yet future— or, in 
other words, who ever come to see the beauty 
and harmony of divine truth as a system. The 
scoffing skeptic may diligently search the divine 
oracles, but he never finds the truth until he 
comes with reverence and humility as a meek 
disciple. He reads the wonders of divine revelation 
in a disjointed way, but cannot systematize 
or comprehend them. And even if God's 
children set them forth systematically, they are 
to him foolishness: he cannot receive them. 
Nor can any man retain this divine truth after 
he has found it, unless he retain the meek spirit 
in which he first received it, which also implies 
the right and diligent use of it. 

This privilege of being shown things to come 
is granted in order, first, that we may not be 
overwhelmed with fear and discouragement at 
the seeming calamities of the future; secondly, 
that we may be co-workers together with God 
in harmony with his plan; and thirdly, in order 
that, seeing our future relationship to that plan, 
we may be fully prepared to enter into that new 
relationship and its duties and privileges. 

The Scriptures give unmistakable testimony 
to those who have full faith in its records, that 
there is a great time of trouble ahead of the 
present comparative calm in the world— a trouble 
which will embroil all nations, overthrow 
all existing institutions, civil, social and religious, 
bring about a universal reign of anarchy 
and terror, and prostrate humanity in the very 
dust of despair, thus to make them ready to appreciate 
the power that will bring order out of 
that confusion and institute the new rule of 
righteousness. All this, the Scriptures show us, 
is to come to pass before the year 1915 (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter IV.)-that 
is, within the next twenty three years. And in 
view of these calamities the Lord's consecrated 
ones are told not to be alarmed, knowing what 
the grand outcome is to be. 

All thinking men, whether they have faith in 
the Word of prophecy or not, see in the present 



attitude of mankind in general a growing 
tendency which threatens such a culmination, 

R1354 : page 20 

and they stand in fear and dread of it. As a 

consequence, the daily papers and the weeklies 

and monthlies, religious and secular, are continually 

discussing the prospects of war in Europe. 

They note the grievances and ambitions 

of the various nations and predict that war is 

inevitable at no distant day, that it may begin 

at any moment between some of the great powers, 

and that the prospects are that it will 

eventually involve them all. And they picture 

the awful calamity of such an event in view of 

the preparations made for it on the part of every 

nation. For several years past thoughtful observers 

have said, War cannot be kept off much 

longer: it must come soon— "next spring," 

"next summer," "next fall," etc. 

But, notwithstanding these predictions and 
the good reasons which many see for making 
them, we do not share them. That is, we do 
not think that the prospects of a general European 
war are so marked as is commonly supposed. 
True, all Europe is like a great powder 
magazine which a single stray match might set 
off at any moment with a tremendous explosion. 
The various nations are armed to the teeth with 
the most destructive weapons that skill and ingenuity 
can invent, and there are national 
grievances and bickerings and hatred that must 
find a vent some time; and in consideration of 
these things the war cloud is always impending 
and ever darkening: but things may continue 
just so for many years, and we think they will. 

These rumors of impending European wars, 
and the desire to judge whether observation 
would tend to confirm the divine revelation that 
the intensity of the great predicted trouble is yet 
nearly fifteen years future, formed no small part 
of our motive in visiting Europe during the past 
summer. With this object in view, and especially 
to be enabled to form some estimate of 
the social conditions of the people, which always 
have much to do with war probabilities, 
we pursued a very different course from that 
usual to European tourists. 

We paid more attention to the towns, villages, 
cities, and especially to the poorer quarters, 
than to the lakes, cathedrals and art galleries. 
That you may know that our observations were 
not confined to any one corner of Europe, we 
will state that our journey carried us over more 
than four thousand miles of those portions of 



Europe expected by so many to be the battlefield 
of the world within a year, viz., 900 miles 
in Italy, 500 miles in Austria, 900 miles in Russia, 
and 1800 miles in Germany and France. 

As for war, it is the talk of everybody in Germany, 
Austria, Russia, Italy and France. And 
all seemed agreed that if it did not break out 
this fall it would surely come by next spring. 
All seem ready for what they consider the inevitable. 
In Germany every man is a soldier; 
and wonderful soldiers they seem to be: every 
thing is done with military precision, the influence 
of the last twenty years of military methods 
extending into every department of life, 
business, etc. And, by the way, we experienced 
quite a change of view with reference to 
this matter of German military influence. We 
had heretofore considered as an almost unmixed 
evil the taking of hundreds of thousands of men 
from the tilling of the soil to spend four years 
each in the prime of life in military service; 
but now we see another side to the question. 
While the taking away of so much of the energy 
and muscle of a nation from the army of 
production into an army of consumption has 
been to the detriment of the nation financially 
for the present and to the greater bondage of 
the women of Germany who do most of the 
farming, it has been the greatest and most 
rapid educator of the men of that nation, and 
thus, under divine providence, an instrumentality 
for awakening the world and preparing for 
the great change of dispensation about to be 
inaugurated. 

It has taken sleepy, thoughtless boys from the 
farm and has waked them up and educated 
them, often to far more practical benefit than 
four years of a college course would have done. 
As a result, one seldom meets a stupid German. 
And this same rule seems to hold in other 
countries in proportion to their strictness in 
military regulations. France, Austria and Italy 
follow the lead of Germany in military education, 
although far behind her. Italy, however, 
is awaking more rapidly than other nations. 
She has adopted the German military system in 
full, and the influence of this measure is already 

R1354:page21 

seen and felt. The German military system, 
it may be as new to others as it was to us 
to learn, is not alone a system of military 
drilling and physical disciplining, but also a 
schooling in the common branches of education. 
The men do not idle and dream away their 



time, except when on dress parade, but have 
regular hours for lessons under well educated 
instructors. 

The effect of this general education may be 
imagined: the people are awake to an appreciation 
of their rights in a way and to a degree 
that no one would have suspected but a short 
time ago, when the German brain was generally 
credited with being rather slow and sluggish. 
No other nation on earth is so fully awake now. 

This general awakening of the masses to a 
knowledge of their rights and their power, it 
might be argued, is one of the chiefest reasons 
for fearing the great time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation, spoken of in the 
Scriptures as one of the results of the present 
increase of knowledge which will eventuate in 
anarchism, and prepare the way for the Kingdom 
of Heaven. 

Yes, this is true; but there are modifying circumstances, 
not generally considered, which will 
hinder this from having its full effect for some 
time to come. These modifications are as 
follows:— 

First, the various states of Germany, once independent, 
are now not only united, but that 
union is cemented by a patriotic feeling which 
would sacrifice much rather than see the present 
empire, of which they all feel proud, destroyed. 
They would therefore bear much rather than see 
it disturbed. 

Secondly, the Germans are a cautious people: 
they know that their present government is as 
good as the average, at least, and that they are 
surrounded by enemies, and they will be extremely 
slow to take chances on a change such 
as would be implied by the word Revolution. 

R1355 : page 21 

Thirdly, the present government and Emperor 
are very popular. The last ten years have 
witnessed for the masses a great social and financial 
elevation; laws have been enacted for 
the protection, and gradually for the betterment, 
of the poorer classes; and the present 
Emperor has very wisely addressed himself to 
various liberal reforms for their amelioration. 

Our judgment therefore is that, so long as 
these conditions prevail, Germany can control 
the anarchistic or lawless elements within her 
borders, and is not likely to experience a social 
revolution for some years to come. 

Germany's military preparation is so well 
known to the leading statesmen of Europe that 
no nation is likely to seek a quarrel with her; 



and her strain to keep up her present standard 
is so great that she wants no increase of it 
such as war would bring. Hence, with Austria 
and Italy in league and largely in the same 
plight and under her influence, Germany is today, 
humanly speaking, the arbiter of the 
world's peace. 

Furthermore, we found that throughout Europe 
the social conditions are much better than we 
had expected to find them. Indeed, the houses 
occupied by the poorest class, except in southern 
Russia, compare favorably with the dwellings 
of a similar class in this country; and we 
know of localities here in Pittsburgh which are 
as dilapidated in appearance as any tenements 
observed on our journey— not even excepting 
the slums of London, Liverpool, Edinburgh and 
Glasgow, which are the worst we saw in Europe, 
Russia alone excepted. 

The people are generally intelligent, industrious, 
busy and comfortably clothed and fed- 
far beyond our previous suppositions. We could 
not help wondering whence come some of 
the worst specimens of all races to this country 
as emigrants. Evidently the people of the 
United States are performing a service of inestimable 
value to the whole world in receiving their 
scum of ignorance and their dregs of degradation 
—both due more to evils of the past than to 
those of the present, and chiefly chargeable to 
priestcraft, superstition and ignorance fostered 
for centuries by that old "Mother of Harlots," 
which falsely claims to be the Church-system 
founded by our Lord and his apostles. The 
wonder often is that, with almost no assistance 
except the necessity and opportunity for industry, 
so many of these degraded members of the 
human family turn out as favorably as they do. 
What a field here at our door for mission workers, 

R1355 : page 22 

evangelists and philanthropists— better, if 

they but realized it, than any foreign mission 

field we saw. And these emigrants, let us remember, 

although generally poor, are not always 

either ignorant or vicious. Some of them 

are God's consecrated saints whom he is sending 

here to be blessed and sealed with present 

truth, which he gives us the privilege of ministering 

to them. 

True, the food of the lower classes of Europe 
would not be satisfactory to the average mechanic 
and laborer in the United States, who, 
accustomed to larger pay and unaccustomed to 
frugality, spends probably six times as much on 



his stomach, eating not only finer and more 

nutritious foods, but also much more of them, 

and wasting often through improvidence as much 

as or more than he eats. However, the European 

laborer seems to enjoy himself as much 

as or more than his artisan brother here, and on 

the whole there is more of an appearance of contentment 

on the faces of all the people there— 

the poor, the middle class and the rich— than 

on faces met in the streets here. 

Intelligence without the grace of God to back 
it up brings discontent: only when it is backed 
by godliness, does it bring contentment, peace 
and joy. For this reason it is that the greater 
general intelligence and greater liberty of the 
people of the United States bring them, not 
more contentment, but less than their less favorably 
circumstanced European brothers. And 
this leads us to expect as stirring times in the 
United States as elsewhere when the "time of 
trouble" shall reach its height. 

While the growing intelligence of Europeans is 
fast preparing them for the trouble and anarchy 
which God's Word predicts, it cannot reasonably 
be expected for some years yet. This is 
further in harmony with prophecy, though out 
of harmony with the expectations of many who 
look every day for a declaration of war in Europe, 
which they suppose will be the battle of the 
great day of God Almighty. Even should a 
war or revolution break out in Europe sooner 
than 1905, we could not consider it any portion 
of the severe trouble predicted. At most it 
could only be a forerunner to it, a mere "skirmish" 
as compared with what is to come. Indeed, 
in our judgment, based upon our observations, 
nothing could precipitate the great anarchistic 
trouble upon Europe, which the Scriptures 
predict, sooner than the date named, except 
a famine or some such unusual occurrence 
which would bring the people to feel that they 
have nothing to lose, but all to gain, by a general 
uprising. 

While it was an agreeable surprise to us (in 
view of the contrary sensational accounts so often 
published) to find the situation in Europe 
as we here describe it— in harmony with what 
the Scriptures had led us to expect— yet so 
great is our confidence in the Word of God and 
in the light of present truth shining upon it, 
that we could not have doubted its testimony 
whatever had been the appearances. The date 
of the close of that "battle" is definitely 
marked in Scripture as October, 1914. It is already 
in progress, its beginning dating from 
October, 1874. Thus far it has been chiefly a 



battle of words and a time of organizing forces 
—capital, labor, armies and secret societies. 

Never was there such a general time of banding 
together as at present. Not only are nations 
allying with each other for protection against 
other nations, but the various factions in every 
nation are organizing to protect their several 
interests. But as yet the various factions are 
merely studying the situation, testing the strength 
of their opponents, and seeking to perfect their 
plans and power for the future struggle, which 
many, without the Bible's testimony, seem to 
realize is the inevitable. Others still delude 
themselves, saying, Peace! Peace! when there 
is no possibility of peace until God's Kingdom 
comes into control, compelling the doing of his 
will on earth as it is now done in heaven. 

This feature of the battle must continue with 
varying success to all concerned; the organization 
must be very thorough; and the final 
struggle will be comparatively short, terrible 
and decisive— resulting in general anarchy. In 
many respects the convictions of the world's 
great generals coincide with the predictions of 
God's Word. Then "Woe to the man or nation 
who starts the next war in Europe; for it 
will be a war of extermination." It will be 
abetted not only by national animosities, but 

R1355 : page 23 

also by social grievances, ambitions and animosities, 
and if not brought to an end by the 
establishment of God's Kingdom in the hands 
of his elect and then glorified Church, it would 
exterminate the race.— Matt. 24:22. 

THE CHURCH'S SHARE IN THE BATTLE. 



The Scriptures show also that the battle of 
the great day will begin with the Church of 
God, and that the overthrow of the great nominal 
church systems will precede the overthrow 
of the present civil powers; for the Lord is 
about to shake, not only the earth (the civil 
organization of society), but heaven (the ecclesiastical 
powers) also (Heb. 12:26), to the end 
that great "Babylon," falsely called Christendom 
—Christ's kingdom— may be completely 
destroyed. The great counterfeit kingdom of 
Christ, with all its allied civil and ecclesiastical 
powers, must go down as a great millstone into 
the sea, preparatory to the final establishment 
of the true Kingdom of Christ. Here, as in 



the world at large, the work of preparation is 
going on. The creeds, which for years have 
been reverenced and received without questioning, 
are now called up for inspection; and their 
inconsistencies and lack of Bible foundation is 
being discovered. As a consequence, the clergy, 
whose living and honors and worldly prospects 
in general are all bound up with the systems 
held together by these creeds, are in great 
trouble, and are looking about to see what can 
be done to strengthen the stakes and lengthen 
the cords of so-called Christianity. A general 
union of the various sects is suggested, 
with a simple creed formulated from the various 
points of agreement among them all and 
the ignoring of all other points of doctrine to 
which objection might be made by some. 

This scheme meets with very general approval 
from all the sects, and the trend of their 
efforts is in this direction. This, too, is in harmony 
with prophecy, which shows, not only 
that the various sects of "Protestantism" will 
band together as one, but that there will also 
be a close affiliation with Roman Catholicism. 
These two ends of the ecclesiastical heaven will 
roll together as a scroll (Isa. 34:4), the two 
rolls, Protestantism and Romanism, coming 
closer and closer together as their power over 
the masses of the people decreases. 

This work is already progressing very rapidly: 
church congresses for the consideration of 
various schemes of union are the order of the 
day. All the various branches of Presbyterianism 
are considering the feasibility of union; so 
also of Methodism, Congregationalism, and 
others. When each of these is consolidated, 
their respective denominations will have a greater 
prestige in the world; and when all Protestant 
sects are more firmly united under some one 
name, such as "The Evangelical Alliance," the 
prestige of Protestantism as a whole will be greatly 
augmented, though we think the term Protestantism 
will probably be dropped entirely as a 
concession to the church of Rome, to secure its 
favor. Such an organization is already in existence, 

R1356 : page 23 

and corresponds to what the Revelator 

calls "the Image of the Beast" (of Papacy); but 

this Image has yet to receive life and power to 

speak with authority to the civil powers, which 

authority will be used for the oppression and 

suppression of all that is opposed to them. (Rev. 13:15.) 

All this remains to be accomplished 

before the trouble upon the world can reach its 



crisis; for when men begin to realize more fully 
the united power of ecclesiasticism to oppress 
and fetter free thought and action, and when 
under the searching light of this day they shall 
have discovered the hollowness of its pretensions, 
we can readily see what the results will be- 
viz., a sudden and terrible overthrow, as the 
Scriptures predict. And when its present power 
of superstitious reverence is broken, and its 
authority no longer binds men in subjection to 
the civil powers by the false doctrine of the divine 
right of kings, the fate of the civil powers 
will not long tremble in the balances, and the 
ever-darkening war cloud will burst in all its 
destructive fury. This culmination we do not 
expect, however, before about 1905, as the 
events predicted will require about that time, 
notwithstanding the rapid progress in these directions 
now possible. 

It is written that judgment must begin at the 
house of God (1 Pet. 4:17), and here it has 
begun. Trials for heresy of many of the most 
prominent clerics of the various denominations 

R1356 : page 24 

have raised the questions, What is heresy? and 
what is orthodoxy? and before these questions 
are settled, every creed of Christendom will be 
brought before the bar of the public judgment. 

"A THOUSAND SHALL FALL AT THY SIDE." 



But while judgment has thus begun at the 
nominal house of God and has been in progress 
for some years past, it had a still earlier beginning 
among those consecrated saints who have 
been coming out of Babylon for the last fourteen 
years, and whom the Lord has been graciously 
leading into the knowledge of the deep 
things of his wisdom and grace. It is right 
that these prospective joint-heirs of God's kingdom 
should be fully tested before its establishment, 
before being permitted to enter into their 
reward; and consequently the Lord has permitted 
and will permit our great adversary to 
severely test and try all accounted worthy of 
the light of present truth. Since 1878, the time 
when this judgment was chronologically due to 
begin, the arts and devices of the adversary to 
overthrow the faith of the saints in the very 
fundamental doctrines have been constantly 
multiplying. New theories have been constructed, 
purporting to tell us of wonderful things to 



come, yet lacking the sure foundation of the Word 

of God. What has not appeared? Theosophy, 

Christian Science, Evolution in all its various and 

deceptive forms, Koreshanism and even a modernized 

Buddhism. All these deceptions have 

one common identity; for no matter how different 

they may be in other respects, they agree 

in denying that the Lord Jesus Christ by his 

death on Calvary paid the penalty for Adam's 

transgression, the guilt and penalty of which 

his race has inherited; and they all agree that 

instead of being justified by faith in that ransom-price 

paid for our release from sin and death, 

salvation is to be on some other score. These become 

"strong delusions," because they each 

unite with their errors certain elements of present 

truth. Thus Satan clothes himself in the 

garment of "light." These have been and are 

being brought with force against the consecrated 

and awakened children of God who have 

escaped from Babylon. Their various theories 

concerning things to come are presented in most 

seductive forms, and God permits them to practice 

and prosper for a time. Nay, He even 

makes use of these, sending the strong delusions 

to lead away from the light all such as, after coming 

to a knowledge of the Truth, do not love it 

so as to be willing to die for it— 2 Thes. 2:10,11. 

Such as fall away under these delusions 
are thereby shown to be "condemned" as unworthy 
a share in the Kingdom of the elect- 
none such will escape, for the deceptions 
will be so strong that "if it were possible they 
would deceive the very elect." But the deception 
of the elect, the faithful, will not be possible: 
God knoweth them that are his— who 
meekly abide under the wedding-garment of 
Christ's imputed righteousness and who are daily 
seeking to be the more conformed to the 
image of God's dear Son. All others shall be 
deceived and led astray from the truth, being 
unworthy of it— who have pleasure in error, 
and who have not that pleasure in the truth 
which gladly endures hardness and persecution 
for its sake. If one error does not overcome 
such, the persistent adversary will be permitted 
to bring another and another. He will surely 
find some seeming messenger of light to bear 
to such a deceptive doctrine, to ensnare such as 
reject the favor of God, expressed in the sacrifice 
for sins once for all. 

And let us remember that a preparation for 
thus leaving the foundation and getting ready 
for the deception is laid beforehand, always. 
Instead of the truth leading such to humble 
service of the truth, it leads to pride or to carelessness 



and worldliness, or to that idle curiosity 
which, while willing and curious to know 
the present and the future, never leads to its 
service; or, neglecting the Word of truth, they 
fall into purely human reasoning and, getting a 
theory, start to twist the Scriptures to fit the 
theory; or imbibe some of the worldly ambitions 
to be thought well of, to be considered 
liberal-minded and very charitable to every 
thing, whether it be truth or error, and to every 
one who claims to be a teacher, whether he teach 
the true gospel or a base and deceptive counterfeit. 
All possessing such a self-seeking, compromising 
spirit are not worthy of the truth, 
and must go back into the outer darkness, 

R1356 : page 25 

whether we wish so or not. Some of the many 
deceptions and snares will overcome all such. 
Or should we become listless and indifferent 
in the service of the truth and have consecrated 
time on our hands which we are willing to occupy 
in other ways than as we covenanted to do, 
the adversary will find some convenient method 
of occupying the time and some plausible excuse 
for so doing, wherewith to silence conscience; 
and to such a covenant-breaker will 
soon be sent a strong delusion, because he is 
not a lover (server) of the Truth. 

"GREAT PEACE HAVE THEY WHO LOVE THY 
LAW, AND NOTHING SHALL STUMBLE THEM. 
-PSA. 119:165.- 



There is but one sure, safe course for the 
saints to pursue if they would gain the prize of 
our high calling, and that is a course of fidelity 
and loyalty to the truth with a full determination 
to give no heed to seducing spirits who seek 
either to present to us another gospel, or to attract 
our attention away from the true gospel 
and from the one service of preaching that gospel 
of the Kingdom to which our lives have 
been consecrated, to the study of other themes 
and interests. Our Lord has opened up before 
us the chart of his wonderful plan of the ages 
and has shown us the written specifications, so 
that the things to come might be as surely 
known to us by faith as the things past and 
present are known by history and experience. 
He has thus taken us into his confidence as beloved 
sons and heirs of the kingdom to come. 
He showed us these things because at the time 



of the showing we were justified by faith in the 
precious blood of Christ, and consecrated to 
his service, and because we were meek and had 
faith in his Word and were loyal to him and desired 
to continue faithful. So we were reckoned 
of him as worthy of the truth and eligible to 
the high calling. 

Having received all these favors of knowledge 
and grace, our use of them becomes the test of our 
loyalty and faithfulness. If we are ashamed to 
bear witness to them lest we offend those who 
advocate false doctrine, preferring their favor to 
God's favor; or if we hold the truth lightly, 
with an open ear for every doctrine opposed to 
the doctrine of Christ, and a God-speed for 
every advocate of error as well as of truth; or 
if we make no effort to withstand error, or to 
help the weak, or to spread abroad the knowledge 
of the right ways of the Lord, we are 
surely unfaithful to our trust and must lose it. 

But ye, brethren, who are still walking in the 
light, be faithful to the end. The things to 
come reveal a glorious reward for your faithfulness. 
In this our part of the battle of the great 
day, a thousand will fall at your side and ten 
thousand at your right hand (Psa. 91:7); but 
be not dismayed. Like Gideon's typical band, 
the victory is reserved to the faithful few. Glory 
not in numbers nor in worldly favor. The 
devices of error alone will prosper in that way. 
Glory only in faithfulness to the Master, and 
make haste to accomplish his appointed work 
for this time of sealing the elect, and bear the 
"good tidings of great joy unto all people," 
saint or sinner, wherever you can reach them. 

"SPEAK AS THE ORACLES OF GOD." 



And in attempting to teach others— for all 
who have the truth are commissioned to declare 
it to others— let us remember the Apostle's 
counsel: "If any man speak, let him speak as 
the oracles of God." (1 Pet. 4:11.) To teach 
what we claim to be divine truth, even in the 
humblest way, is to incur great responsibility; 
for in so doing we stand as God's representatives, 
and the Prophet Isaiah (5:20,21) says, 
"Woe unto them that call evil good, and good 
evil; that put darkness for light, and light for 
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet 
for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in 
their own eyes and prudent in their own sight." 

Hear again the word of the Lord by the 
Prophet Ezekiel (13:1-23) saying, "Son of 



man. ..say unto them that prophesy out of their 
own hearts, Hear ye the word of the Lord: 

R1357 : page 25 

Thus saith the Lord God, Woe unto the foolish 
prophets that follow their own spirit, and have 
seen nothing.... They have seen vanity and 
lying divination, saying, The Lord saith: and 
the Lord hath not sent them; and they have 
made others to hope that they would confirm 
the word. Have ye not seen a vain vision, and 
have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye 

R1357 : page 26 

say, The Lord saith it? albeit I have not spoken." 

"Therefore, thus saith the Lord God: Because 
ye have spoken vanity and seen lies, 
therefore, behold, I am against you, saith the 
Lord God. And mine hand shall be upon the 
prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies: 
they shall not be in the assembly of the people, 
neither shall they be written in the register of 
the house of Israel; and ye shall know that I 
am the Lord Eternal." 

Let us, therefore, be zealous for the truth, 
in declaring the glorious things to come, according 
to God's revealed plan, but take heed 
that we be not of those "foolish prophets that 
follow their own spirit and have seen nothing." 
No man has any commission from God to be a 
teacher of divine truth who has not first learned 
what the truth is and become fully convinced 
of it so that he can say with confidence, Thus 
saith the Lord! and here are the chapter and 
verse, and thus and so it harmonizes with every 
other chapter and verse of the Word. Let us 
have confidence in the sure word of the Lord 
and with humble boldness declare it and with 
zeal and vigor as loyal soldiers of the cross defend 
it against every opposing device of error. 
"If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles 
of God; if any man minister, let him do 
it as of the ability which God giveth [not of his 
own], that God in all things may be glorified 
through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and 
dominion forever and ever."— 1 Pet. 4:11. 



R1360 : page 26 
THE REFORMER. 



-BY J. G. WHITTIER. 



All grim and soiled and brown with tan, 

I saw a Strong One, in his wrath, 
Smiting the godless shrines of man 
Along his path. 

The Church, beneath her trembling dome, 

Essayed in vain her ghostly charm; 
Wealth shook within his gilded home 
With strange alarm. 

Fraud from his secret chambers fled 

Before the sunlight bursting in; 
Sloth drew her pillow o'er her head 
To drown the din. 

"Spare," Art implored, "yon holy pile; 

That grand, old, time-worn turret spare;" 
Meek Reverence, kneeling in the aisle, 
Cried out, "Forbear!" 

Gray-bearded Use, who, deaf and blind, 
Groped for his old accustomed stone, 
Leaned on his staff, and wept to find 
His seat o'erthrown. 

Young Romance raised his dreamy eyes, 

O'erhung with paly locks of gold— 
"Why smite," he asked in sad surprise, 
"The fair, the old?" 

Yet louder rang the Strong One's stroke, 

Yet nearer flashed his axe's gleam. 
Shuddering and sick of heart I woke, 
As from a dream. 

I looked: aside the dust-cloud rolled— 

The Waster seemed the Builder, too; 
Up springing from the ruined Old 
I saw the New. 

'Twas but the ruin of the bad— 

The wasting of the wrong and ill; 
Whate'er of good the old time had 
Was living still. 

Calm grew the brows of him I feared; 

The frown which awed me passed away, 
And left behind a smile which cheered 
Like breaking day. 

Grown wiser for the lesson given, 



I fear no longer, for I know 
That where the share is deepest driven 
The best fruits grow. 

The outworn rite, the old abuse, 

The pious fraud transparent grown, 
The good held captive in the use 
Of wrong alone,— 

These wait their doom, from that great law 
Which makes the past time serve to-day; 
And fresher life the world shall draw 
From their decay. 

God works in all things: all obey 

His first propulsion from the night. 
Wake thou and watch!— the world is gray 
With morning light. 



R1357 : page 27 
INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



OVERCOME WITH WINE. 



LESSON III., ISA. 28:1-13, JANUARY 17. 

Golden Text— "Judgment also will I lay to the line, 
and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow 
the hiding place."— Verse 17. 

This portion of Isaiah's prophecy is set forth 
in the International Lesson series as the temperance 
lesson for this quarter: and it certainly 
is a very strong one. But while we carefully 
observe this, let us not forget its prophetic 
character; for a prophecy must be received as 
a prophecy, and not merely as a collection of 
moral or religious precepts to be indiscriminately 
applied. 

Our first observation in studying any prophecy 
should be as to the time when its predictions 
will be realized, and when, therefore, its warnings 
should be specially heeded. The division 



into chapters and verses, it will be remembered, 
is merely an arbitrary arrangement in modern 
times for the sake of convenience. Glancing 
back to chapters 26:21 and 27:1 we see that 
a definite time is marked— "In that day." 
What day? In the day when "the Lord cometh 
out of his place to punish the inhabitants 
of the earth for their iniquity" (26:21); the 
same day which Daniel foretold, saying, "And 
there shall be a time of trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation, even to that same 
time" (Dan. 12:1); the day of which Malachi 
said, "Behold, the day cometh that shall burn 
as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that 
do wickedly, shall be stubble" (Mai. 4:1); 
and again, "Who may abide the day of his 
[Christ's] coming? and who shall stand when 
he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire 
and like fuller's soap." (Mai. 3:2.) Ah! yes: 
it is the harvest time of the Gospel age, the 
day of reckoning, the very day in which we are 
now living— from 1874 to 1914— the latter part 
of which is to witness the great conflict foretold, 
and the preparations for which are now 
going on in the world. The wheat and tares 
of nominal Christendom are now being separated, 
and the latter bound in bundles— tied up 
tightly in great organizations— preparatory to 
the symbolic burning or trouble of the closing 
days of this age and the ushering in of the 
Millennial day. 

Among the things mentioned concerning that 
day, the Prophet (28:1) foretells woe to the 
crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim. 
As the language is symbolic, we next inquire, 
Who is referred to under the name Ephraim? 
It is the very same class mentioned in our last 
lesson (Isa. 26:5) as the "lofty city" that the 
Lord is going to bring down to the dust— that 
great city, "Babylon" (Rev. 16:19; 17:5; 
18:2), which now proudly calls itself Christendom 
(Christ's kingdom). The Prophet in succeeding 
chapters applies to it several symbolic 
names. The name Ephraim here used signifies 
fruitful, and is symbolically applied to the great 
nominal Christian system, both Papal and Protestant. 
It has a great show of fruitfulness in 
number, influence, power and wealth; but this 
is not the kind of fruitfulness for which the 
Lord is looking. This he calls "hasty fruit" 
—sour and bitter, like that forced before the 
summer.— Verse 4. 

With this introduction, let us briefly view the 
lessons of this chapter:— 

Verse 1. "Woe to the crown of pride"— the 
worldly prosperity— the boast of the great 



Nominal Church. Her glory in numbers and 
wealth and power is a fading flower. Who can 
not see it, in this day when her position is disputed 
and her doctrines and authority are boldly 
called in question? Her "beauty" crown 
the "fat valleys" of worldly-mindedness where 
many are overcome, intoxicated, with the spirit 
of the world. The trouble or "woe" on these 
systems is beginning to be experienced, and will 
be continually increasing. 

Verse 2. The "mighty and strong one" is 
the Lord, whose instrument is the Truth, which, 
"like a flood of mighty waters" (Water is a 
symbol of truth), is destined to cover the earth 
—"The knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
earth as the waters cover the sea." It will 
come as "a tempest of hail and a destroying 
storm." Hail represents truth put in a hard, 
forcible way; and "a tempest of hail" indicates 
the destructive and forceful method which the 
Lord will adopt. Thus the Truth will batter 
down the old and long-established errors upon 
which the great systems of "Christendom" 
have been built. The Lord has refrained from 
the separating of the wheat and tares until this 
time of harvest; now he will separate them, 
glorify the "wheat," and cast the "tares" into 
the fiery furnace of a time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation (Matt. 13:30). 
Thus he will do "his work, his strange work, 

R1357 : page 28 

and bring to pass his act, his strange act" 
(verse 21)— viz.: the bringing down to the 
earth and laying low of great Babylon- 
Christendom. 

Verse 3. "The crown of pride"— the 
wealth and fame and prestige of these great 
systems, together with all who have been intoxicated 
with their worldly spirit shall be 
"trodden under foot"— humbled in the dust. 
Compare Rev. 18:2,5. 

Verse 4. In rejecting the Lord's plans and 
adopting plans of their own, the various nominal 
churches have had great fruitfulness in 
numbers, etc., but the fruit is not good. It is 
"hasty," immature fruit. Thousands of such 
have been brought into the various nominal 
churches whose hearts remained unchanged, 
and hypocrites of every shade also find a home 
there, until, in the language of Inspiration, 
"Babylon has become the hold of every foul 
spirit and a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird."-Rev. 18:2. 

Verse 5. Unto "the residue of his people" 



—those who are truly consecrated to the Lord 
and who follow his leading, who love and obey 
his truth— the Lord will be for a crown of glory 
and a diadem of beauty. They are his betrothed 
and will shortly be exalted as his bride 
and joint-heir. To all such who are still in 
Babylon as wheat in the midst of tares he says, 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of 
her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

Verse 6. The Lord will give judgment, discretion, 
to those who endeavor to discern between 
truth and error, and who bring all things 
both new and old to the test of his Word. 
His strength will also be given to those who 
battle against the forces of error— who endeavor 
to "turn the battle at the gate." The gates 
of ancient cities were generally important places 
in the defence of the city and there courts of 
justice, public assemblies, etc., were often held. 
To turn the battle at the gate would, therefore, 
in symbolic language, signify public effort to 
withstand error with the truth, even in the 
strongholds of error. For this God will and 
now does give strength to his people, so that 
one may "chase a thousand, and two put ten 
thousand to flight." 

Verse 7. "But they also"— to whom the 
people look as leaders and teachers, viz.: the 
clergy— "have erred through wine, and through 
strong drink are out of the way: the priest and 
the prophet have erred through strong drink, 
they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of 
the way through strong drink, they err in vision, 
they stumble in judgment." Here, in 
harmony with the symbolic character of the 
prophecy, we see that the wine and strong drink 
are also symbols— symbols, too, of something 
bad, something deceptive in its character and 

R1358 : page 28 

intoxicating in its effects— hence, indirectly, a 

rebuke to the evil thing itself. But as a symbol 

what does it mean? It is a forceful symbol 

of the spirit of the world, the love of the world 

and of the world's approval and emoluments, 

with which spirit all the systems of Christendom 

are intoxicated, especially the "priests and 

the prophets"— the leaders and teachers in 

Babylon. Therefore do they "err in vision 

and stumble in judgment." It is for this 

very reason that they cannot understand this 

prophecy which we are now considering. They 

are so infatuated with the greatness of their antichristian 

systems that in their pride they cannot 



see its application to them; and in their 
blindness they set forth these verses as a lesson 
on temperance in the use of intoxicating beverages, 
taking no notice of the time of its application 
—"In that day" (verse 5)— nor to its 
symbolic and prophetic character. Truly, said 
the Prophet, "they err in vision, they stumble 
in judgment." 

Verse 8. "For all tables are full of vomit 
and filthiness, so that there is no place clean." 
"Here is a forceful statement of the condition 
of affairs of which we are all witnesses today. 
The Calvinistic tables are all so polluted 
with the rejected dogmas swallowed in the past, 
that people are now turning away in disgust 
from the tables around which they formerly 
gathered so complacently. The Arminian tables 
are almost equally polluted, so that Methodists 
are beginning to discuss the propriety of 
absolving the laity from all doctrinal tests, lest 
they lose a large proportion of their membership. 
And truly, look where we will, through 
all the sects of "Christendom," as the Prophet 
says, "There is no place clean"— no table fit 
for God's intelligent children. But God is 
providing "meat in due season" now for all 
who hunger and thirst after righteousness, outside 
of Babylon. "My table thou hast furnished 
in the presence of mine enemies," the true 
Church may still sing. 

Verse 9. Here the Prophet raises the question, 
"Whom shall he [the Lord] teach knowledge? 
and whom shall he make to understand 
doctrine?" In other words, Who among all 
this people, who are in this miserable plight, are 
worthy of the truth which is now due to the 
faithful? Will he give it to the drunken? or 
will he give it to those who are satisfied with 
their polluted tables? or to those who have no 
hungering and thirsting after truth prompting 
them to seek it? No, the Prophet says he will 
give it "to them that are weaned from the milk 

R1358 : page 29 

and drawn from the breasts"— to them who are 
reaching out after more knowledge of God and 
of his gracious plans. Blessed are the hungry 
who desire more and stronger spiritual food 
that they may grow thereby, for they shall be 
filled. (Matt. 5:6.) Milk is for babes, but 
strong meat is for those who have passed the infant 
stage and who are no longer babes in 
Christ. -Heb. 5:14. 

Verses 10-12 show that it will take a great 
many more lessons to help those in Babylon 



who are not yet ready to be helped; for he will 
not longer speak to them through the old 
tongues— the intoxicated "priests and prophets" 
to whom they still look for leading. But 
"by men of strange lips and with another 
tongue will he speak to his people." (R.V.) 
He will raise up other teachers— teachers not 
ordained of men, but of God— whom therefore 
they will not incline to recognize or heed; because 
they will not "prophesy smooth things," 
saying, Peace! peace! when there is no peace." 
And when these (verse 12) point out the true 
rest and refreshment of divine truth, they will 
not hear. 

Verse 13 is a solemn warning of the responsibility 
of such; showing that when they are 
ensnared in the traps of error, and thereby fail 
of the reward of faithfulness to the truth, it will 
have been due to their own improper condition 
of heart, and not to any lack of faithfulness on 
God's part. 

In view of this solemn averment of responsibility 
on the part of those who hear but will 
not heed the truth, and who are too much intoxicated 
with the spirit of the world to discern 
it, how solemn are the words of rebuke that 
follow. This whole prophecy is one which 
every child of God who desires to know the 
truth and to escape the snares of error would do 
well to study with reverent humility and lay its 
solemn warnings and precepts well to heart. 

But let all such first make sure that they are 
not in the least intoxicated with the wine or 
strong drink of Babylon, but that in simplicity 
of heart they desire the strong meat of truth, 
that they may grow thereby. 

R1358 : page 29 

HEZEKIAH'S PRAYER AND DELIVERANCE. 



LESSON IV., ISA. 37:14-21,33-38, JANUARY 24. 

Golden Text— "The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth 
and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:17. 

This lesson is a scrap of history incidentally 
interwoven with Isaiah's prophecy. In reading 
it we should bear in mind that Israel was 
God's peculiar people and under his special protection 
and care, as it is written, "Ye are the 
children of the Lord your God. ...Thou art 
a holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the 
Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people 



unto himself, above all the nations that are upon 
the earth." "The Lord hath chosen Jacob 
unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure." 
-Deut. 14:2; Psa. 135:4. 

We should remember also that God himself 
was King of Israel, and that Hezekiah and 
others were his representatives on the throne, 
as it is written, "Then Solomon sat on the 
throne of the Lord as king, instead of David his 
father." (1 Chron. 29:23.) While God thus 
ruled in Israel he permitted all the other nations 
to pursue their own course and follow their own 
inclinations except when they interfered with 
his plans for the government of Israel. When 
Israel became refractory and disobedient he often 
chastised them by permitting the other nations 
to annoy them and take them into captivity, 
but as long as they were obedient to the 
Lord they had prosperity. 

All the promises made to Israel were promises 
of temporal good; no mention was made to them 
of the heavenly hopes set before the Gospel 
Church. These are peculiar to the gospel dispensation 
which had its beginning in our Lord's 
ministry and at Pentecost, and which closes 
with the dawn of the Millennium. The promises 
made to Israel were that they should have 
the land of Canaan "for an everlasting possession" 
(Gen. 17:8), and that, if they were 
willing and obedient subjects of God, their 
King, they should "eat the good of the land."— 
Isa. 1:19. 

But they were also told that if they were disobedient 
and walked contrary to the Lord, he 
also would walk contrary to them, and bring 
upon them distress and trouble. See Lev. 26, 
and observe in their history how God dealt 
with them as he said he would do. So long as 
Israel was under the divine rulership and care 
no evil could befall them except by divine permission 
for their correction and discipline, as 
it is written, "Shall there be evil in a city [a 
city of Israel], and the Lord hath not done it 
[or brought it upon them]?" And they were 
generally forewarned of such impending evils 
or calamities and given the alternative of repentance; 
for, said the Prophet (Amos 3:7), 
"Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he revealeth 
his secret unto his servants the prophets." 

In reading Hezekiah' s prayer for the deliverance 
of Israel from the Assyrian invaders, and 
the Lord's answer to that prayer in the destruction 
of the enemy, we are not to consider that 
a precedent is thus established, whereby other 
nations may claim God's help in overcoming 
their national enemies; for none of the other 



nations has ever been recognized as God's 

R1358 : page 30 

kingdom, nor has Israel, since the rejection of 
the Messiah. Since that time, God has had no 
kingdom set up in the world, but has permitted 
the Gentile kingdoms to have full sway until 
the time appointed for the establishment of his 
own glorious kingdom in the hands of his 
Anointed— our Lord Jesus and his Church. 
And when that time arrives, which now is not 
far distant, all these Gentile kingdoms must be 
destroyed. 

The only sense in which the kingdom of God 
now is or has been in the world since the beginning 
of the Gospel age is in its embryo or 
incipient stage, and it is composed of the 
prospective heirs of that kingdom. In this 
sense all through the Gospel age the kingdom 
of heaven has suffered violence and the violent 
have taken it by force (Matt. 11:12). Suffering 
and ignominy, and often martyrdom, have 
been its lot; but the glory is to follow in due time. 

This scrap of Israel's history which the Prophet 
here narrates was given, not merely to point 
a moral lesson, but to show, in connection with 
other similar items recorded by other prophets 
and historians, how God actually did deal with 
them as a people according to his promises and 
his threatenings. However, we may take all 
the good suggestions we can draw out of the 
narrative. Thus, for instance, we may admire 
Hezekiah's sterling character, particularly in 
view of the wicked example of his father who 
reigned before him; for instead of heedlessly 
following in his unrighteous ways, as most sons 
of unrighteous parents incline to do, Hezekiah 
resolved to do differently, and became a great 
reformer in his day; and the narrative of this 
lesson shows his reliance upon God's promises 
in time of trouble, and how God honored his 
prayer and fulfilled those promises in the deliverance 
of Israel from a great impending 
calamity. 

The golden text— "The righteous cry, and 
the Lord heareth and delivereth them," is applicable 
to all who fulfill its conditions. 

R1358 : page 30 

WHO HATH BELIEVED OUR REPORT. 



LESSON V., JANUARY 31, ISAIAH 53:1-12. 



Golden Text— "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity 
of us all."— Isa. 53:6. 

R1359 : page 30 

In the midst of his vivid and striking prophecies 
of the Millennial glory of Christ's Kingdom 
in the earth, and of the overthrow and 
destruction of Great Babylon preparatory thereto, 
the Prophet here predicts, and particularly 
describes, that one great event which was to be 
the foundation upon which the whole superstructure 
of the plan of salvation and the hope 
of future glory should rest. 

That one central or pivotal truth, is briefly 
expressed in our golden text— "The Lord hath 
laid on him the iniquity of us all." The one 
referred to we readily recognize by the prophetic 
description to be the Christ of the New 
Testament history. The prophecy and the 
fulfilment both stand out prominently on the 
pages of divinely-attested truth. But notwithstanding 
the importance of this great truth 
to the whole human race, the Prophet, speaking 
from a then future standpoint when the fulfilment 
of his prophecy had been accomplished, 
inquires, "Who hath believed our report? and 
to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?"— 
thus calling attention to that which we now 
realize, viz. that only a very few understand 
or appreciate the good tidings. And when we 
remember that faith in this message is necessary 
to the receiving of its benefits, it is disheartening, 
unless we know some of the further 
steps of the divine plan, to realize how few 
believe it. Daily there are thousands and tens 
of thousands, in both civilized and uncivilized 
lands, going down into the grave without faith, 
and without the least ray of hope from this 
precious truth. In view of these things, many 
seem to think that God's arm is shortened that 
it cannot save— except the very few who now 
believe. 

But let such observe the second inquiry of 
the Prophet— "And to whom is the arm of 
Jehovah revealed?"— intimating that his arm, 
his power, has not yet been revealed to many 
that they might believe. But his arm, his 
power, will be fully revealed to all in due time 
in the final accomplishment of his plan. But that 
plan is one which requires ages for its complete 
accomplishment; hence the "arm of Jehovah" 
is revealed now, to those only who can receive 
the revelation of it by faith. The household of 
faith may therefore comfort themselves with 



this blessed assurance, that "God our Savior 
will have all men to be saved [out of the 
Adamic death], and to come to the knowledge 
of the truth; for there is one God, and one 
mediator between God and men, the man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:3-6.) 
To this end, a resurrection, "both of 
the just and the unjust," is promised: "The 
hour is coming when all that are in the graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and 
shall come forth." (Acts 24:15; John 5:28,29.) 
They will come forth in due time to have 
the truth fully testified to them, and to profit 
by it; and if they are obedient to it, they may 
go on unto perfection and live forever. 

Verses 2 and 3 describe "the man Christ 
Jesus," saying, "For he shall grow up before 

R1359 : page 31 

him [Jehovah] as a tender plant, and as a root 
out of a dry ground." All humanity under 
the condemnation of death was reckoned dead; 
and this one alone, like a new, fresh, living 
root out of the barren soil, grew up from infancy 
to manhood. But, in the estimation of 
men, he had no desirable form nor comeliness, 
nor beauty. His glorious perfection made manifest 
their deformity; and when he declared 
himself the Messiah and the King of the Jews, 
they had no desire for such a king. They were 
looking for a king like Alexander the Great, 
or like the Caesars; one who, with military 
skill and carnal weapons, should deliver them 
from the Roman yoke. They had no faith 
therefore in the meek Nazarene and his claims: 
they saw no beauty such as they were looking 
for in him. Consequently, he was despised and 
rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief. He was despised, and 
men esteemed him not. And because men 
lightly esteemed and even despised him, "he 
hid as it were his face from them." [See 
margin. Because of their unbelief and hardness 
of heart, they therefore lost the benefit of 
his wisdom and teaching and many of his mighty 
works.-Rom. 1 1:20; Matt. 13:58.] 

Verse 4. "Surely he hath borne our griefs 
and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem 
him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted." 
As a perfect man, apart from the condemned 
race, and having no sin nor any cause of death 
in him, he voluntarily bore our griefs and carried 
our sorrows. Though he was rich before 
he became a man, and though as a man he had 



all the talent necessary to secure earthly riches, 
he voluntarily became poor and remained poor 
—so poor that often he had not where to lay 
his head. Thus he was able to sympathize 
with the poor of this world. And though as a 
perfect man, without sin, and consequently 
without the consequences of sin, he had perfect 
health, yet during the three years of his ministry 
he was continually imparting his vitality- 
vigor, strength— to the suffering ones around 
him, thus impoverishing himself and so being 
"touched with a feeling of our infirmities," 
as it is written: "And the whole multitude 
sought to touch him, for there went virtue 
[vitality, strength] out of him, and healed them 
all;" "And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched 
me, for I perceive that virtue [vitality, strength] 
is gone out of me." He felt the consequent 
weakness.-See Luke 6:17-19; 8:46-48; 
Mark 5:30-34. 

But while he thus, from exhausting labor and 
daily sacrifice for the good of others, endured 
weakness and weariness, so that at the end of 
the three and a half years of his ministry he 
was unable to bear his cross to the place of 
execution (Luke 23:26), men did not recognize 
the real cause of his physical weakness, but 
esteemed him stricken and smitten of God, as 
though he were a sinner like other men, and 
therefore, like them, subject to physical decline 
and death. But no, "In him was no sin:" he 
was generously and sympathetically bearing our 
griefs and carrying our sorrows, while we ungratefully 
"esteemed him smitten of God and 
afflicted." 

Verse 5. "But he was wounded for our 
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: 
the chastisement of our peace was upon him; 
and with his stripes we are healed." The 
dreadful tragedy of Calvary was not for his own 
sins, but for ours, as also saith the Prophet 
Daniel (9:26)-"Messiah shall be cut off, but 
not for himself." "He suffered for sins," says 
Peter, "being put to death in the flesh, the just 
for the unjust, that he might bring us to God." 
(1 Pet. 3:18.) And Isaiah continues— verses 6 and 7 
—"All we like sheep have gone astray; 
we have turned, every one, to his own way; 
and the Lord [Jehovah] hath laid on him the 
iniquity of us all." And meekly and willingly 
he bore our burden; for, though "he was oppressed 
and he was afflicted, yet he opened not 
his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is 
dumb, so he openeth not his mouth." See 
Mark 15:3-5. 



Verse 8. "Through oppression and through 
judicial punishment [by means of false accusations 
which secured a legal condemnation to 
death] was he taken away; but his generation 
—who shall declare it? for he was cut off out 
of the land of the living: for the transgression 
of my people was he stricken." 

"His generation." This expression may be 
understood in three ways truthfully, and hence 
properly. (1) Who of his day and generation 
would admit the facts?— only the very few who 
became his despised followers. (2) How few 
knew of his generation, of his divine lineage! 
how few believed or confessed that the despised, 
rejected and crucified one was the only begotten 
son of God, made flesh for the very 
purpose of thus giving himself a ransom for all! 
(3) But "his generation" is specially to be 
understood (see following verses) in the sense 
of his posterity. Who would suspect that he 
who was thus cut off childless would ever become 
"The Everlasting Father?" (Isa. 9:6.) 
Yet "he shall see his seed" (verse 10) in Jehovah's 
appointed season. At his second advent, times 
of restitution shall come (Acts 3:19-21), when, 
as the great Life-giver [father], he will give 
life and health and strength to all of Adam's 

R1359 : page 32 

race who will accept them under the conditions 

of the New Covenant. It is a gross mistake, 

however, to suppose that the Gospel 

Church is the "seed" of Christ, whether 

reckoned by the millions (including the black, 

the speckled and the ring-streaked, a worldly 

class, as Bishop Foster describes them) or merely 

the "little flock" of consecrated and faithful 

believers. The Church is never spoken of as 

the children of our Lord Jesus, either in symbol, 

or in type, or in literal statement. The 

Church "he is not ashamed to call his brethren." 

The bride, the Lamb's wife and joint-heir, 

are the honorable titles given to the little 

flock whom the Father, Jehovah, draws to 

Christ, and gives to him, as it is written, "Behold 

I and the children [of God] which God 

hath given me." (Heb. 2:11-13.) Our Lord 

Jesus enunciated this clearly when he said, "I 

ascend unto my Father and your Father, and 

to my God and your God." (John 20:17.) 

But after the "little flock" of the Gospel age 

has become the Bride and joint-heir of the 

Lamb, the glorified body of Christ, the new dispensation, 

the Millennium, will open, when the 

glorified Christ— Head and body— will become 



the Life-giver or Father to the world in general, 
restoring to them the human life and privileges 
lost in Adam but redeemed for them by the 
sacrifice of Christ's human life. That will be 
the time in which the glorified Christ in kingdom 
power will draw ALL MEN toward righteousness 
and life, even as the Father now draws 
the elect truth-hungry ones to Christ— as it is 
written, "No man can come unto me unless the 
Father which sent me draw him. And he 
[thus drawn by the truth— by the promises of 
God] that cometh unto me [Christ] I will in no 
wise reject." But as many who are now drawn 
or called to Christ by the Father fail to profit 
by the drawings of the truth, and hence to 
make their calling and election sure, so during 
the Millennial age, when Christ shall bring the 
whole world to a knowledge of the truth and 

R1360 : page 32 

thus influence or draw ALL MEN toward righteousness, 

it will still be for each to decide the 

matter for himself. Such as accept the gracious 

offer will receive everlasting life from Christ 

and his glorified Church, and will thus become 

the children of the Christ, and the Christ becomes 

to such the Everlasting Father. Thus 

He shall see his seed [his children] and shall 

prolong their days everlastingly; and thus the 

pleasure [will, plan] of Jehovah shall prosper 

in his hand.— Verse 10. 

Verse 9. "And they made his grave with 
the condemned [Heb. rasha, condemned or 
guilty— i.e., with the race of condemned sinners], 
and with the rich in his death [in the 
tomb of the rich man— Joseph of Arimathea— 
Matt. 27:57-60], although he had done no 
violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth." 

Verse 10 declares that all this violence that 
befell our blessed Lord and Redeemer was in 
exact accordance with the plan of Jehovah, 
who so loved the world that he gave his only 
begotten Son to redeem their life from destruction 
by the sacrifice of his own— "Although 
he had done no violence, neither was any 
deceit in his mouth [and therefore no cause of 
death in him], yet it pleased the Lord [Jehovah] 
to bruise him: He hath put him to grief." 

Verse 11. "He shall see [the fruits] of the 
travail of his soul [in the grand restitution of 
the redeemed race] and shall be satisfied." 
And here the Prophet interjects the statement 
that it was our Lord's knowledge of the divine 
plan or purpose to redeem and then restore the 
fallen race that enabled him to thus carry out 



that purpose in the sacrifice of himself, thus 
justifying many by bearing the penalty due for 
their iniquities— "By his knowledge shall my 
righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear 
their iniquities." 

Verse 12 points to the great personal exaltation 
of our blessed Lord Jesus, because of his 
obedience to the Father's will, even unto 
death.— "Therefore will I [Jehovah] divide 
him a portion with the Great [rab— the Lord, 
the Chief, the Master of the whole universe, 
Jehovah himself]." Because of his faithfulness 
he was highly exalted, made a partaker of the 
divine nature, and was associated with his Father 
in his throne. (See Phil. 2:9; Rev. 3:21.) And 
not only so, but he has been permitted of God to 
carry out another feature of his plan in the 
selection, training and final exaltation of a 
faithful few from among the redeemed race to 
share his great reward— to become likewise 
"partakers of the divine nature" (2 Pet. 1 :4) 
and "joint-heirs" of his kingdom and glory 
(Rom. 8:17; Luke 12:32)-Thus "he shall 
divide the spoil [the great reward] with the 
strong"— the overcomers. In accordance with 
this privilege granted him by the Father he left 
the gracious promise on record for us— "To 
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me 
in my throne, even as I overcame and am set down 
with my Father in his throne."— Rev. 3:21. 



page 34 

SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



DO YOU DESIRE THE FURTHER SEMI-MONTHLY 
VISITS OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER? 



We send out sample copies of this issue of the 
TOWER to many who were on our Lists last 
year, but from whom we have heard no report 
as to this year. Let us know whether or not you 
desire its visits to continue. We shall, of course, 
be glad not only to have all the old names continued 
but to have large numbers added— your 
friends and neighbors— whoever you may think 
would be benefited by the "meat in due season" 
which as the Master's servants we set forth. 

If you do not wish to subscribe for your 
friends, and think that a sample copy might 
benefit them, send us their addresses at once. 

The mark on the address tag of your paper 
shows the date to which you have paid your 
subscription. If you have paid for this year it 
should read Dec. 92. The price is not high: 
one dollar a year, or less than two cents a week. 
To those who through accident or misfortune 
cannot pay, yet desire it enough to say so, it 
will be sent free. It is not, therefore, a question 
of whether you can afford it, but rather 
whether you can afford to do without it. 

R1361 : page 34 

WHAT THE "GOOD HOPES" CAN DO. 



We use this name, "Good Hopes," in referring 
to the conditional promises suggested in the 
November '91 TOWER. 

We have reckoned up the number of these 
"Hopes" and are surprised at two things: first 
at their fewness and second that the general 
average runs so high as it does. We do not 
mention this matter by way of chiding those 
who have not responded, but by way of telling 
those who did send them what their "Hopes" 
are doing in the work of spreading the Truths 
we all love to serve. While we know and teach 
that there is no law but Love for the new creatures 
in Christ, yet we believe that the great 
Apostle's instruction is as sound upon this subject 



(1 Cor. 12:2) as upon others; and while 

we believe that every one who has the spirit 

thus to serve the Master, even if it be but with a 

"poor widow's two mites," will be blessed according 

to the Master's promise, yet it is not 

for us to insist or to urge the subject upon 

any. Let each act according to his own judgment 

of the Lord's mind and the willingness 

of his own heart upon this as upon every other 

subject. We have mentioned the subject merely 

by way of reminding you and indicating 

how such a course might be used to the Master's 

glory. Each is steward of his own time, money 

and influence consecrated to him who bought 

us with his own precious blood. 

But as to what the "Hopes" are doing: We 
received in all ninety-eight, which promised, if 
possible, a total of $1,946.08— the amounts 
ranging all the way from five cents to five dollars 
per week. 

We have concluded that on the strength of this 
we can safely arrange to send out one hundred 
thousand sample copies of the WATCH TOWER; 
for if some shall find themselves unable to do all 
that their "Good Hopes" suggested, others will 
probably be able to do more, and have declared 
that they will do more if possible. 

It occurs to us that the present issue and the 
previous issue are specially suitable for new 
readers; so instead of waiting for the payments 
all to come in, we will begin at once. Who 
knows how many out of this one hundred thousand 
may find honest, truth-hungry hearts, and 
bring light and joy and peace— and a newness 
of Christian life. We cannot, of course, expect 
that many will bring forth such a fruitage; but 
if only one in a thousand, it means a hundred 
of God's dear children set free from bondage 
of ignorance into the light of present truth. 

Some of us know how to sympathize with the 
"lost sheep" who, in all the different churches, 
are seeking the true Shepherd and the green 
pastures and quiet waters of refreshment to 
which he now desires to lead all who are really 
his sheep. We doubt not that every one of 
those who have sent in "Good Hopes" was 
once among those grossly blinded by human 
tradition. They feel thankful to God for the 
truth, and to their fellows who as God's servants 
put the truth— the food— before them in the 
shape of TOWERS, TRACTS and DAWNS, etc. 
Five dollars that will go into this 100,000 sample 
copies came from the sister of an attorney at 
law who was turned from Infidelity to the service 
of Christ, by the reading of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I. The sister sent this $5.00 as a 



thank-offering to the Lord and to help forward 
a cause which had the power of truth sufficient 
to convert an unbelieving lawyer. The next 
day brought a letter and a donation of ten dollars 
for the same purposes from the lawyer himself. 
Let us thank God for the light, dearly beloved, 
and let us do all that we can in every 
way possible, that seems to us a good way, to 
obey our Master's words: "Let your light so 
shine that men, seeing your good works, may 
glorify your Father in heaven." 



page 34 

FURTHER READING MATTER FOR YOUR INTERESTED FRIENDS. 

WHILE A SAMPLE COPY OF THE WATCH TOWER OR ONE OF 
OUR FREE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS MAY START A HUNGRY 
SOUL TO INVESTIGATING, THEY CAN DO LITTLE MORE. TELL SUCH 
THAT THE HELP THEY NEED FOR UNDERSTANDING THE BIBLE IN 
THE LIGHT OF PRESENT TRUTH IS MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. 
-"THE PLAN OF THE AGES"-OVER 160,000 ALREADY PUBLISHED 
-350 PAGES. TELL THEM OF THE BENEFIT IT HAS BEEN TO 
YOUR OWN HEART AND HEAD, AND HOW YOU VALUE IT, AND THAT 
IT IS ONLY 25 CENTS POST PAID-OR LOANED TO THOSE TOO POOR 
TO BUY-AND URGE THEM TO SEND FOR IT AT ONCE. 



R1362:page35 
