





HELP FOR THE FAMILY | PARENTING
Help Your Children Deal With Disturbing News Reports




Nerve-racking news—often accompanied by graphic video footage—is available 24/7 on TVs, phones, tablets, and computers.
And children are watching.
How can you keep your children from becoming overwhelmed by disturbing news reports?
How are children affected by the news?

How can you help your children deal with news anxiety?

What if your child has witnessed a tragic event?





How are children affected by the news?

  Many children are upset by tragedies they see on the news. Some children might not openly express their feelings, but a tragic news report may disturb them deeply.a Their anxiety might be heightened if their parents are unduly anxious.

  Children may misinterpret what they see on the news. For example, some conclude that what they have seen will happen to their family. And young children who watch repeated video footage of a disturbing incident may think that it is occurring repeatedly.

  Children may have trouble putting the news in perspective. They may not realize that news agencies are businesses that profit from having a large audience. Therefore, a report may be sensationalized to keep the attention of anxious viewers.





How can you help your children deal with news anxiety?

  Limit their exposure to tragic news. This does not mean that your children should be oblivious to what is happening in the world. But little good is accomplished when they watch or hear a disturbing news story related over and over.
“Sometimes we talk in detail about a news report, not realizing how overwhelming it is for our children who overhear us.”—Maria.

Bible principle: “Worry is a heavy burden.”—Proverbs 12:25, Contemporary English Version.

  Listen patiently, respond empathetically. If it is difficult for your child to talk about the event, suggest that he draw a picture about it instead. Address your child’s concerns using terms he will understand, but avoid discussing needless details about the event.
“Our daughter seems to feel better after we sit and listen to her. What doesn’t help is telling her, ‘This is the way things are now, and we have to get used to it.’”—Sarahi.

Bible principle: “Be quick to listen, slow to speak.”—James 1:19.

  Help your child put news reports in perspective. For example, a report of an abduction may make a crime like that seem much more likely to occur than it really is. Explain to your children what measures you have taken to keep them safe. Also, keep in mind that a tragedy is usually considered newsworthy because it is rare—not because it is common.
“Help your children through their emotions. Often, emotions follow thoughts, so if we help our children focus on something positive, they will be able to see clearer skies.”—Lourdes.

Bible principle: “The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight and adds persuasiveness to his speech.”—Proverbs 16:23.





a Younger children might show their anxiety by reverting to bed-wetting or by being afraid to go to school and be separated from their parents.

What if your child has witnessed a tragic event?
On May 7, 2019, two youths opened fire at a school in Highlands Ranch, Colorado, U.S.A., killing one student and injuring eight. Jack, 9, was a student at that school, and he was present on the day of the shooting. His parents, Ben and Casey, discuss their efforts to help Jack deal with the aftermath.





How was your son affected by the shooting?
Casey: For months afterward, Jack was constantly on high alert.
Ben: In an instant, he could go from being a carefree child without a worry in the world to one who clings to his parents if something reminded him of what happened. Jack developed a tendency to think of worst-case scenarios, which was understandable considering what he had been through.
Did you watch the news coverage of the shooting?
Casey: At first, we did. In fact, all three of us watched the news constantly for about a week. Then my husband and I realized that watching the news was only causing Jack to relive the event, keeping the trauma fresh in the minds of all three of us instead of focusing on healing.
What did you find to be most helpful for Jack?
Casey: Physical activity helped reduce Jack’s anxiety, so we tried to make time each day for that. But more important was just listening when Jack was ready to talk. I noticed that before bedtime, when things were quiet, Jack would pour out his heart. Sometimes we talked for an hour, but it gave him the support that he needed. Jack knew that he didn’t have to carry the weight of this alone.
What advice would you give to parents whose children have lived through a tragic event?
Ben: It’s important for children to feel secure within the family before a tragedy occurs. That way if they do go through a traumatic situation, you’ll have a foundation on which to build.
Casey: Each child is different. One might be more sensitive than another. Some people might think that you’re being overly protective, but just give your child what he or she needs. Make the family bond stronger so that your child feels secure at home, even if the world outside the home seems unsafe.


Review: How can you help your children deal with tragic news reports?
  Limit their exposure to the news.

  Listen patiently, respond empathetically.

  Help your children put news reports in perspective.




