The Bible’s Viewpoint
Does God Have Time for Me?
“IF THERE’S a God, he’s not interested in you or me!” Have you ever heard people say that? Most people believe that God exists, but many feel that he could not possibly have the time to be concerned about them.
How can we be sure that God cares? He has provided us with loving gifts, including life itself. He created pleasures for us​—the taste of food, the sound of music, the marvels of nature, the scent of fresh mountain air, the soft touch of a loved one, the laughter of children, and the warmth of a baby’s smile. All of these are gifts from God. We enjoy them only because he lovingly gave us the ability to do so by means of our five senses.​—James 1:17.
In addition, if God did not care about humans, why would he have provided the Bible that gives so much guidance and comfort to people and that is filled with information about his ways and dealings?​—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
The Bible shows that God is interested in individuals​—that he is interested in you. His written Word shows how you can have a happier life, a better family, and finer children. Yes, the Bible shows you the way to contentment and satisfaction. It relates God’s wisdom and strengthens your faith in his promises. It provides a firm hope for the future. Does that sound like the kind of help that comes from someone who does not care?
Further, a person who cared about you would be approachable. Is that true of God? Consider what these Bible writers say: “Taste and see that Jehovah is good,” wrote David. Further, the disciple James admonished: “Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.” And the apostle Paul said that God made humans “to seek God, if they might grope for him and really find him, although, in fact, he is not far off from each one of us.”​—Psalm 34:8; James 4:8; Acts 17:24-27.
Do You Make Time for God?
Isn’t that interesting? These Biblical statements say that God is close but that we must make time to pursue a relationship with him. He cares, but we must make an effort, show some initiative!
Jesus said: “Keep on asking, . . . keep on seeking, . . . keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.” He said that if your son asks for bread, you will not give him a stone, or if he asks for a fish, you will not give him a snake. “Therefore,” Jesus continued, “if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will your Father who is in the heavens give good things to those asking him?”​—Matthew 7:7-11.
Think of what Jesus was saying​—if you seek God’s favor, he will show greater interest in you than parents show in their own children!
‘Will God Even Listen to Me?’
However, some may have done very bad things​—both in the eyes of God and of men. They might say: ‘Surely, God would never listen to me!’
But those people can do something about their lives. They can change. The Bible says: “Let the wicked man leave his way, and the harmful man his thoughts; and let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will forgive in a large way.”​—Isaiah 55:7.
The Bible gives quite a list of things people might have done. It says: “Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men kept for unnatural purposes, nor men who lie with men, nor thieves, nor greedy persons, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners will inherit God’s kingdom. And yet that is what some of you were.” They had changed. They had put aside their old ways. They had turned around, been washed clean, been sanctified and “declared righteous in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and with the spirit of our God.” So there is hope for all who really want God to care for them!​—1 Corinthians 6:9-11.
Someone Died for You
However, there is far greater proof that God cares for individuals​—that he has time for you. God sent the one dearest to Him in all the universe to give his life as a ransom for those who will accept it. The Scripture says: “God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.”​—Romans 5:8.
Do we really show appreciation for that magnificent act of love? Do we make the time to speak with thanksgiving to the God who cares so much? And do we take the time to speak to others about him?​—1 John 4:16, 19.
What He Expects
Thus, the Scriptures already cited show that God is close but that he expects us to make an effort. They urge us to take positive action: “Taste,” “search,” “seek,” “grope,” ‘ask,’ ‘knock.’ Such actions show willingness, determination, appreciation, and faith.
We are counseled to search the Scriptures, to learn about God, to bring our lives into harmony with his ways, to accept his Son as Ransomer, and to come under God’s arrangement for salvation. If you make the effort to do so, you will see that God really does have time for you.
[Picture on page 18]
God has time for you. Do you make time for God?

