From Our Readers
Hope for the Mentally Ill
I must express my appreciation for the articles on mental illness. (September 8, 1986) Although suffering from schizophrenia and having been in a psychiatric hospital, I still did not understand or accept the diagnosis until I read your articles. I take medication once a month to control the symptoms, and I think it is a small price to pay to be able to function normally and feel well.
B. B., England
I just had to write and thank you for the articles on “Hope for the Mentally Ill.” There was mental illness in my family and family background. Your articles stated how mental illness is often a badge of shame, a malady draped with the language of contempt. That’s exactly how I felt. Your articles will enlighten many people, I’m sure, and help them to show more compassion for those who suffer from emotional disorders.
J. R. F., United States
My grateful thanks to you for the articles on “Hope for the Mentally Ill.” For six years now I have been suffering from schizophrenia without being aware of it and was even interned in a mental institution where, fortunately, they discovered what my problem was. Now under medication I feel practically normal, for which I thank Jehovah. Before reading the articles my knowledge of schizophrenia and its symptoms was limited. Now, however, with a better understanding of this ailment, how happy I am to know that even though there is no cure, it can be controlled and that in the near future Jehovah, through Christ Jesus, will put an end to all sickness.
A. M. S., Brazil
I am writing about the last sentence in the article “Mental Illness​—Is There a Cure?” It states: “Her faith helps more than any medication doctors have to offer.” Might this statement cause some in the truth to put off seeking medical help for mental problems?
I. V. R., England
We believe that statement should be understood in the context of the entire series of articles. It was shown that Irene needed to stay on her medication. But the point is that at best the medication, though necessary, was of limited value and had undesirable side effects. Her faith in Jehovah not only helps sustain her through these problems but gives her a sure hope of a complete cure in the new system under Christ Jesus, something far better than the limited benefits medicine can give her.​—ED.
Down’s Syndrome
I am writing concerning the item “Down’s Syndrome​—A Modern Approach,” dealing with newly developed cosmetic surgery to alter the appearance of children suffering from Down’s syndrome. (February 8, 1986) Although you take a strong attitude toward the blood issue, you deal with this subject in a favorable light.
T. N., Japan
The information was presented only as a news item, not as a recommendation. The last paragraph stated: “Of course, plastic surgery in such instances has its critics. And ‘Awake!’ does not endorse or recommend specific forms of therapy, recognizing that these are matters for personal decision.” Such an operation would be different from taking blood, something strictly forbidden in God’s Word.​—Leviticus 17:10-14; Acts 15:29.​—ED.

