Come to the Festival of a Free People!
THERE is today a group of people that are truly free. They have been set free from the fear of man, free from the bondage of superstition, ignorance and false religion, free from selfish ambition and corrupt practices, and free from bondage to the great enslaver, Satan the Devil. They are free because they have complied with the words of Jesus Christ: “If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”—John 8:31, 32.
Once each year these free people come together to celebrate or commemorate the event that made it possible for them to become a free people, namely, the death of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ. This they do in obedience to his specific command, as recorded for us by the apostle Paul: “For I received from the Lord that which I also handed on to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was going to be handed over took a loaf and, after giving thanks, he broke it and said: ‘This means my body which is in your behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.’ He did likewise respecting the cup also, after he had the evening meal, saying: ‘This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood. Keep doing this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.’”—1 Cor. 11:23-25.
Jesus Christ instituted this festival memorializing his death on a most fitting date. How so? In that it was on this very night, namely, the fourteenth day of the first Jewish month known as Nisan, that the Jewish passover was celebrated. This, in turn, commemorated a most notable event that had taken place 1,545 years earlier. And what was that? The deliverance of the nation of Israel, together with all their firstborn, from Egyptian bondage, whereas all the firstborn of Egypt, of both man and beast, were slain by the angel of Jehovah. They marched out that night a free people!—Ex. 12:1-39.
On Nisan 14 of 33 C.E. “Christ our passover” was about to be sacrificed for the freedom of his followers and so there was to be a new festival of liberation; yes, ‘spiritual Israel’ was to be set free on the basis of Christ’s sacrifice. (1 Cor. 5:7, 8; Gal. 6:16) And just as that annual Passover celebration commemorated the original passover deliverance and was held only once each year on the anniversary date, so it is but fitting that the Memorial celebration that took its place with Jehovah’s people, the Lord’s supper or evening meal, also be celebrated only once each year, and that on the very night that it was originally instituted.
Jesus did not invite his countrymen indiscriminately when instituting the memorial of his death. No, but only certain ones from among these who were ‘really his disciples,’ a select few who were members of what he termed a “little flock,” and to whom he could say on that occasion: “You are the ones that have stuck with me in my trials; and I make a covenant with you, just as my Father has made a covenant with me, for a kingdom, that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones to judge the twelve tribes of Israel.” From other scriptures we learn that his “little flock” is limited to 144,000.—Luke 12:32; 22:28-30; Rev. 14:1, 3; 20:4-6.
How fitting that Jesus’ followers should annually come together to consider all that their Leader and Master did for them and to commemorate his death! Though he had been God’s foremost spirit creation, he left it all to become a mere mortal. More than that, “he humbled himself and became obedient as far as death, yes, death on a torture stake.” By this course he vindicated his Father’s name, clearing it of the reproach heaped upon it by Satan the Devil, who had boasted he could turn all men away from God.—Phil. 2:8; Job, chapters 1 and 2; Prov. 27:11.
Ever since that memorable occasion the people set free by Jesus Christ have endeavored to celebrate annually this festival of liberation and they will celebrate it again this year on April 12, after sundown, that being the equivalent of the Jewish Nisan 14. On that occasion those present will receive fine spiritual instruction and admonition, even as Jesus on the passover night of 33 C.E. gave his eleven apostles much fine counsel, particularly on the subject of showing unselfish love toward one another. All the readers of The Watchtower are invited to meet with the Christian witnesses of Jehovah as they gather in their Kingdom Halls that evening to celebrate this festival of liberation. Seats are free and no collection will be taken.—John 13:1–16:33.
At this festival of a free people the presiding minister will make clear what the requirements are of those who are entitled to partake of the bread and wine. These must be dedicated footstep followers of Jesus Christ, set free by reason of their continuing in Christ’s word and being begotten of Jehovah’s spirit to be spiritual sons. Further, they must have the witness of the spirit that they have been “born again,” and have the sure hope of the heavenly reward and they must be living up to their dedication vow so that they will not be improperly partaking of the bread and wine and so bring judgment upon themselves. (John 3:3-8; Rom. 8:14-17) Following the discourse, there will be passed to those in attendance plates on which there is unleavened bread, the only kind that was on hand when Jesus instituted the memorial of his death, and which at the same time is a fitting symbol of his body, since leaven here pictures sin and Jesus was free from sin. Then goblets or glasses of unsweetened red wine will be passed, only such wine being able fittingly to represent Jesus’ shed blood.—1 Cor. 5:7, 8.
Last year upward of two million were in attendance at the more than 25,000 congregations of Jehovah’s people throughout the earth for the celebration of Jesus’ evening meal. Yet of all those in attendance, less than 11,000 partook of these emblems. Those not partaking were, for the most part, either members or prospective members of the “great crowd” that the apostle John saw in prophetic vision. Their hope is not that of reigning with Christ in heavenly glory, but that of living forever on a paradisaic earth in which “righteousness is to dwell,” and in which there will be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying nor any more pain. (Rev. 7:9; 2 Pet. 3:13; Rev. 21:4) Though they themselves did not partake of the emblems, all were richly blessed by hearing and observing what was said and done on that occasion. The same will he true this year.
Certainly there is no other place in all the world that you should want to be on the evening of April 12, 1968, than at a gathering of Jehovah’s people where the Lord’s evening meal will be celebrated in keeping with Jesus’ instructions. What you hear and see on that occasion will cause you to appreciate more than ever what Jesus Christ did for you and will help you to be one of God’s free people.

