Announcements
“NOT FORSAKING THE GATHERING OF OURSELVES TOGETHER”—Heb. 10:25, NW.
Gathering together! Serving God together! Publishing the truth together! These are things that God’s people do! The apostle Paul stresses the importance of doing all these things at Hebrews 10:25, NW. No, Jehovah’s witnesses do not express only to one another at congregation meetings what they believe. In addition they preach from house to house. In June Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to do this by presenting two books and two booklets on a $1 contribution. Householders should be given special opportunity to obtain the new booklet Christendom or Christianity—Which One Is “the Light of the World”?
STILL IN GREAT DEMAND
Do you have a copy of the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, Volume 1 (Genesis to Ruth), and the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures (Matthew to Revelation)? Vague and archaic terms are replaced by clear and definite words in common use today. Available on a contribution of $1.50 a volume. De luxe green-leather-bound editions may be obtained at $5 a volume.
“TRIUMPHANT KINGDOM” ASSEMBLIES
Much has been said here about the thrilling prospects of attending the forthcoming European assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses. But what about those persons who find this international travel impossible? Outstanding North American assemblies will begin on June 22 in Comiskey Park in Chicago, then will progress to Empire Stadium in Vancouver, B.C., June 29–July 3, to Wrigley Field in Los Angeles, July 6-10, to the Cotton Bowl in Dallas, July 13-17, and to famed Yankee Stadium in New York, July 20-24. The featured public talk is “World Conquest Soon—by God’s Kingdom.” Surely you cannot afford to miss this special spiritual provision that has been made for you!
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s offices, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from July 30 to August 14, inclusive. Orders and correspondence sent in during that period will not be handled until some time after the reopening of the offices. Please anticipate your needs and place your orders in ample time for attention before the vacation period.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
July 10: The Putting of Your Faithfulness to the Proof, ¶1-21. Page 337.
July 17: The Putting of Your Faithfulness to the Proof, ¶22-29, and Tested Quality of Faith. Page 343.

