Missionaries Sent Out​—by Whom?
‘YOU are being sent out as representatives of whom?’ was the question that Milton Henschel posed to the twenty-five missionaries of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead’s 60th class, at their graduation exercises held in New York city on Sunday, March 7.
Henschel, the third of six featured speakers, answered his own question for the benefit of the graduates and their hundreds of well-wishers present. He pointed to the example of the Chief Missionary, Jesus Christ, who said: “I know [God], because I am a representative from him, and that One sent me forth.”​—John 7:29.
The speaker called attention to Jesus’ being sent out from the realms of heaven. He came down to live amidst imperfect humans, whose thinking and practices were foreign to God’s thinking. (Isa. 55:8) Jesus never complained, nor did he exalt himself as God’s missionary, but glorified the One who sent him.
Theodore Jaracz, chairman for the occasion, opened by noting that a number of relatives of the graduates were present from overseas. He remarked that this class was young, averaging about twenty-eight years, but had, on the average, been serving as witnesses of Jehovah for thirteen years, nearly half their lives.
Jaracz then called on U. V. Glass, Gilead instructor, for a few parting words to the students. Glass called attention to the human ear with its ability to distinguish even slight differences in the tone and quality of a sound. The Christian, he pointed out, knows the “sound,” the exact “tone” of the truth from God’s Word​—the voice of the Fine Shepherd. (John 10:2-5) He counseled the students to be alert to reject false or counterfeit “tones” that could decoy them from their true objective as missionaries.
John C. Booth, the next speaker, had been in a position to become acquainted with nearly all of the more than 5,000 graduates of Gilead from its beginning in 1943. Booth encouraged the graduates by first asking, “Do you qualify to be sent out as missionaries?” He called attention to the fifty-nine previous classes. Are not the increases in praisers of God in lands where missionaries have been sent living proof that they qualified?
Following this talk there was an interval of relaxation during which the audience stood as the School Registrar, E. A. Dunlap, read telegrams from near and far, expressing appreciation for the School and good wishes for the graduates in their assignments.
“Beware that You Do Not Become a Dropout,” was the theme developed by Lyman Swingle. Reminding the graduates that they had been Bible students before coming to Gilead School, he added that while at School they had learned much more. But they were now actually only beginning to learn. To believe otherwise would lead to their loss of spirituality and eventual dropping out from the missionary ranks. Indeed, even undesirable circumstances, which one might use as an excuse for becoming a dropout, could actually become another lesson imparting strength.
“Nothing we can do will enrich Jehovah God. Yet he invites us to bring our gifts to him.” With these words, Leo Greenlees introduced a description of God’s arrangements for sacrifices offered to Him at the temple in ancient Jerusalem. Only sound, unblemished sacrifices were acceptable. Likewise when we present a “sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of [our] lips,” it must be sincere, wholehearted, accompanied by prayer.​—Heb. 13:15; Ps. 141:2.
As the final speaker of the two-hour morning session, N. H. Knorr developed the theme “What Do You Think?” Those starting out in foreign missionary work could have their right thinking influenced by a change in language, customs and living conditions. They could begin thinking about giving up their missionary assignments. Only by sticking close to the thinking found in God’s Word could they remain steadfast. He went on to cite the incident in which the apostle Peter, sincere but thinking the thoughts of men, tried to dissuade Jesus from going through with his sacrificial course. Jesus, however, thinking the thoughts of God, immediately rejected Peter’s thinking and maintained his right course.​—Matt. 16:21-23.
Following the talks the new missionaries received their diplomas and assignments to twelve countries, among them being Iceland, the Seychelles Islands, Spain and India.
The afternoon session was student-arranged. In this school class there were contingents of Scottish, English, American, German, Spanish and Hawaiian students. Each small group enlisted the help of others for its own part and coached them, to come up with a program that delighted the audience. A presentation of three Bible-based dramas followed.
In conclusion, Brother Jaracz closed the joyful day’s gathering with the words of the apostle Paul to the elders in the ancient city of Ephesus: “And now I commit you to God and to the word of his undeserved kindness, which word can build you up and give you the inheritance among all the sanctified ones.”​—Acts 20:32.

