Romans​—Good News for Jew and Gentile
THE inspired letter of the apostle Paul to the Jewish and Gentile Christians in Rome was indeed good news for them. Due to the ransom provided by Jesus Christ, Jew and Gentile were on equal footing before Jehovah God, and by exercising faith in Jesus Christ they could be declared righteous by God. No more were Jews in bondage to the Law, and Gentile converts to Christianity were not required to be circumcised to become worshipers of Jehovah. What “good news”! In fact, Paul uses the term “good news” a dozen times in this letter.​—Rom. 1:9, 17; 3:20-30.
When and from where did Paul write this letter? The book of Acts and the book of Romans itself make it clear that Paul wrote this letter while in Corinth, around the year 56 C.E. Strictly speaking, Paul dictated it, the writing being done by one of his co-workers, Tertius.​—Rom. 16:22.a
How did the Christian congregation at Rome get its start? It could well have been formed by Jews and proselytes who came to Jerusalem at Pentecost 33 C.E., heard the good news about Jesus Christ as preached by Peter and others, got baptized and then returned to Rome.​—Acts 2:5, 10.
In this letter Paul evinces not only his warm love for his brothers in Rome but also a fine sensitivity. How so? In that, repeatedly, when he had occasion to counsel or correct them he adds a softening expression, as it were. For example, after stressing that circumcision of the heart rather than circumcision of the flesh is what counts with God​—a point that some Jewish Christians found hard to accept—​he then notes that, nevertheless, the Jews were advantaged by reason of God’s entrusting to them the “sacred pronouncements,” that is, the inspired Scriptures.​—Rom. 2:28 to 3:2.
Paul’s inspired letters, by and large, might be said to deal with three areas of Christian thought and activity: exposition of Christian doctrine, matters relating to himself personally and exhortation as to Christian conduct; this is true of Romans.
DOCTRINE​—THE GOOD NEWS
In developing the theme of being declared righteous on the basis of faith, Paul uses the term “righteous” some fifty-five times in all his letters, and it is found more often in the book of Romans than in any other book of the Christian Greek Scriptures. The related term “righteousness” also appears, proportionately, far more frequently in Romans than in any other book of the entire Bible.
Paul begins by telling that he is an apostle of the good news, that he is not ashamed of it and that ‘the righteous one will live by reason of his faith.’ (Rom. 1:1, 16, 17) This good news holds out the hope of everlasting life to those working at what is good. God is not partial, and so the Gentiles, even though not having a statement of God’s laws, had a law written in their hearts.​—Rom. 2:7-16.
Regardless of who may or who may not accept the truth of God’s Word, as far as Christians are concerned, they are to “let God be found true, though every man be found a liar.” (Rom. 3:4) All men are born sinners, and that being so, no one can be declared righteous by the Law; rather, it highlighted man’s imperfection and sinfulness. Apart from the Law, God has made righteousness possible through faith in the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, thus allowing no grounds for boasting. To show the superiority of faith over works of the Law, Paul notes that Abraham was declared righteous because of his faith, even before being circumcised.​—Rom. 4:1-12.
Paul goes on to show what great love God expressed in giving his Son to die for us, doing so while we were yet sinners. Just as sin and death came to all men due to the disobedience of one man, Adam, so also through the obedience of one man, Jesus Christ, many will become righteous and gain life.​—Rom. 5:12; 6:23.
Therefore all in union with Christ, whether Jew or Gentile, are free from condemnation. God, in making such provisions, is not unjust, for he has a right to determine matters. He showed that right when he chose Isaac and not Ishmael, and Jacob rather than Esau, and also in his dealings with Pharaoh of old. As the Great Potter, he can do with human vessels as he pleases; yes, everything depends “upon God.”​—Rom. 8:1; 9:6-26.
Again and again Paul stresses the importance of faith for salvation. Those calling upon Jehovah’s name will be saved, but how can they call on him of whom they have not heard, and how can they hear unless someone preaches to them? True, the great majority of Jews failed to accept Christ, but that did not spell defeat for God. No, a remnant accepted Christ, even as in the days of Elijah there was a remnant of 7,000 who had not apostatized. Then Paul illustrates the way in which many Jews, like cultivated olive branches, were lopped off as prospective members of the seed of Abraham, because of their lack of faith in Jesus. Wild olive branches were grafted in their place, but this is no grounds for boasting, for should they lack faith they too can be lopped off.
PERSONAL MATTERS
Paul’s inspired epistles are indeed personal letters replete with bits of information that cause us to know him better and to love him all the more. Thus, after his introduction, Paul commends the Christians at Rome for their strong faith and reveals his love for them by writing: “I am longing to see you, that I may impart some spiritual gift to you in order for you to be made firm; or, rather, that there may be an interchange of encouragement among you, by each one through the other’s faith, both yours and mine.”​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
In his exposition he adds the warm human touch by continually including them, by the personal plural pronoun “we,” as well as by repeated references to himself​—“the good news I declare,” “I am speaking in human terms,” and so forth. In chapter seven he tells of his own struggle with sin in the flesh. (Rom. 2:16; 6:19; 7:7-25) Next he tells of his sorrow because of the unbelief of his Jewish brothers, which causes him to plead with God on their behalf. He has this great concern for them even though he is “an apostle to the nations,” that is, the Gentiles.​—Rom. 9:1-5; 10:1, 2; 11:13, 14, 25.
In his counsel to present our bodies to God’s service, Paul personally urges us: “I entreat you by the compassions of God, brothers.” (Rom. 12:1) And the last two chapters 15, 16 especially deal with his personal matters. In chapter fifteen he tells of the extent of his preaching activities as well as his desire to preach in untouched fields. He refers to his bringing a contribution to the needy brothers at Jerusalem and asks the brothers to pray for him. In his final chapter 16 he names twenty-six Christians in Rome and sends greetings to them, as well as to others. He cautions them against certain dangers and prays for their spiritual well-being.
EXHORTATION ON CHRISTIAN CONDUCT
Paul, in his letter to the Romans, gives much admonition and encouragement. He is not one to discuss doctrinal matters at great length without broaching matters of conduct. For example, in chapter one he tells of God’s wrath against godless men who are inexcusable, since God’s qualities can be seen in creation. Yet, despite this, as he says, they keep worshiping creatures rather than the Creator and indulge in all manner of immorality, and so they deserve destruction.
In chapter two Paul warns us against judging others while ourselves doing the same things for which we judge them. Also, he counsels against our preaching that others should keep God’s commandments but at the same time breaking them ourselves. Then, in chapter five, he encourages us to exult in tribulation, as it leads to an approved condition, which, in turn, leads to hope and confidence. Since Christ died for us, we should be dead as to sin and now ‘present our members as slaves to righteousness with holiness in view.’​—Rom. 6:1-23.
Continuing, Paul shows that we are to be minding the things of the spirit, which mean life, and that God’s spirit bears witness to those who are his spiritual sons that they really are such. God works in all things for good to those that love him, and so, “if God is for us, who will be against us?” Yes, God’s love is so strong that no power in heaven or on earth, past or future, can separate us from that love. (Chapter 8) In chapter ten he stresses that we must both believe in our hearts and make confession with our lips to gain salvation. In chapter 12 he urges us to make our minds over to be able to serve God in an acceptable manner and to have tender affection for one another.
Then, in chapter thirteen, Paul gives compelling reason for obeying secular authorities, such as in paying taxes. Again he warns against judging others, this time in regard to food; for the kingdom of God does not mean eating and drinking. Rather, we should be concerned with doing what is right and living in peace with one another. Are we strong? Then let us patiently put up with those whose consciences are weak. Further, he reminds us that God’s Word was recorded for our instruction, that through its comfort and our endurance we might have hope. (Rom. 15:1-4) And in conclusion he warns against selfish men that would cause divisions, and he counsels us to be wise as to what is good but innocent as to what is evil. Truly, all of it is fine admonition!
May we today benefit likewise as we read this letter and seek to apply it in our lives!
[Footnotes]
It is generally held that Romans comes first in the collection of Paul’s letters because of its length. Be that as it may, it doubtless was providential, as the truths therein presented are fundamental and the rest of his letters might be said to be based on or to take these truths for granted.

