A Complete Solution​—Is It Possible?
“IMPOSSIBLE!” say some. “Why, to rid the earth of depression completely would call for sweeping changes. We’ve had depression for thousands of years and the future looks as if it will be here for a long time to come.”
Just think of a few conditions that contribute to depression​—an oppressive environment, friction in our relations with others, bad living conditions, inner weaknesses and guilts and sickness. To correct all of these seems hopeless.
Heartwarming Promises
The Bible promises that God will use his glorified Son, Jesus Christ, as a heavenly king to remove today’s depression-causing environment. Prophetically the Bible states: “Let him [God’s king] crush the defrauder. For he will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, . . . From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul.”​—Ps. 72:4, 12-14.
Gone forever will be a wicked system that has fostered harshness, insensitivity and oppression. Imagine the relief! But the Bible also promises relief from internal pressures. The effects of sin and imperfection will fade away. (Rom. 8:20-22; Rev. 21:3, 4) Disease and sickness​—including depression—​will vanish. Guilt and feelings of worthlessness will give way to self-esteem, as persons will then be able to measure up perfectly to God’s standards of how to live. Relations with other people will reflect perfect understanding and love.
Other promises of the Bible have already been accurately fulfilled. Current events are fulfilling Bible prophecies written nearly 2,000 years ago. (Matt. 24:3, 7-14; 2 Tim. 3:1-5) The practicalness of the Bible passages referred to earlier in this series of articles shows evidence of great wisdom. Does it not seem logical to you that they originated with a Source that really knows our makeup​—emotionally and physically—​namely, God?
Millions of persons in over 200 lands are convinced that all these promises of God will soon be realized. This hope sustains them even during severe depression. “Knowing that these problems will one day soon cease, and thinking of the wonderful conditions that will prevail in the ‘new earth,’ kept me going,” said one who had endured a long struggle with depression.​—2 Pet. 3:13.
This confidence, coupled with earnest effort to apply what the Bible says about our conduct, brings lasting happiness. Jehovah’s Witnesses are more than willing to help you to build such conviction. They will help you to get even closer to the God who is described as able “to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of those who are in pain.”​—Isa. 57:15, Lamsa.

