VOL. XXIV. JUNE 1, 1903. No. 1 1 



CONTENTS. 

The Editor on His European 

Journey 163 

The Royal Priesthood 164 

No Condemnation and No 

Separation 167 

"The Body is Dead" 171 

"Thy Kingdom Come" (Poem) 173 

"God Moves in a Mysterious 

Way" 173 

Public Ministries of the Truth 176 

Special Items: 

Volunteers, Attention! 162 

Zion's Glad Songs 162 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOLUNTEERS, ATTENTION! 



The new ammunition is now being sent to all who have 
ordered consignments. Larger orders go by freight and 
the smaller ones will reach you by express or mail. Remember 



that we prepay all charges, and that you should 

not pay anything to the railroad or express company delivering. 

Those who have not ordered should write us at 

once. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



We have this booklet of spiritual songs in large supply 
again, and orders can be filled promptly. While it is not 
expected that the "Songs" shall take the place of the noble 
hymns in the book POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, they 
will be found appropriate for social meetings and praise 
services. The price is 5c each, postpaid; 60c per doz. 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 



This work contains a very choice selection of 160 poems 
and 333 hymns, purged, we trust, from much of the too 
common hymn-book theology. In cloth binding only, 50 
cents. TOWER subscribers supplied at the wholesale rate, 
25 cents. This price now includes postage. 



R3198 :page 163 

THE EDITOR ON HIS EUROPEAN JOURNEY. 

U.S.M.S. "NEW YORK." 

GREETINGS to "the Children of the Morning" 
—of the Dawn— of the Light:— 

On board the Steamship "New York" I am 
nearing Great Britain and the dear brethren there 
whom I know by correspondence and so dearly 
love, and whom I hope soon to greet personally. 
Nevertheless, all the dear readers of the WATCH 
TOWER are before my mental vision, and I take this 
opportunity for sending you a message of love and 
fellowship. It is a source of great pleasure and encouragement 
to me to realize that your love and prayers 
are with me on my journey; and I well know that 
every feature of my experiences will be of interest to 
you. 

Just a week ago (on April 14th) I bade farewell 
to a goodly company of the Church at the railway 
depot in Pittsburg. On the previous Sunday I said 
"Goodbye" to the Church at Allegheny as a whole, 
shaking hands with about 300 personally; but I was 
cheered, nevertheless, by the final parting at the train. 
Next morning I was met at New York depot by representatives 
of the Churches of New York, Brooklyn, 



Yonkers, Jersey City, Perth Amboy and Philadelphia, 

who saw me on board my steamer and tarried until 

the starting of the vessel,— then from the pier waved 

me their love and good wishes as they assured me previously 

that I had their prayers. 

I was not so vain as to accept these love-tokens 
as personal tributes; but received them, on the contrary, 
as expressions of devotion to the Lord and 
appreciation of his truth, with which in his providence 
I had become associated as a servant;— a minister of 
the Lord, a minister of his Word, a minister of his 
people. All may be sure that my heart fully reciprocated 
the kind wishes and blessing accepted from these 
dear friends, who in a still larger sense represented to 
me all of the dear WATCH TOWER readers of America 
who rejoice to send me, with their prayers and love, 
as their representative for a few weeks to those of 
like precious faith in Europe. 

Our steamer has had a quiet voyage, and in many 
ways I have been "kept" by divine providence— so that 
I have had no seasickness since the first two days out, 
and was able to respond to the invitation of our captain 
to assist in conducting the usual Sunday morning 
services of the vessel— including an address of about 
thirty minutes on the Hope that is the anchor to our 
souls, both sure and steadfast.— Heb. 6:19. 

I had no reason to hope that among the passengers 
would be many with "an ear to hear"; nor could 
I expect, in so brief a space, to do more than sound 
one chord on our precious Harp (the Bible). Committing 
results to the Lord, I pointed out the great Covenant 
Promise which our heavenly Father gave to 
Abraham and his seed: that it was, "In thy seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed"; that the natural 
seed, Isaac and Jacob and the nation of Israel, 
held fast the promise but never inherited it; that 
the true Seed only began to come in the person 
of the Lord Jesus; that the true Church, the true 
members of the body of Christ, are members of 
this "Seed" and heirs according to that original 
promise which has not yet had its fulfilment, but 
awaits the completion of the Seed— the completion 
of "the Church which is his body." "If ye be 
Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according 
to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

Briefly noting that this is the Christian's hope of 
our text, and that it is still unfulfilled, we saw that it 
is still to be striven for by all who would make their 
calling and election sure; and that in the light of this 

R3198 :page 164 

promise and hope all true Christians should recognize 
present experiences, trials, etc., as so much of their 
education in the school of Christ,— in preparation for 
their work in the coming age— the work of blessing 



the families of earth during the promised Millennial 
Kingdom. 

Only five of the passengers have had either interest 
or curiosity sufficient to lead them to converse 
with me on the subject,— and only two of these with 
earnestness; but if two or even one should ultimately 
develop as a ripe grain of "wheat" how glad and 
thankful we would be. So far as I can ascertain, about 
one-half of the passengers are professing Christians, 
and about two-thirds of these Episcopalians— of whom 
not one has seemed interested. Of the two manifesting 
interest one is a Baptist, the other a Methodist. 
A Baptist minister aboard declared himself an Evolutionist 
and in full sympathy with "higher criticism" 
—denying that the Lord bought us. When pressed 
with Scripture he denied the authority of Paul and the 
other Apostles, and claimed to hold to the life and 
words of Jesus only. When confronted with our Lord's 
own words to the effect that he came to "give his life 
a ransom for many" he avoided further discussion. 

More and more it becomes evident that we are in 
the great trial -day of the Christian faith, and that it is 
not so much a question of Who will fall? as of "Who 
shall be able to stand?" (Rev. 6:17.) The prophet 
declared, "A thousand shall fall at thy side" (Psa. 91:7), 
and so we find it. So far from glorying in the 
evidences that many are falling from the fundamental 

R3199 :page 164 

faith, and that many have already fallen, we are pained. 
Nevertheless, recognizing this as one of the signs of the 
close of the present dispensation, we can rejoice that 
the Millennium of blessing will ere long be ushered 
in;— when dim faith will be swallowed up in the sunlight 
of truth;— when "the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth as the waters cover the great deep;" 
when "the wayfaring man though a fool need not err." 
-Isa. 9:11; 35:8. 

I seal and mail this when near the British shore, 
where (Southampton) Brother Henninges is expected 
to meet me and accompany me to London. Continue to 
remember me in your prayers, that our Father and 
Elder Brother may direct our every word and act to 
his glory and to the profit of our dear brethren on this 
side of the world— of various tongues but of one spirit 
—in as well as outside of Babylon. 

Faithfully, your brother and servant in the Lord, 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 



R3199 :page 164 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD. 



"Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a 
peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him who hath 
called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.. ..Ye have 
tasted that the Lord is gracious, to whom coming as unto a living 
stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious, 
ye also as living stones are built up a spiritual house, 
an holy priesthood, to offer up sacrifices* acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ"-- 1 Pet. 2:9,3-5. 

AT no time in the Church's history has our great 
Adversary been so active in multiplying false 
doctrines and in diverting attention from the 
truth by introducing unprofitable and irrelevant questions 
as at present. Just when the exaltation and 
glory of the Church are soon to be accomplished, and 
when the faithful are about to be received into the joy 
of their Lord, every device is resorted to to beguile 
them of their reward and to frustrate this feature of 
the divine plan. To really frustrate any part of the 
divine plan is impossible: God has purposed to take 
out from among men a "little flock," "a people for 
his name," a royal priesthood; and such a company 
is assuredly being gathered; but whether all those now 
in the race for the prize will surely be of that company, 
is still an open question. Take heed, beloved, that 
no man take thy crown. (Rev. 3:11.) If any come 
short of their privileges and prove unworthy of the 
rich inheritance, there are others who will quickly fill 
their places. 

We beseech you, brethren, as you value the glorious 
hope set before you in the gospel, that you give 
no heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, as 
the Apostle terms them (1 Tim. 4:1); but that, with 
fixedness of purpose, you apply yourselves to the one 
thing you are called and are privileged to do as prospective 
members of that Royal Priesthood. Let us 
never forget that we are a "peculiar people," separate 
from the great body of nominal Christians, as well as 
from the world, having higher hopes, aims and ambitions 
and favored with a clearer insight into the deep 
things of God, having been called out of our former 
darkness into his marvelous light. And if thus separate 
from the world and from Christians who partake 
largely of the worldly spirit, what wonder if we find 
them all out of harmony with us, and either ignoring 
or opposing us. 

Such opposition is to be expected and will, doubtless, 
continue until we finish our course in death. To 
submit patiently to this opposition is to sacrifice our 
own natural preferences for the friendship and the pleasures 
of the present life, and to endure hardness as 
good soldiers for the truth's sake, in whatever shape 
that hardness may come, in our effort to do the Lord's 
will and work of advancing the interests of his Kingdom. 



*Sinaitic MS. omits spiritual before sacrifices. 

R3199 :page 165 

This is what is meant by the presenting of our 
bodies living sacrifices in the divine service. To be 
really in this service involves: first, the careful and 
continual study of God's plan; second, the imbibing 
of its spirit; leading, thirdly, to an enthusiastic zeal 
for its accomplishment, and to activity to the extent 
of ability in its service, at whatever cost or sacrifice 
it may require. 

If we are faithful in this service we have no time, 
nor have we the disposition, to give heed either to 
false doctrines or to other themes which have no bearing 
on the one thing to which we have solemnly dedicated 
our lives. Our time is not our own if we have 
consecrated all to God; and consequently, we have 
none to spare for the investigation of fanciful false 
theories, built upon other foundations than that laid 
down in the Scriptures; nor have we time to devote 
to the ideas and pursuits which engross the world's 
attention, many of which are harmless in themselves, 
but would be harmful to us if we were to allow them 
to occupy consecrated time and to divert our attention 
from the one thing we ought to be doing. The Apostle 
warns us "to shun profane babblings, for they will 
increase unto more ungodliness;" but adds, "Study 
to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word 
of truth." "Teach no other doctrine: neither give 
heed to fables and endless genealogies, which minister 
questions rather than godly edifying which is in 
faith."-2 Tim. 2:15,16; 1 Tim. 1:3,4. 

Each consecrated believer should ask himself, How 
carefully have I studied that which I have clearly recognized 
as divine truth? and how fully capable am I, therefore, 
of handling the sword of the spirit? Few indeed 
are those who can say they have fully digested 
and assimilated all they have received; that they have 
let none of these things slip from memory; that they 
have so treasured it up in their hearts that it is their 
meditation by day and by night; that they have a 
ready answer— a "Thus saith the Lord"— for every 
man that asks them a reason for the hope that is in 
them, concerning any point of doctrine; that they can 
clearly and intelligently portray the divine plan, quote 
the divine authority for each successive step of it, 
and, if need be, point out its place in the divine system 
of types. To gain such proficiency in the Word 
is indeed the work of a lifetime; but every day should 
see a closer approximation to that proficiency, and 
will, indeed, if we are faithful students and faithful 
servants of the truth. 

If all the consecrated were thus busily engaged 



putting on the armor of God, and in proving it by 

actual use in zealous endeavors to herald the truth 

and to help others to stand, there would indeed be no 

time left for disputings on the Anglo-Israel question, 

or whether the earth is a plane instead of a globe, or 

whether the principles of socialism would be advisable 

among Christians in the management of their temporal 

affairs. Nor would there be time for politics, 

nor even for the good temperance-reform work, nor 

the work among fallen women, nor among the slums 

of the great cities, nor even for preaching the doctrine 

of divine healing. All this is work which can and 

will be effectually accomplished in "the Times of Restitution," 

now in the near future; and, besides, there 

are others interested in these works (and we are glad 

of it and bid them Godspeed), while we recognize and 

seek to accomplish the work set before us in the divine 

plan. And if, indeed, we have no consecrated 

time for these things which are only side issues and 

not harmful in themselves, except as they divert attention 

and consume valuable time which has been 

consecrated to another and higher use, surely there is 

none whatever for giving heed to false doctrines such 

as so-called Christian Science and the various no-ransom 

or Evolution theories, all of which are attempts 

to show men how to climb up to everlasting life by 

some other way than that which the Scriptures point 

out; viz., by faith in the precious blood of Christ 

shed on Calvary for our redemption. He that climbeth 

up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber 

(John 10: 1); and we are commanded to have no 

fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but 

rather to reprove them.— Eph. 5:11. 

How narrow this way! say some, contemptuously, 
of those who, like Paul, devote their energies to the 
one thing— the service of the truth. Yes, that will be 
the verdict against you, of all except the few who, 
like yourself, have carefully sought out this "narrow 
way," and who are determined to walk in it, regardless 
of the reproach it brings. The way to the mark 
for the prize of our high calling is not wide enough to 
admit all the vain philosophies and foolish questions 
and babblings and speculations of science, falsely so 
called. It is only wide enough to admit the Lord's 
plan and those who are willing to discard all other 
plans and projects and questionings and to devote 
themselves fully and entirely to its service, and who 
are quite willing to bear any reproach it may bring. 

Consider your calling, brethren, for ye are a chosen 
generation, a royal priesthood to offer sacrifices 
acceptable to God; a holy nation, a peculiar people, 
that ye should show forth the praises of him who 
hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. The very object of our being called into this 
light is that we may let it shine. If we do not let it 
shine we are unworthy of it, and the treasure will be 



taken away and we will be left in darkness. If indeed 

R3200 : page 166 

we have received the light and have consecrated 
ourselves fully to God, let us ask ourselves. What am 
I doing to show forth the praises of him who hath 
called me out of darkness? Am I going forth with 
these tidings to my neighbors near and far? Am I 
busy from day to day in seeking to vindicate the divine 
character, and to make known God's righteous 
ways? Am I economizing time and means, and so 
arranging my temporal affairs as to give as much time 
as possible to the work? And, then, am I diligently 
studying to make myself thoroughly familiar with the 
truth, so that I may indeed be a living epistle known 
and read of all men within the circle of my influence? 
—a workman indeed that need not be ashamed? Can 
I truly affirm that I am 

"All for Jesus, all for Jesus- 
All my being's ransomed powers; 
All my thoughts, and words, and doings, 
All my days and all my hours"? 

If so, then we are just narrow-minded enough to 
say, This one thing I do; and I make everything else 
bend to this one thing of showing forth God's praises 
and helping others into his marvelous light. And to 
this end I cultivate and use what talents I possess as a 
wise steward of my heavenly Master. 

Dearly beloved, we impose no vows or bondage 
upon each other, but the call has its own limitations: 
the Master has directed us, saying, "Go ye and teach 
all nations [for the gospel is no longer confined to the 
Jewish nation], baptizing them in the name of the 
Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching 
them to observe all things"— concerning our (questionable) 
Anglo-Israelitish origin? No.— All things 
concerning the shape of the earth? No.— All the 
vain philosophies of men who have erred from the 
truth, and all the subtle sophistries by which they 
make void the word of God? No.— "Observe all 
things whatsoever I have commanded you."— 
Matt. 28:19,20. 

This is just what the apostles did. There were 
plenty of errors and side issues in their day; but, ignoring 
them, they resolutely devoted themselves to the 
promulgation of the truth. Paul paid no attention to 
his fleshly genealogy, because he recognized himself as 
a new creature in Christ Jesus. It was easier for him 
to prove his fleshly origin as an Israelite than for any 
of us to do it; but he cared nothing for that. He did 
not care whether he was of the ten tribes or of the two 
tribes; for he had on none of the tribal righteousness 
of the Law. His only ambition was to be found "in 
Christ, not having on his own righteousness, which is 
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of 



Christ— the righteousness which is of God by faith." 

(Phil. 3:9.) He says (verses 3-7), "We [new creatures 

in Christ] are the [real] circumcision, which 

worship God in spirit and rejoice in Christ Jesus and 

have no confidence in the flesh [or the fleshly relationships], 

though indeed I have had confidence also 

in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath 

whereof he might trust in the flesh, I had more: Circumcised 

the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the 

tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as 

touching the Law, a Pharisee; concerning zeal, persecuting 

the Church; touching the righteousness 

which is of the Law, blameless. But what things were 

gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ." 

Hear him again in his zeal for this one thing to 
which he had devoted his life: "And I, brethren, 
when I came to you, came not with excellency of 
speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the mystery of 
God; for I determined not to know anything among 
you save Jesus Christ and him crucified. [I riveted 
your attention on this one thing ! I kept this one 
thing continually before you.] And my speech and 
my preaching were not with enticing words of man's 
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and power 
[of the truth], that your faith should not stand in the 
wisdom of men, but in the power of God."— 
1 Cor. 2:1-5. 

Paul was a plain uncompromising teacher. When 
he knew he had the truth, he spoke it with confidence, 
and boldly declared that everything contrary to it was 
false doctrine; and he taught his disciples that it was 
not only their privilege, but their duty also, to be 
established in the faith and to know, on the evidence 
of God's Word, why they believed, and to be able to 
give to every man that inquired for it a reason for the 
hope that was in them. 

There is among Christians today a great lack of 
established faith on any point of doctrine. They say, 
"I think," "I hope," or "Perhaps it may be so, but 
this is only my opinion, and it may be right or it may 
be wrong. I have charity, however, for your opposing 
opinion, and for every man's opinion; for who 
knows which is right? I'm sure I cannot say; but, 
nevertheless, I have great faith and charity (?). I 
shake hands with every body and call him brother if 
he claims to be a Christian, no matter what he believes 
and teaches, whether he is pointing to Christ as the door 
to the sheepfold, or whether he is trying to teach men 
how to climb up some other way. In Christian love I 
bid them all Godspeed and pray for the success of all 
their teachings, no matter how antagonistic they may 
be to each other or to the Scriptures as I read them." 

All this passes among Christians generally for 
large-hearted benevolence and personal humility, while 
in fact it is an ignoble, compromising spirit that is 
unwilling to forego the friendship of those who oppose 



R3200 : page 167 

the Lord by opposing the truth; and which would 
rather see the truth suffer, and those weak in the faith 
stumbled, than that they should bear the reproach of 
Christ. Those who have real and sincere faith in God 
are willing to take him at his word; and with these 
the first principles of the doctrine should long ago have 
been established; much of the superstructure of gold 
and silver and precious stones should already be erected, 
and the work be steadily progressing. Such are 
able, if they are loyal and true to God, to discern between 
truth and error. The Apostle John, recognizing 
this ability, says, "If there come any unto you and 
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your 
house, neither bid him Godspeed; for he that biddeth 
him Godspeed is partaker of his evil deeds." (2 John 10.) 
We ought to know what we believe and why we 
believe it, and then should be bold and uncompromising 
in declaring it; for "if the trumpet give an uncertain 
sound who shall prepare himself to the battle?" 

Again says the Apostle (1 Cor. 2:6-10), "However, 
we speak wisdom among them that are perfect 
[developed; we are not to cast our pearls before 
swine]; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the 
princes [the popular leaders and teachers] of this 
world, that come to naught. But we speak the wisdom 
of God, which was hidden in a mystery, which 
God ordained before the world unto our glory; which 
none of the princes of this world knew. ...Eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. But God hath revealed 
them unto us by his spirit; for the spirit [or mind of 
God in us, is so anxious to know his truth, that 
it] searcheth all things; yea, the deep things of 
God." 

The princes of this world do know something of 
astronomy and geology, and have their ideas of the 
shape of the earth, etc., but they have not known this 
hidden wisdom of the divine plan, which maps out a 
destiny so glorious to the faithful saints who will constitute 
the royalty of the age to come. Let the world 
speculate as it may about its own themes of interest, 
but let us devote ourselves to the one thing in hand, 
avoiding foolish questions and genealogies and contentions, 
...for they are unprofitable and vain. (Titus 3:9.) 
Let us be faithful to our commission to preach 
this gospel to the meek who are ready to hear it. (Isa. 61:1.) 
Let the bride of Christ be diligent in making 
herself ready (Rev. 19:7), for the marriage of the 
Lamb is the event of the very near future. 



R3200 : page 167 

NO CONDEMNATION AND NO SEPARATION. 

--ROM. 8:1-14.-MAY 31.- 

"For as many as are led by the Spirit 
of God, they are the sons of God." 

THE chapter of which this lesson forms a part is 

unquestionably one of the most precious in the 

entire Bible. It begins with the assurance that condemnation 

has passed, and concludes with logical proofs 

of everlasting divine favor toward those who become 

"New Creatures" in Christ Jesus. In the preceding 

chapter the Apostle specially points out condemnation 

and imprisonment upon the whole race of Adam as sinners 

under the divine Law— and especially upon the 

Jew, additionally under the Mosaic Law. He points 

out the utter hopelessness of those who attempt to 

escape the penalty of death by self -justification through 

"works of the Law." After thus showing the bondage 

of all, he points to the door of salvation— the redemption 

in our Lord Jesus: saying, "I thank God, through 

Jesus Christ our Lord." It is to this class, which gets 

the victory through Christ, that there is no condemnation, 

and can be no separation from the divine love and 

favor, so long as they abide in him as the branch in 

the Vine. 

This lesson is well fitted in, as giving us a glimpse 
of the Apostle's spiritual liberty and relationship to 
God at the time of his imprisonment at Caesarea. Once 
he had had his liberty according to the flesh, and in 
his ignorance and blindness had done many things contrary 
to the Lord, not properly appreciating his liberty 

R3201 :page 167 

nor knowing how to use it aright. Now, although a 

prisoner and outwardly restrained, he had gained great 

liberty and blessing, and also freedom from divine condemnation, 

with assurance of hope toward God, not 

only respecting the present life, but also the one to 

come. 

In the first verse the word "therefore" carries us 
back to the preceding argument, and shows us that our 
freedom from present condemnation is the result of our 
Lord's sacrifice on our behalf. (Rom. 7:25.) It is 
because we appreciate the fact that justice provided a 
redemption price for our sins, and because we have 
availed ourselves of the terms offered its beneficiaries, 
that we realize that the condemnation of the divine Law 
no longer holds as against us. In his preceding argument 
the Apostle had clearly shown that the difficulty 
did not lie in the Law itself; that God could not give 
an imperfect or, in any sense, an evil Law. The Law 



was just, perfect and good; the difficulty was in us, 

that through the inheritance of sin and its weaknesses 

we were unable fully to comply with the requirements 

of the divine Law. How, then, do we escape its condemnation? 

R3201 :page 168 

The Apostle answers that we reached the 

present standpoint of release— freedom from condemnation 

—when we came into Christ. Others, out of Christ, 

are still under the condemnation. It is an important 

question, therefore, for each to decide for himself, 

whether or not he has taken the step which alone can 

bring him into this happy condition. The Apostle, in 

a previous chapter (5:1), marks the first step out of 

condemnation and into Christ as being justification, 

which brought peace with God, the covering of the sins 

that were past; but this was not enough, for if all the 

sins that were past were cancelled, and no arrangement 

was made for our daily imperfections of word and deed, 

we would quickly be again condemned. Hence, to those 

who would be entirely freed from condemnation, another 

step was necessary— a step into Christ. These 

two steps should not be confounded; it is one thing to 

get out of responsibility for past sins, and quite another 

step to get into Christ, and under the full covering of 

his merits as respects all the remainder of life. The 

two steps are mentioned in Rom. 5:1,2: faith in the 

redemption brings justification from past sins and peace 

with God; but by it also, as the Apostle explains, we 

have access into this grace (the favor of sonship, membership 

in the body of Christ) wherein we stand, rejoicing 

in hope of the glory of God (because glory and 

honor and immortality are promised to every member 

of the New Creation— every member of the body of 

Christ). 

The last clause of this verse, "who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the spirit," is properly omitted by 
the Revised Version, because not found in ancient 
MSS. The thought, however, is correct enough, and 
these very words are found in the conclusion of verse 4. 
The words do not properly apply in verse 1, for 
that describes those who are in Christ, as members of 
his body, and none are counted as in him except those 
who are walking after the spirit— not after the flesh. 

The Apostle calls our attention (vs. 2) to two laws 
in operation. We were under one of these, which sentenced 
us, as sinners, to death. We got out from under 
that law entirely when we got into Christ Jesus, as members 
of his body. Our Redeemer kept the Law, was 
blameless; then gave his blameless life as a redemption 
price to purchase us who had been the slaves of sin and 
death from that slavery. We were redeemed by his 
precious blood. As he was raised to a new nature by 
the Father's power, we now are invited to become associates 
with him in that new nature— to be counted in 



as members of his body, under him as the Head. The 
whole transaction is one of faith; faith first in his sacrifice, 
and God's acceptance of it, and our justification 
thereby. Secondly, faith in our call to membership in 
his body; faith that our consecration in response to 
that call made us acceptable with the Father and recorded 
our names in the Lamb's book of life as children 
of God upon this new plane. All who can realize 
that they have taken these two steps may, therefore, 
realize that from God's standpoint they are no longer 
thought of nor treated as members of the human family, 
but as members of the new order— members of the 
body of Christ. 

Hence, they may realize themselves as entirely 
freed from the condemnation that was against them as 
human beings, and as having come under a new law, 
a new arrangement, which in Christ guarantees them 
life everlasting. The new law judges us as new creatures 
in Christ, according to the spirit, the mind, the 
intention, in righteousness, and not as human beings, 
according to the flesh and its weaknesses and 
imperfections. 

The Law of God,— strict justice without mercy,— 
represented in the Mosaic Law and its covenant, could 
not help the weak, fallen race, because the easiest requirement 
it could make would be perfection toward God 
and toward men, and our race being fallen was unable to 
comply with its demands. It was, therefore, "weak" 
(powerless) for our deliverance, because we were weak 
on account of the imperfect, fallen flesh. But God, 
through Christ, made an arrangement for us which does 
not violate his own Law— sending his Son to accomplish 
our redemption— the payment of our penalty. 
God's Son was not sent in sinful flesh, but "in the 
likeness," or nature of our flesh, which had become 
sinful,— he, the while, being holy, harmless, separate 
from sinners. The object of his coming in our likeness 
is set forth; viz., as an offering for sin— a sin-offering 
and atonement-sacrifice on our behalf. 

This course in no sense of the word justified sin- 
in no degree made sin right, or declared it proper. On 
the contrary, the very means which God adopted for 
our relief, at the same time "condemned sin in the 
flesh." Thus at the same time that the door of salvation 
was opened to us we were most emphatically 
assured that there was no hope in any other 
direction. 

Notwithstanding the great clearness and explicitness 
with which this doctrine of the necessity for a sacrifice 
for sins is set forth in the Scriptures,— in the Old 
Testament as well as in the New— it seems remarkable 
that some still stumble over it. There is no avoiding 
the conviction that there is something wrong with their 
hearts, else their heads would not thus become confused 
respecting a matter which is so explicitly set forth 
in the Word. The Apostle points out that it was so 



with the Jews as a nation. They stumbled over the 

cross of Christ;— they then admitted and still acknowledge 

that Jesus was a great Teacher. Rabbis all over 

R3201 :page 169 

the world today are claiming Jesus as a great Jew, 
whose teachings have blessed the world in great measure. 
Their dispute is with the cross of Christ,— that 
they were sinners who have no way of escape except 
through an atonement on their behalf, and that Christ's 
death constituted the sin-offering, through faith in 
which alone any may become acceptable to God— justified. 
The same objection exists in the heart of the natural 
man who is not a Jew. He prefers to climb up 
some other way, rather than to go through the door; 
he would use the teachings of Jesus as a ladder to get 
into the sheepfold; but declines to enter through him 
as a door, and to acknowledge himself condemned of 
God and irretrievably lost, except as the great sacrifice 
for sins and the merit of the Redeemer are applied on 
his behalf. Nevertheless, those who refuse God's way 
will find that it is unalterable, and that "there is none 
other name given under heaven or amongst men whereby 
we must be saved." Those who will not enter by 
this door, those who will not accept the forgiveness of 
their sins through the merit of Christ's sacrifice, cannot 
have the divine favor, cannot be considered members of 
the body of Christ nor heirs with him— they are not in 
Christ Jesus— they are yet in their sins, because they 
believe not God's testimony. Some are now in this 
attitude who were once in the light of truth on this 
subject; who once had on the wedding garment, but 
took it off— rejected the robe of Christ's righteousness, 
and are attempting to stand before God in their own 
righteousness, merely accepting Jesus as a Teacher and 
not as a Redeemer. We consider the condition of such 
to be most dangerous. We cannot feel sure that they 
will ever have an opportunity to accept again the merit 
of the precious blood which they once enjoyed and 
spurned, "counting the blood of the covenant [the 
death of Jesus] wherewith they were [once] sanctified 
an unholy [common] thing," thus doing despite unto 
the spirit of grace— despising, disdaining, repudiating 
the favor of divine forgiveness through the blood. So 
rejecting the Redeemer, they take their cases out of the 
hands of the Mediator of the New Covenant. Thus 
they fall at once into the hands of the living God, and 
are subject to the full requirements of the absolute Law 
without mercy— because all of God's mercy extended 
to sinners is in and through him who loved us and 
bought us with his own precious blood. We do not say 
that all who reject the blood of the covenant do so thus 
to their everlasting loss, but are glad to believe, on the 
contrary, that many of them have been so blinded by 
the god of this world that they have never seen clearly 



and, hence, never rejected entirely the blood-bought 
robe of righteousness. For all such we shall expect 
that the light of the new dispensation will show them 
the divine plan clearly, and we shall trust that many 
of them will be ready humbly to accept God's grace 
upon his own terms. 

The Apostle points out (vs. 4) that this Law of the 
spirit of life in which we as new creatures in Christ rejoice 
is really the same Law that once condemned us— 
that the change from condemnation to death to justification 
to life signifies no change in the Law, but a 
change in our position. It is a law of life to us, because, 
by God's grace through Christ, we have come into a 
place where we are able to comply with the requirements 
of the Law and to fulfill them. It is not our flesh 
that has been changed, so that it is perfect and able to 
obey the Law, but that as New Creatures the flesh is 
reckoned dead, and we are reckoned according to the 
spirit or mind; and with our minds, or spirits, or wills, 
we are able to keep God's Law perfectly— that is to say, 
we can will to do right, we can endeavor to do right, 
we can strive to please God, and so long as God accepts 

R3202 : page 169 

the will, the intention, the endeavor, and ignores 

our flesh and its uncontrollable weaknesses, that long 

we can realize that the divine Law approves us; and 

that will be just so long as we abide in our present position 

as members of the body of Christ, and we are privileged 

to remain members of the body of Christ just so 

long as our desires are for righteousness and in opposition 

to sin. The New Creature does not love sin, but, 

instead, loves righteousness, the very reverse. If the 

will, the heart, should turn again, so as to love unrighteousness, 

so as to desire to do the things that are 

contrary to the Lord's will, it would mean that we had 

died as New Creatures, and become alive again as fleshly 

creatures, to mind the things of the flesh, to have its 

hopes, its aims and its objects. In that case we should 

come again under the law of sin and death, and be 

judged again according to the flesh, the sentence, as 

before, being, "The wages of sin is death." Moreover, 

such a turning, as a sow to wallowing in the mire, and 

as a dog to his vomit, would, in the case of those who 

have become New Creatures in Christ and so passed 

out of Adamic death, mean the Second Death— the result 

of their own wilful rejection of God's favor through 

Christ, which they spurn after having once enjoyed. 

It will be seen, then, that there are two ways of rejecting 

God's grace; one by turning to sin (not merely 

by being overcome of the weaknesses of the flesh temporarily, 

but by a deliberate choosing of sin, and intentional 

abandonment of righteousness); the other by a 

mental rejection of the conditions of favor— a mental 

repudiation of the blood of the New Covenant. These 



two forms of committing the sin unto death— unto Second 
Death— are clearly set before us by the Apostle in 
Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31. 

There is force, then, in the Apostle's explicit definition 
of the class justified under the Law of the spirit 

R3202 : page 170 

of life— that it is those who are in Christ, and who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the spirit— who are not 
seeking to satisfy the cravings, appetites and desires of 
the flesh, but are seeking to control these, and to keep 
them in subjection to the new mind, to their utmost 
ability. Walking after the spirit does not necessarily 
mean walking up to the spirit. Only the Lord Jesus 
could walk up to the spirit of the perfect Law of God; 
but all the members of his body, all who are in Christ 
Jesus, may walk after the spirit— as nearly up to it as 
may be possible for them to do. Such a walk is acceptable 
to God, in the case of all those who are abiding 
in Christ, through faith in his blood. If, by reason 
of weaknesses of the flesh, through an unfavorable 
heredity, they be very degraded and weak, and able 
merely to hobble along with difficulty and slowness 
after the spirit, they are nevertheless counted as though 
they walked up to the spirit perfectly. In other words, 
God's arrangement for accepting the will, the intention, 
of the members of the body of Christ, instead of their 
actual performances, meets every requirement, and justifies 
freely, fully, completely, all who are in Christ— 
not one of whom could have been justified by the Law 
under the Jewish covenant or otherwise. 

The Apostle answers a supposed question as to how 
we may know those who are New Creatures in Christ 
and walking after the spirit, from others. This 
is a difficult question. There are some not in Christ 
whose flesh is much less depraved than that of some 
who are in Christ; hence, if they were measured by 
the deeds of the flesh, the one in Christ might appear 
to less advantage than the one out of Christ. The 
Lord, therefore, exhorts his people to judge not by outward 
appearance merely, assuring them that some are 
hypocritical, and that God looketh on the heart, the 
intention. So again the Apostle enjoins us, saying, 
"Henceforth know we no man after the flesh." He 
did not mean that we should pay no attention to the 
shortcomings of the flesh, either in ourselves or in other 
members of the body. All fleshly weaknesses should 
be striven against, and they may frequently demand 
rigorous treatment in the interest of the New Creature; 
but, nevertheless, we are to distinctly differentiate between 
the New Creature and his weak mortal body, 
and are to love and sympathize with the brother, while 
it may be necessary for us, in his interest, and also in 
the interest of the Church, to reprove or rebuke or 
otherwise correct his wrong course. The Apostle's definition 



of how we are to know the two classes apart is 

(vs. 5) that the unregenerate will mind the things of 

the flesh, while the regenerate will mind the things of 

the spirit. There is a great gulf fixed between these 

two classes, and there should be no need that any one 

should long be in doubt on the subject of whether he 

is or is not a member of the Church, the body of Christ. 

If he is in Christ he has the new ambitions, the new 

hopes, the new aims, and however short he may at 

times come of realizing these aims and ambitions, his 

heart being right it will always revert to the divine 

standard. His affections are for the things that are 

just and pure and good, however he may find the law 

of sin and death assailing him, through the weaknesses 

of his mortal body. He is not to be content with 

merely this condition of mental preference for the right 

and having his heart solicitous for righteousness, experiencing 

grief if he finds himself overcome by temptation; 

but, as the Apostle elsewhere enjoins, he is to 

be so deeply in earnest about the matter that he will 

not only do his best to right every wrong, but will continue 

seeking for grace at the heavenly throne, that he 

may be more and more able to overcome, that he may 

grow stronger and stronger in spirit, and that the power 

of his flesh may be correspondingly weakened. The 

Apostle exhorts such to make straight paths for their 

feet, for their weaknesses, for their lameness, according 

to the flesh— to avoid the ways of temptation and weakness 

as they discover them, and thus show their hearts' 

desires for righteousness. He urges again that all keep 

continually setting their affections on things above, so 

that the things of the earth may have less and less influence 

and control over them to hinder them in their 

course. He urges that the heart, the mind, the lips, 

the conduct, that are filled with the Lord's truth and 

service, will be thus sanctified and separated so that the 

Wicked One will find less and less opportunity to take 

the advantage. 

The matter is set forth in still different terms in vss. 6,7. 
We are to distinguish the mind of the flesh from 
the mind that is in accord with God, for the one is at 
enmity with God and the other in harmony with him. 
The mind that is in harmony with God finds delight 
in his Law, in righteousness, purity, goodness, peace, 
faith, through the promises of God, and looks forward 
with joy to the glorious realization of all the wonderful 
hopes inspired through those promises. The fleshly 
mind (however polite or polished or well educated and 
decorous and under control of the mortal body) is not in 
accord with God; it has its own ambitions, its own 
plans, and takes pleasure in these, and is grieved if 
they are thwarted; builds its hopes and aims chiefly 
upon what can be attained in this present life; is not 
in accord with God, nor disposed to accept with gratitude 
whatever he may be pleased to send; but rather 
is full of choice and self-will— not subject to divine 



control, nor can it be, because it is fleshly, and because, 
at the present time, all mankind is in a state of sin, 
alienation from God, etc. These two conditions of 
mind are contrasted, and the Apostle assures us that 

R3202:page 171 

the one is death; that it means death; means that the 
person who has that mind is still in the death condition, 
has not received Christ as the Life-giver. "He 
that hath the Son hath life," and may have, too, a 
joy and peace of the new mind in Christ; but he who 
has not the Son, he who has not surrendered his will, 
is still in death, still under condemnation, still an 
alien from God. 

This does not mean that those whom we are unable 
to bring now under the scope of the gospel of Christ 
may never become amenable to it. It does not mean, 
either, that the flesh itself is opposed to God, and 
God opposed to the flesh. The word "flesh" here 
is used in the sense of sinful flesh, because all mankind, 
through the fall, has become sinful. Originally, 
however, as represented in Father Adam before the 
fall, the flesh was pronounced very good, and God's 
own workmanship, in his own image, was not opposed 
to the Law of God, but in full accord with it. The 
divine Law was written in the very organism of our 
first parents; the difficulty is that through the fall this 
divine Law has been very considerably obliterated, and 
instead the law of selfishness— which includes all evil 
—has been engraven upon the hearts of their posterity. 
Hence the proposition of the Lord for the world is that 
he will restore all mankind to that primeval condition, 
for which times of restitution have been provided and 
promised by the mouth of all the holy prophets. (Acts 3:19-21.) 
It is in full accord with this that the Lord, 
speaking of the operation of the New Covenant, declares 
that under it (Christ being the minister of that New 
Covenant and its administrator during the time of its 
operation) he will take away the stony heart of selfishness, 
and will make a new heart of flesh, tender, sympathetic, 
generous, God-like. In other words, he will 
re-write in the organism of mankind, by the processes 
of the Millennial age,— the times of restitution,— all 
the original character and God-likeness and law which 
he possessed as originally created. When perfection 
shall have thus been accomplished for so many as will 
receive the Lord's favor on his terms of love and 
hearty obedience, it will no longer be true that the 
mind of the flesh will be at enmity with God, as it 
was not true originally, when Adam was in accord with 
God. 

To understand the Apostle it must be kept clearly 
in mind that he is writing these words, not to the world 
nor about the world, but to the saints and about the 
saints. He is describing the condition of those who 



have passed from death unto life, who have become 
New Creatures, contrasting them with the world, still 

R3203 :page 171 

in sin and divine disfavor. They that are in the flesh, 
living according to their own wills, who have not heard, 
or, hearing, have not accepted God's grace in Christ, 
cannot please God, cannot be said to be acquitted, cannot 
be considered as under divine favor. 

Turning to the Church, the Apostle points out, 
"Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that 
the spirit of God dwelleth in you." The Apostle here 
indicates what it is that constitutes us New Creatures. 
We are New Creatures because begotten again; because 
begotten of the spirit of God. We were not thus begotten 
until first we had been justified by faith in the 
blood of Christ, and then had heard the invitation to 
present our bodies living sacrifices, and then had complied 
with that invitation and consecrated our all 
upon the Lord's altar. Then we received the spirit of 
God; then we were recognized as New Creatures in 
Christ— as no longer flesh beings, but as spirit beings. 

Here, then, is the test. Those who have the spirit 
of Christ must have been begotten to it; those who 
have not the spirit of Christ are not his. Thus we are 
to judge ourselves, and thus we are to judge of the 
brethren— by the spirit, the intention, the will, and not 
by the success, not by the flesh. Oh, how generous 
this would make us in our judging of the brethren! 
If they profess and give any evidence of loving the 
Lord, trusting in the precious blood, loving holy things, 
loving the brethren, loving the word of grace and truth, 
and of seeking to develop the fruits of the spirit, they 
are surely brethren, surely "in Christ." If they have 
not this spirit, love the world, prefer worldly company, 
give themselves wholly to worldly ambitions, pride of 
life and self-gratification, we have strong reason to 
doubt their relationship to the Lord, no matter what 
they may profess. And this feature of the matter 
should be especially applied by each one of us to himself, 
as an individual test of his relationship to the 
Lord, and each one who finds the spirit of worldliness 
growing upon him should feel that he is losing ground, 
should seek afresh to set his affection on things above 
and to grow in grace. 

"THE BODY IS DEAD." 

The Apostle explains that in the case of these New 
Creatures in Christ, from the divine standpoint the 
body is treated as dead, but the spirit, or mind, is 
treated as alive. It is the New Creature which God recognizes, 
to which he purposes to give a new spirit-body 
in due time— in the first resurrection. It is necessary 
that this thought be clearly fixed in our minds, in order 



that we may continually realize our peace toward God 

and his favor and sympathy toward us in Christ. If 

we lose sight of the fact that God regards us from the 

standpoint of the will, if we get to thinking of ourselves 

and God's estimate of us as according to the flesh, we 

are sure to get proportionately into darkness and confusion 

and discouragement. But let us not forget, on 

the other hand, that the spirit, or will, is counted alive 

R3203 : page 172 

because of its righteousness, because it is in harmony 

with God. Let us, therefore, never be slack in respect 

to the will, or intention, governing the conduct of our 

lives, but remember that any laxity will mean the proportionate 

loss of spiritual life. To will right is always 

possible to us, and nothing less than an absolutely 

loyal will could be acceptable to God in Christ. 

However, as the Apostle explains in vs. 11, if God's 
spirit animates us, the result will surely be that these 
bodies which we reckon dead, and which God graciously 
reckons dead, will be so quickened, so energized, 
so controlled by the new mind, the holy mind, 
the spirit of our new nature, that they will become actively 
"quickened"— toward righteousness, toward the 
service of the Lord, the service of the truth— in doing 
good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith. This is only what we should 
expect, too, for the spirit of God is powerful in whatever 
way it be applied. As an illustration of its power, 
the Apostle points us to our Lord Jesus and his literal 
death, and how God's holy spirit raised Jesus from the 
dead in his resurrection. The thought is that this 
power of God thus exercised on behalf of the Lord 
Jesus, and which he promises so to exercise in the 
close of this age on behalf of all the faithful members of 
the body of Christ, indicates a power of God by which, 
if we avail ourselves of it, the new nature will find 
strength to conquer, to keep the flesh under, and, more 
than this, to make it active, energetic in the service of 
righteousness. The Apostle is not here speaking of 
the future resurrection of the just— the completion of 
the first resurrection as spirit beings. He is speaking 
of the figurative resurrection, which the Lord's consecrated 
people experience in this present time. As he 
elsewhere expresses it, "If ye then be risen with Christ, 
seek those things which are above;" and again, "You 
hath he quickened [made alive, resurrected figuratively] 
who were dead in trespasses and sins, ...and 
hath raised us up together, and made us to sit together in 
heavenly places in Christ Jesus."— Col. 3:1; Eph. 2:1,6. 

The sum of the matter, then, is that we who are 
New Creatures find that we do not owe anything as 
New Creatures to the flesh; that all of our advantages 
and blessings have come to us along other lines. We 
ought, therefore, to ignore the flesh and its desires and 



appetites, and ought to walk as strictly after the spirit 

as possible in all of our affairs. Do we ask why? One 

answer is here given (vs. 13), "If ye live after the 

flesh ye shall die." We who have received the grace 

of God, who have heard of his mercy and love, and 

have been accepted in the Beloved, have counted all 

our earthly interests as sacrifices, that we might have 

share with Christ in the sufferings of this present time 

and in the glory that shall follow. For us to live after 

the flesh would mean to die in the most absolute sense 

—the Second Death— because we have had the full benefit 

of the ransom already imputed to us. There is 

hope for the world, which knows, as yet, comparatively 

little or nothing of the grace of God, which has not 

tasted, has not seen, etc.— there is hope for the members 

of this class that under the Kingdom rule they will be 

caused to see clearly, and may then respond obediently 

to the divine arrangement; but if we sin wilfully after 

that we have received a knowledge of the truth, there 

remaineth no more sacrifice for sins for us— therefore, 

there would remain no future hope for us. But, on the 

other hand, let us hope that few of those who have 

accepted the grace of God are disposed to draw back 

unto perdition; but are rather disposed to go on and to 

secure the end of their faith,— glory, honor and immortality, 

joint heirship in the Kingdom. To us who are 

thus minded the Apostle's words are encouraging, when 

he says, "If ye, through the spirit, do mortify the 

deeds of the body, ye shall live." The condition upon 

which we may continue our relationship to the Lord, 

and our hope for a share in the glories of the first resurrection 

are thus definitely stated to include mortification 

of the deeds of the body— restraining the fleshly 

inclinations, putting them to death, crucifying them, 

using them up in the service of the Lord and his cause. 

Such mortification of the deeds of the body, such a battle 

against the weaknesses of the flesh, is what the 

Apostle elsewhere speaks of as the "warfare," when he 

tells us that the flesh warreth against the spirit, and 

the spirit in turn warreth against the flesh, for the two 

are contrary, and will be opponents to the end of life; 

and if the spirit has been willing, and has fought to the 

best of its ability against the weaknesses of the flesh, 

the Lord will count the victory complete, through the 

merit of the Redeemer. 

We are not to think of this as being the warfare 
of a fleshly will against a spiritual will, nor the battling 
of the old nature against the new nature. These 
are erroneous conceptions, not in accord with the Scriptural 
delineations. We cannot have two wills and yet 
be in Christ. We cannot serve two masters. The matter 
must be decided— it must be settled before we are 
accepted to membership in the body of Christ. Hence 
it is, that a full consecration of all that we have and 
are is necessary to membership in Christ. Henceforth 
there is only the one will, the will of Christ. As for the 



will of the flesh, we do not own it to be ours; we ignore 
it, we oppose it— we are the New Creatures; the will 
of the flesh and, in general, the flesh, are contrary, and 
thus reckoned by the Lord as well as by us as dead; 
we must keep the body under— keep it dead; we must 
not allow a fleshly will to assert itself in us. This 
does not mean that we can hinder a fleshly desire, but 

R3203 : page 173 

there is a vast difference between a desire and a will. 

Our flesh may desire various things which we believe 

the will of God would oppose, but our wills will not consent. 

Even though through weakness of the flesh an 

error might have been committed, the will could not 

have consented so long as it was loyal to the Lord. The 

new will may have fallen temporarily into a stupor 

and so have come under the power of the flesh for a 

time, but as surely as it was the new will it never consented 

to sin and never approved of it. 

This, then, is the guide by which we may know 
our true position, not only at the beginning of the race, 
but to the end of it; viz., if we are led by the spirit of 
God— if that is the direction in which we are following, 
if that is what we are seeking— then we are sons of God; 
he owns and accepts all who have come unto him 
through Christ, and who are trusting in the merit of the 
wedding garment, and who continue in this attitude of 
heart. These will continue to be owned of the Lord as 
sons to the end of the present journey, to the end of the 
present time of sacrifice; and beyond he will own them 
as his sons in the first resurrection, giving them the 
suitable spirit bodies he has promised them.— Rom. 8:14; 
2 Tim. 2:11,12; 1 John 3:2. 



R3204 : page 173 

"THY KINGDOM COME!" 

"For as the earth bringeth forth the bud, and as the garden causeth 
the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord God will 
cause righteousness and praise to spring forth 
before all the nations."— Isa. 61:11. 

Thy Kingdom come! Give ear, O King of ages! 

This earnest prayer is knocking at thy door; 
The Church of God with one accord engages 

In hopeful pleading till the night is o'er. 

Thy Kingdom come! We wait the promised glory 

That, like the sea, embraces every shore. 
We wait the time proclaimed in psalm and story, 

When strife shall cease and nations war no more. 



Thy Kingdom come, and bring its feast of gladness 
To groaning creatures wasted by despair; 

To dry all faces with the breath of gladness, 

And soothe our sorrows with thy love and care. 

Thy Kingdom come! To darkened minds revealing 
The blissful springs of gratitude and praise. 

Come, Sun of righteousness, with beams of healing; 
Dispense thy light in universal rays. 

Thy Kingdom come! O, haste the Bride's appearing; 

Let every soul her wand of healing feel,— 
While all the ransomed of the Lord, revering, 

Adore Jehovah, and in homage kneel. — G.M. Bills. 



R3204 : page 173 

"GOD MOVES IN A MYSTERIOUS WAY." 

-ACTS 27:33-44. -JUNE 1 .- 

"Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he 
delivered them out of their distresses."— Psa. 107:6. 

NOT long after Paul's discourse before Festus and 

Agrippa, opportunity offered for sending him 

a prisoner to Rome, in accordance with his 

own appeal. He was not sent alone, but in company 

with other prisoners and under a strong guard. The journey 

from Caesarea to Rome was by water on merchant 

vessels, and was probably in the fall of the year, when 

the storms on the Mediterranean are frequently very 

severe, sometimes lasting for several days, as in the 

case mentioned in this lesson. The storm lasted for 

fourteen days, and was evidently unusually severe. 

The dangerous season for navigation was reckoned from 

September 14 to November 14, at which time all navigation 

in the open sea was suspended for the winter. 

It is presumed that this storm occurred about September 

25. 

Doubtless, were we able to look at affairs from 
God's standpoint, as we will be able to view them by 
and by, we should see more reason than we now are 
able to discern why the Apostle's journey to Rome 
should have been attended with such trying experiences, 
mental and physical, as were incidental to the 
shipwreck, wintering on the island of Malta, etc. Possibly 
the Apostle's faith was being tried; possibly it 
was being rooted and grounded by these experiences. 
The Lord had distinctly informed him in a vision that 
he should go to Rome as his ambassador. He was now 
on the way, and on several occasions matters looked 
serious; it seemed as though he would never see the 
capital of the world; never have the privilege of presenting 



the truth to the brethren residing there, to 
whom he had already sent the Epistle to the Romans; 
never have the opportunity of laboring in their midst, 
as he had hoped and promised to do. 

When in port at Crete a conference was held 
respecting the wisdom of wintering there or of going 
on, and the Apostle gave his opinion that it would 
be unsafe to go on. This may have been the result 
of some inspiration, but quite possibly was merely 
the result of his own judgment of the weather, etc. 
He had already had large experience in seeing disasters, 
as we are informed in one of his epistles written previous 
to this time: "Thrice I suffered shipwreck, 
a night and a day I have been in the deep." (2 Cor. 1 1:25.) 
Besides, his trade as a sail-maker would 
naturally bring him in contact with sailors, and interest 
him in all matters pertaining to the craft. Those 
in command, however, decided to proceed on the journey, 
and encountered the disastrous storm of our lesson. 
During those fourteen days the Apostle had 

R3204 : page 174 

abundant opportunity to fear and doubt and question 
the Lord's providences, and apparently it was not until 
the night of the thirteenth day of the storm that the 
Lord sent an angel to the Apostle, with the consoling 
message that he should not fear— "Fear not, Paul; 
thou must be brought before Caesar; and lo, God hath 
given thee all them that sail with thee." (Vs. 24.) 
We may safely assume that the Apostle, during these 
testing days, remained heartily loyal in faith toward 
God, and that this message at the close was in the nature 
of an encouragement and an expression of 
approval. 

We may draw a good lesson from this incident, not 
only in respect to our own affairs in life,— that the Lord 
may lead in mysterious ways regarding our temporal 
matters and our service for him and his cause;— but 
we may additionally apply the lesson in a general way 
to all spiritual testings and trials. The Lord gives us, 
for instance, assurances of his love and care, and of the 
ultimate outcome of the narrow way to all who faithfully 
follow in the steps of Jesus; but meantime he 
may permit trials and difficulties of various kinds to 
come as storms upon us, threatening our very destruction, 
threatening the overwhelming of our spiritual 
life, darkening the sky of our hopes with the thunderclouds 
of our enemies' threats and Satan's roarings. 
Our duty is to let the eye of faith be undimmed by 
these various terrible conditions,— to let our hearts be 
firmly fixed upon him who has promised, and who is 
able also to perform. Thus, 

"When the storms of life are raging, 
Tempests wild on sea and land, 



I will seek a place of refuge 
In the shadow of God's hand. 

"Enemies may strive to injure, 

Satan all his arts employ; 
God will turn what seems to harm me 

Into everlasting joy." 

The expression, "God hath given thee all them 
that sail with thee," is very meaningful. It reminds 
us of Abraham's prayer for Sodom— peradventure there 
were even five righteous persons, God agreed to save the 
city. There is no suggestion in these words of the 
"fatherhood of God, and brotherhood of men," as that 
false teaching is now advocated by many who have a 
noble impulse. The thought, on the contrary, is that 
there was only one man on that ship who was in personal 
relationship to God. The others, whatever their 
natural traits of character, had never come into personal 
relationship with the Father. Another thought from 
the words is that the divine care going with the 
saints may prove a great blessing to their companions, 
even though, as in this case, they be worldly and unregenerate. 
This thought is particularly applicable in 
the earthly families of God's people. The believing 
consecrated father or mother is the direct subject of 
divine care; for of the angels it is written, "They are 
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister unto those 
who shall be heirs of salvation," and, in ministering 
to these, very frequently (indeed, we may suppose generally) 
those of their families who have not come into 
full relationship with the Lord are to some extent included 
under the protecting care. Elsewhere the Apostle 
points out that in some respects the believing wife 
has a blessed influence over her husband; or the believing 
husband a favorable influence over the wife 
in regard to the children, else the children would be 
accounted unholy. (1 Cor. 7:14.) This is another 
illustration of the same general lesson that divine care, 
though specially for the saints, includes all of their 
interests of every kind. This does not necessarily imply 
earthly prosperity, wealth, preservation from accident, 
shipwreck, etc., as in Paul's case, and yet it does 
always mean, in some sense and in some degree, an 
advantage. Let us take from this thought all the comfort 
we can. All things shall work together for good 
to the Lord's saints, and those who are nearest and 
dearest to them will surely be participants to some extent 
in their interest and in the divine care. 

Promptly after receiving the assurances of the 
safety of all on board, the Apostle made the matter 
known to the ship's company, and manifested his own 
faith in the message by cheerfulness and breaking of 
his fast, and advising all the others to do likewise. 
His spirit was contagious; they were all cheered, and 
doubtless they were all impressed not only by the fact 



to which the Apostle called their attention— namely, 
that this disaster had come upon them by their failing 

R3205 : page 174 

to follow his advice— but also by the evidence of God's 

special favor toward him in connection with the knowledge 

of their ultimate rescue. So it should be with us: 

whatever we know that is good or comforting or refreshing 

to ourselves, we should dispense to others. 

Had the Apostle kept this good news to himself, it 

would have implied one of two things; either that he 

did not have faith in its fulfilment, or that he was selfish; 

but having the Lord's spirit of generosity, as well 

as large trust in the Lord, he did not hesitate to make 

known the coming deliverance; and he glorified God 

in that he did not claim to have this knowledge of himself, 

but credited it to a revelation. Evidently the 

prisoner had produced a deep impression upon many 

of the soldiers and sailors. Who can say that at some 

future time the Apostle's brave and noble conduct may 

not have influenced some of his two hundred and seventy-six 

companions— possibly eventually drawing some 

of them to the Lord? So it should be with each of us; 

we should be prompt to tell to others the best tidings 

we have; sympathy with the groaning creation in the 

R3205 : page 175 

various trials of life should lead us to point to the 
Lord's promises respecting the coming Kingdom and 
the blessings that should then be to all the families of 
the earth. Whoever does not thus proclaim daily, on 
every suitable opportunity, gives evidence either of lack 
of knowledge or of faith in the revelation or of selfishness, 
which the Lord can not approve, and which, persisted 
in, will ultimately debar him from a share in the 
Kingdom. 

Another thought properly connected with this lesson 
is the absence of any suggestion of a revival service being 
held on board the boat. Neither Paul nor Luke nor Aristarchus 
are reported to have made the slightest effort, 
except as their lives were living epistles. It is barely 
possible that religious services may not have been permitted 
on the vessel; but, anyway, we know from the 
Apostle's general course of conduct, that he did his 
fishing for men amongst rather different classes. As 
we understand the matter, the seamen of that day were 
of a coarse and ignorant class. We cannot doubt that 
the Apostle would have been glad indeed to have served 
any of his companions had he found in them the hearing 
ear— according to the Master's words, "He that 
hath an ear to hear, let him hear." That the sailors 
were not in a condition to receive or appreciate the gospel 
is evident from the lesson; because they were 
selfishly intent upon using the only small boat available 



for their escape, and premeditated leaving the soldiers 
and the prisoners on the vessel. We mark the spirit of 
selfishness as totally unbecoming in anyone begotten of 
the spirit of God, and contrast it with the spirit of the 
Apostle, as generous, loving, considerate of others. A 
similar test shows us that the soldiers in general were 
not of a class likely to have a hearing ear, because, 
when perceiving that the vessel would go to pieces, and 
that thus some prisoners might escape, they counselled 
their destruction. "The liberal heart deviseth liberal 
things," and all of the Lord's consecrated people should 
not only have the noble impulses coming to them because 
they are the Lord's and because they have tasted 
of his grace, and been made partakers of his spirit, but, 
additionally, they should see to it that this spirit prevails 
in them; that it is manifest in all the affairs of 
life. They should see to it that they do not crush out 
the noble impulses which would properly come to them; 
that, on the contrary, they foster them and encourage 
them and develop them more and more. Thus we 
grow in grace as we grow in knowledge, by obedience 
to the things which we learn. 

The centurion alone seems to have profited by the 
experiences. He alone seems to have read the Apostle's 
living epistle to any advantage, and upon him it did 
make an impression, for while he would not have objected 
so much to the killing of the other prisoners, 
who probably were seditious characters and worthy of 
death, he saw no way to make an exception of Paul, 
and for Paul's sake, therefore, all the prisoners' lives 
were spared. 

Notwithstanding the Apostle's assurance of the 
Lord that the lives of the entire ship's company were 
given him, that all would be saved, he realized the propriety 
of using all proper diligence in cooperation with 
the promise. Hence, when he discerned the evident 
intention of the sailors to escape in the small boat, 
leaving the passengers, unable to guide the vessel, at 
the mercy of the sea, he communicated the facts to the 
centurion, pointing out the necessity of compliance with 
reasonable precautions to insure the fulfilment of the 
divine promise. So we all should understand that we 
have something to do in realizing the gracious promises 
of God to us. In connection with the affairs of this 
present life he has promised that our bread and water 
shall be sure, but this does not imply that we shall 
neglect reasonable opportunities for securing these. He 
has promised us also a share in the Kingdom by and 
by; but it is for us to make our calling and our election 
sure. God is thoroughly capable and thoroughly 
willing to perform all of his part in connection with 
every matter, but it is to our advantage that he calls 
upon us to show our faith by our works— by our cooperation 
with him in all reasonable ways. He does not 
expect us to perform miracles; but he does expect us to 
do what we are able to do both in respect to present 



things and eternal matters. By and by the Apostle's predictions 

were fulfilled, and the entire ship's company, 

some by swimming and others by floating on wreckage, 

reached the land. We notice again that the Apostle did 

not propose, on reaching land, to have a general revival 

service; he was not bent on exciting men's minds, but 

was practising the same gospel methods which the 

Master taught him; viz., "Let us reason together"— 

sit down first and count the cost of discipleship, and, if 

willing to pay the price, "Come, take up thy cross, 

and follow me." If this, the Lord's method for gathering 

his people from the world, were still pursued, 

there would be many fewer nominal Christians; but 

we believe there would be no smaller number of the 

genuine ones. The time for bringing in the world is 

not yet; hence the Master's words in prayer, "I pray 

not for the world, but for those whom thou hast given 

me out of the world, that they all may be one... 

that [ultimately, 'in due time'] the world may believe." 

The gathering of the elect class for the Kingdom 

is under disadvantageous conditions which will 

thoroughly test them, and make their way so narrow 

that few will find it, and still fewer make progress in 

it. When God's time for dealing with the world shall 

have come, the powers of heaven and of earth will 

cooperate with the glorified Church in making the gospel 

so plain that a wayfaring man, though a fool, need 

not err therein. 

So far as the record shows, the Apostle and his 
companions did no mission work amongst the barbarians 
of the island on which they were wrecked, nor 
amongst the soldiers and sailors, their companions during 
that winter. They left no Church there;— we may 
safely presume that they found no hearing ears. The 
lesson to us from this should be that we are not to expect 
the conversion of the world nor anything akin to 
it. We are to expect that the Lord will find with the 
truth a sufficient number to complete the elect Church, 
and then, with the power and the authority of the Kingdom, 
establish righteousness and cause the knowledge 
of himself to fill the earth and bless the whole world 
through the Church. -Gal. 3:29. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 