Announcements
1953 CONVENTION REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
The New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses at Yankee Stadium, New York city, July 19 to 26, will be an event of interest to Christian people throughout the world. Sometime following the assembly a 96-page report will be published, giving many of the convention high lights and details. Many pictures of different features of the assembly will be presented. So that you will be certain to get your copy of this report, we urge you to place your order now. Wherever possible, all of Jehovah’s witnesses are encouraged to place their orders through the local congregations. However, individuals may place their orders direct if they wish. Do not forget to order copies for persons of good will in your area. Specify clearly the number of copies of the 1953 Convention Report of Jehovah’s Witnesses that you want, and enclose a remittance of 25 cents a copy. Type or print your name and address plainly. If your address should change between now and October 1, please be sure to advise us.
GIVING BRINGS GREATER HAPPINESS
There is certainly no pleasure in living without happiness. God’s Word reveals that, while there is happiness in receiving, greater happiness comes in unselfishly giving good things to others. (Acts 20:35, NW) To mankind Jehovah gives his Word and sacred promises in abundance, plus a great many material benefits, and he must have great pleasure in so doing. So it is not strange that his servants on earth find happiness in giving out his Word of truth that surpasses even their joy at having received it. During August preachers of good news will continue to offer a combination of three bound books on a contribution of $1.50, with three booklets free. Everyone is invited to participate. If you would like to acquaint friends, neighbors and others with what Jehovah’s witnesses believe and preach, send for a small packet of 200 tracts bearing the title “What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe?” Remit only 25c for 200 of these six-page, pocket-size tracts.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 16: Launching the Kingdom Government, ¶1-26.
Week of August 23: Launching the Kingdom Government, ¶27-47.

