French Guiana
The jungle is everywhere, like a huge green carpet spreading from the Tumuc-Humac Mountains in the south to the Atlantic Ocean to the north. Cutting through this dense rain forest, the Maroni and the Oyapock rivers flow from south to north before emptying into the sea. The land between these rivers is French Guiana.
The rains, which last more than half the year, create a lush environment. But not many humans penetrate the interior of the country. There are few good roads away from the coast, and rapids make river travel a challenge. The names of the rapids signify the danger they present—Saut Fracas (Crash Rapids), Gros Saut (Big Rapids), Saut Tambour (Drum Rapids), Saut Laissé Dédé (Rapids That Leave You Dead), A Dieu Vat’ (That’s the End of It).
The forest contains over a thousand species of trees, dazzling orchids, and other plants that thrive in the moist, tropical environment. More than 170 species of mammals, 720 species of birds, and countless species of insects make their home here. There are huge anacondas, caimans, jaguars, and anteaters, but they are not often seen, since they make a stealthy escape when they detect human presence. Over the paths and above the rivers, bright-blue butterflies drift nonchalantly, and brilliantly colored birds dart from tree to tree.
Just as colorful as the plants and wildlife is the great variety of people and cultures. Amerindian villages are scattered along the coast and rivers. The populace includes the Galibi, Arawak, Palicur, Wayana, Emerillon, and Oyampi.
The majority of the population of this small South American land is concentrated along the coast and in the capital, Cayenne. Living in river communities on the Suriname border are the Bush Negroes, descendants of escaped slaves who were brought from Africa to work on plantations. They speak a creole language called Sranantongo. About a hundred years ago, Asian immigrants arrived from Singapore, Vietnam, and China. In 1977 the Hmong began arriving as political refugees from Laos. Along with Asians, immigrants from Martinique, Guadeloupe, Haiti, Brazil, Suriname, the Dominican Republic, Saint Lucia, Lebanon, Peru, and metropolitan France make up over half the population of over 150,000.
A Harsh Life
The first Europeans arrived here about the year 1500, but their initial attempts to settle in this land did not succeed. The environment was too harsh. However, the territory now making up French Guiana became a French colony in the 17th century. Later on, long-term convicts were sent from France to penal camps for forced labor in such places as Cayenne, Kourou, and Saint-Laurent. Political prisoners were consigned to Devil’s Island, where only a small number survived. Those prison camps have long been closed. Now, Kourou is the location of a European satellite-launching center. Although French Guiana is 4,400 miles [7,100 km] from Europe, it is still officially an administrative district of France, a French overseas department, and thus also part of the European Community.
In the latter half of the 19th century, nearly 300 years after a legend concerning a city of gold in this land was reported by Sir Walter Raleigh, gold was finally discovered. In spite of the dangers, by the 1920’s, driven by gold fever, some 10,000 men had penetrated deep inside the rain forest in the hope of striking it rich.
Then came others who also had the courage needed to deal with the rigors of life in French Guiana. However, these pioneers came to give, not to take.
Seeds of Bible Truth Planted
These courageous pioneers brought with them good news from God’s Word. They told people about God’s purpose to put an end to sickness and death, to help people of all nations to live together as brothers, and to make the earth a paradise. (Isa. 2:3, 4; 25:8; 33:24; Rev. 7:9, 10) They were sharing in the work foretold by Jesus Christ when he said that this good news of God’s Kingdom would be preached “in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations” before the end would come. (Matt. 24:14) This important evangelizing work reached French Guiana in 1946. Most of the early Witnesses of Jehovah who came to French Guiana were from such French overseas departments as Guadeloupe and Martinique as well as from Dutch Guiana (now known as Suriname), which lies just to the west.
The first seeds of truth were planted by Brother Olga Laaland, a zealous minister from Guadeloupe. In December 1945 he made a trip to visit his mother and his fleshly brothers, who lived near the Mana River in the interior of French Guiana. Reaching his mother’s village required traveling several days by river canoe. Along the way, he took advantage of overnight stops—at small open sheds covered with leaves of palm trees—to preach and distribute Bible literature. When he arrived at his mother’s village, Haut Souvenir, he joyfully shared with his family the good news of the Kingdom. To his surprise and chagrin, they called him a demon. In this hostile atmosphere, in 1946 he commemorated the Memorial of Jesus’ death with only his young brothers in the audience. Soon his mother, influenced by the local priest, chased him away, shouting: “Demons cannot live here in my house!” Her negative reaction did not dampen his zeal.
On the return trip, he preached when stops were made at gold mines and degrads, or trading posts. One night he and the other passengers were sleeping in a hut on the riverbank. A tropical downpour caused a huge tree to fall with a terrifying crash. In panic, Olga dived into the river, not knowing that the waters were infested with piranhas. When he was unharmed, the men there were persuaded that he must have godlike powers, so they viewed him with deep respect. This made them more open to the message he was bearing.
Brother Laaland eventually reached Mana, a village of 800 inhabitants on the Atlantic Coast. During his initial six-month stay there, he organized meetings and regularly taught ten persons the Bible truths that bring true freedom. (John 8:32) The people nicknamed him Père Paletot (Father Jacket) because he used to wear a jacket, in contrast to the local priest, whom they called Father Dress. Though Brother Laaland ran out of literature, he delivered public talks and zealously preached to all who would listen. He developed a reputation as an energetic speaker, not averse to lively discussions with the local clergy.
Nearly two years after visiting his mother, Brother Laaland returned to Guadeloupe. No one had been baptized as a result of his preaching, but he had planted many seeds. The fruitage would come later.
Workers From a Variety of Lands
In 1956 the Watch Tower Society asked Wim van Seijl from the Suriname branch to go to French Guiana. He relates: “With a small plane, we went from Saint-Laurent to Cayenne and stayed for about three weeks in a small hotel. We worked a great part of Cayenne with the book La Vie Eternelle [Everlasting Life], placing several hundred copies. There definitely was interest, but because of our lack of knowledge of the French language, it was difficult to start studies. Our introduction from house to house was: ‘Yesterday we arrived in Cayenne by plane to preach the good news.’ After two weeks, we still started with ‘Yesterday we arrived in Cayenne,’ since it was the only introduction we knew in French! In an old theater that was no longer in use, we showed the film The New World Society in Action. The narration was translated by a man into patois and was then translated by a woman into French.” There was considerable interest, but how would it be cultivated?
More Witnesses from Suriname came to help. Paul Naarendorp and Cecyl and Nel Pinas were among them. Quite a few of those who came could speak French.
Help came also from an unexpected source. In Dunkerque, France, a family had been studying the Bible. Only the 16-year-old son, Christian Bonecaze, continued to show interest. When the family moved to Cayenne, Christian spoke to his schoolmates about the things he had learned from the Bible. One showed interest, and so did his three sisters. Christian wrote to the Society for help.
About that time, Xavier and Sara Noll had returned to Martinique after graduating from Gilead School in 1958. The Society asked Brother Noll to go to French Guiana to help the small group there. It was a ten-day trip by small boat, during which Xavier had to sleep on the deck.
On arriving in Cayenne, Brother Noll was received hospitably by the interested ones. They invited him to have his meals with them during his stay, and they arranged for him to have a pleasant room in a hotel that was run by a former convict. Every day Brother Noll had Bible studies and spiritual discussions with Christian and the family that was so hospitable. Their knowledge of Bible truth became deeper. Within a few weeks, Christian expressed a desire to get baptized; so did his friend and two of his sisters. Though a downpour made it impossible for Brother Noll to give the baptism talk on the beach as planned, he gave it for the group right in their small automobile. Then they proceeded with the immersion, the first one conducted by Jehovah’s Witnesses in French Guiana.
During his stay in the country, Brother Noll used his time well in the field ministry. In a week he had placed nearly all his literature. He kept just one magazine to show people as a basis for obtaining subscriptions. Within three weeks he obtained 70 subscriptions, including about a dozen in Chinese. How did he explain matters in Chinese? He showed his class picture from Gilead School, pointed to the Chinese students in the class, and used lots of gestures. “It worked very well,” he says. Among others to whom he witnessed was Michel Valard, whose brother was a priest but who himself had been searching for gold in the interior of the country. After Brother Noll left, Christian Bonecaze took the lead in the activity of the small group there in Cayenne.
Shortly after this, in 1960, the branch in Guadeloupe was assigned oversight of the preaching of the good news in French Guiana. How beneficial it was for them to receive help on a more regular basis! A foundation had been laid, and now progressive building could be done. To that end, in 1960, Octave Thélise was sent from Martinique to serve as a special pioneer. He proceeded to visit those who had subscriptions to our magazines and those who had obtained other Watch Tower publications. In that same year, Théophanie Victor, also from Martinique, moved to French Guiana to serve, and soon she was assigned to be a special pioneer.
Earlier, in 1954, Mr. van Pardo, a Dutchman, and his Martinican wife had moved to Paramaribo, Suriname, where the wife was contacted by the Witnesses. The following year, they moved to Saint-Laurent, just across the Maroni River, which separates Suriname from French Guiana. Two Witnesses from Suriname, Brothers Pinas and Libreto, crossed the Maroni River by canoe every three months for a period of about five years to help the couple grow in knowledge of Jehovah and his requirements. In December 1960, at a convention in Paramaribo, Suriname, during a visit by Milton Henschel from the Watch Tower Society’s world headquarters, the Van Pardo couple along with two others from French Guiana got baptized.
In May 1961, Nicolas Brisart, the branch overseer from Guadeloupe, visited the group of 16 publishers in Cayenne to participate in the first circuit assembly there. In addition, he showed the film The Happiness of the New World Society to an audience of 250. The excellent response prompted him to show another film—The New World Society in Action. There was a similar fine response when the films were shown in Saint-Laurent. The deputy mayor of Saint-Laurent was so impressed that he said: “It is the first time in my life that I have seen something like that.” While shaking hands with the brothers, he asked: “Did you ask the mayor for permission to use the town hall to show your film? I’ll talk to him about it tomorrow.” Permission was granted not only to show the films but also to present a public Bible talk every night. In all, over 500 persons saw the Society’s films and heard talks based on the Bible during that memorable visit. The deputy mayor said: “We need the kind of people you are, you Jehovah’s Witnesses.” About two years later, in March 1963, the first congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses was established in Cayenne. The meetings were held in a small house on the outskirts of the city in a place called Petit Monaco.
How the Truth Reached Them
Among those in that first congregation were Brother and Sister Sylvestre, both originally from Martinique. How did they become Jehovah’s Witnesses? One day in 1952 when Mrs. Sylvestre was going to the grocery store, a former inmate of Devil’s Island saw her and asked her to take some books to her husband. Where he got the books she did not know, but they were Watch Tower publications. She knew that her husband liked to read them, so she took them along. She recalls: “As I dropped the books on the table, my eyes caught sight of the title ‘Let God Be True.’ I immediately took interest in this book that spoke about God. When my husband came home, I related to him what I had read about the name of God, the worship of idols, and what the forbidden fruit really was. Never before had I heard such things. I was immediately convinced that this was the truth. Right away, I stopped attending my religious meetings. Although I had never met the Witnesses, I started to talk to my friends about what I was learning through this book, and I encouraged all around me to read it. Nine years later, a lady, Théophanie Victor, came to my door and offered me two Awake! magazines. As she was leaving, I asked her which religion she belonged to. ‘The Association of Jehovah’s Witnesses,’ she answered. ‘Well,’ I exclaimed, ‘I have been waiting for you for nine years now! May I have an appointment with you?’” In time, she and her husband took a firm stand for the worship of Jehovah.
Michel Valard, who had earlier been contacted at his workplace by Xavier Noll, was also among those who embraced the truth when the Witnesses in this country were few. When he began to attend meetings held by the Witnesses, he gradually realized that he was getting satisfying answers to his questions. Sister Victor offered to study the Bible with him, and he immediately accepted, but Jeanne, his wife, was very upset about it. As a result, he had to study outside the house. Yet, he was convinced that what he was learning was the truth, and he wanted to share it with Jeanne. So he selected articles from the magazines that he knew would arouse her curiosity and put these where she could not help but see them. Eventually, she too agreed to have a Bible study, and in 1963 both of them got baptized. Their children also accepted the truth, and one of them, Jean-Daniel Michotte (Jeanne’s son before she married Michel Valard), serves as a member of the Branch Committee.
It was while studying in France that Paul Chong Wing, a young teacher from French Guiana, came in touch with the Witnesses. He was disillusioned by the world situation and the attitudes of the people. He had pursued Freemasonry, but it did not answer the questions that were puzzling him. He used to tell himself that there must be truth somewhere, and he resolved to look for it. His contacts with Jehovah’s Witnesses convinced him that he had found it. On returning to French Guiana, he got in touch with Michel Valard, and to his great joy, he learned that there was a Kingdom Hall very near his home. He got baptized in 1964, and his wife, the following year. He progressed rapidly. The need for capable and willing men in the congregation was so great that he was appointed to be the congregation servant just one year later. He helped to form a number of congregations. Now he serves as a member of the Branch Committee.
Supporting Isolated Publishers
The congregation in Cayenne was growing, but the publishers there did not limit their efforts to their local territory. Brothers from Cayenne periodically made weekend visits to support the small groups of isolated publishers in Saint-Laurent, Mana, and Iracoubo. The schedule on such trips was full. First they drove along the coast from Cayenne to Saint-Laurent, at the border with Suriname. At 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, a meeting including a public talk and the Watchtower Study was held. After an overnight stay, they drove north to Mana in order to begin the meeting there at 8:00 a.m. After a lunch on the way back on the road to Cayenne, they stopped at Iracoubo to hold the same program, starting at 3:00 p.m. Then they headed home to Cayenne.
These were marathon weekends, but those who participated have unforgettable memories. The trip involved traveling 150 miles [250 km] each way. The roads were red dirt and full of holes. After a tropical rain, the roadway was flooded and was sometimes under three feet of water. The brothers had to wait a few hours to allow the waters to subside before they could continue. It was necessary for a caravan of five or six vehicles to travel together because the holes in the road were so deep that the cars often got stuck. When this happened, the brothers had to cut small trees from the forest and put the trunks across the holes. Then everyone pushed the cars across. The first car to pass over a large hole helped to pull the others across. There were also delays as they waited for ferries at Kourou and at Mana. While waiting, the brothers were attacked by mosquitoes, but they used their time to offer magazines to passersby.
The isolated groups of publishers were greatly built up by these visits, and their expressions of gratitude far overshadowed any problems encountered in the journey. The benefits were not one-sided. The brothers from Cayenne were also greatly encouraged by the hospitality and zeal shown by Brother and Sister van Pardo, Sister Fantan, Sister Barthebin, and Sister Defreitas. Arrangements were later made for Brother and Sister Fléreau from Guadeloupe to serve as special pioneers in this area, and they did excellent work cultivating the interest. In fulfilling the commission given by Jesus to “make disciples of people of all the nations,” Jehovah’s Witnesses have not neglected those in French Guiana.—Matt. 28:19.
Progress—Slow but Sure
By 1970 there were 129 publishers in the Cayenne Congregation, and isolated groups were active in Saint-Laurent and Kourou. The numbers were small, but Jehovah’s Witnesses were becoming well-known in the country. Yet, progress was slow. Another ten years passed before the number of Kingdom proclaimers in the country doubled.
Spiritual progress was impeded by the difficulty that some had in accepting the Bible’s counsel on disfellowshipping and repentance. Divisions appeared among the publishers. Some supported decisions by the body of elders; others did not. Traveling overseers from Guadeloupe came to review with the brothers the instructions from the Governing Body on this matter. Those who accepted the direction that came through Jehovah’s channel blossomed.
Another factor that influenced the spirit of the publishers was the people’s attitude toward our preaching in Cayenne. The Catholic Church was very influential. The clergy despised the Witnesses and influenced their flocks against them. This did not deter the brothers. In fact, their zeal caused a stir in the community. When people did not open their doors, the Witnesses would go around to the rear of the houses to search out people who might be hiding in the backyard. Some brothers engaged in heated arguments about the Sabbath with Adventists and about hellfire and the immortality of the soul with Evangelists. Those discussions could last from morning until evening!
David Moreau, who traveled from Martinique to serve as a circuit overseer, recalls one of those arguments. “We were talking to a young man when a pastor of the Seventh-Day Adventist Church came and shared in the discussion. He insisted on talking about the Sabbath. Virgo, our brother, said that he had come to speak about God’s Kingdom, but the discussion turned out to be about the Sabbath anyway. The pastor declared: ‘The Sabbath is from God. Even in the Paradise to come we will still practice the Sabbath!’ He quoted Isaiah 66:23: ‘It shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord.’ Brother Virgo now asked the pastor: ‘So according to this verse, what was last Wednesday?’ The pastor, perspiring abundantly, tried several answers but was unable to make the link between last Wednesday and the verse. ‘It was the new moon, man! So, look! You practice the Sabbath, but you forget the new moon! You’re removing more than an iota from the Bible.’” Virgo later said to David: “I never go out in the service without checking the calendar to see when the new moon is, in case I meet an Adventist.”
Although the brothers had become skilled at defending their beliefs, some were focusing more on winning arguments than on searching out sheeplike ones. Training was needed to witness effectively to the population, and Jehovah provided the needed help.
Missionaries Open Up the Interior
In the late 1970’s, missionaries trained at Gilead School as well as pioneers from France who were assigned directly to missionary service began arriving in French Guiana. The important work of training and strengthening the congregations began. The brothers were taught how to give a more tactful, effective witness. The missionaries also took the lead in preaching among the various language groups in the country. Soon local brothers followed suit and began to learn English, Portuguese, Sranantongo, and Galibi, which is an Amerindian language. At present, the branch office in French Guiana provides literature for distribution in 18 languages.
In April 1991, Jonadab Laaland and his wife, both graduates of Gilead School who had been serving in New Caledonia, were assigned to the Kourou area to strengthen the congregation there. Jonadab’s father, Olga Laaland, had done some of the earliest planting of seeds of Bible truth in French Guiana. Over 280 publishers now praise Jehovah in Kourou.
Missionaries also spearheaded efforts to open new territories, especially in the difficult-to-reach interior. They were undeterred by the fact that this involved exposure to such tropical diseases as malaria, encounters with snakes, putting up with swarms of insects, navigating powerful rivers and dangerous rapids to reach isolated villages, and braving torrential rains and mud.
Elie and Lucette Régalade did much fine work in Cayenne and Saint-Laurent. They also worked previously untouched territory along the upper part of the Maroni River on the western border of the country. Along with a small group of brothers, they made a three-week preaching expedition to all the river villages from Saint-Laurent to Maripasoula. This trip had to be interrupted so that one in the group could be treated in Saint-Laurent for a severe case of malaria. But preaching campaigns into the interior continued so that people there could hear the good news.
To reach Saint-Élie, a village established by 19th-century explorers in search of gold, requires a seven-hour canoe trip from the coast on the Sinnamary River through the center of the country. This is followed by a two-day, 20-mile [30 km] walk through the jungle with a heavy bag on one’s back. Any who witness there have to bring enough food for three days and a good supply of literature. At night they need a fire to keep animals away and, likely, a hammock to sleep in. But what a pleasure it was for two missionaries sent from France, Eric Couzinet and Michel Bouquet, to make that trip and give a thorough witness to the 150 inhabitants. Twenty persons attended the slide talk that was given during their stay.
It is among these people that the brothers found Fanélie, who was trying to satisfy her spiritual need. She had formerly been a Roman Catholic. Recently, she had joined the Adventists. No one from her religion ever visited her in Saint-Élie. She used to send in Bible courses by mail, but she never received an answer. When she met the Witnesses, she realized that only they were making efforts to visit people in such remote places as Saint-Élie. Fanélie studied with the brothers every day for a week. Soon thereafter, she moved to a bigger city for six months. During that period, she studied three times a week. When she returned to the village, she was an unbaptized publisher. Fanélie was caring for her non-Witness husband and five young children, but her zeal for the truth moved her to spend over 40 hours each month in witnessing to others. She also helped to organize meetings for interested ones. When she arranged for the Memorial, 40 attended. Since then, Fanélie has moved to the coast, but she continues to be active in the ministry. She rejoices that one of her daughters has been baptized and that her husband now studies.
Kaw, Ouanary, and Favar, in the eastern part of the country, are other communities that were first reached by the missionaries. Brother Couzinet well recalls his first preaching tour to those places in 1987 along with some local Witnesses. They took a ferry and then drove along a 25-mile [40-km] red dirt road to arrive at a swamp. When they stopped the car, they heard frightening roars. He thought that it must be jaguars ready to attack. But the brothers traveling with Brother Couzinet assured him that it was just a group of howler monkeys disturbed by their arrival. They met a couple who had been searching for the truth. This couple moved into Cayenne, progressed to baptism, and now serve in the Portuguese field in French Guiana.
Gradually, many other remote territories were visited. Grand Santi, Papaïchton, and Saül are some of these places that benefited from initial visits by the missionaries. Most of the previously untouched territories are now regularly visited by Kingdom publishers.
Preaching in Maripasoula
Maripasoula, a very important village on the upper Maroni River, was reached with the Kingdom message as early as 1963. For professional reasons, Adrien Jean-Marie, who was then a Bible student, had to go there three times a year. He was bubbling with enthusiasm for the truth, so he used the opportunity to give a thorough witness and always left behind many Bible publications.
Although others also witnessed in Maripasoula, it was difficult to communicate with the local Sranantongo-speaking inhabitants. Known by locals as Taki-Taki, Sranantongo is based on English and draws elements from Dutch, French, Portuguese, and various languages of Africa and India. The Suriname branch sent Sranantongo-speaking special pioneers to Maripasoula for periods of three to six months, but the population responded negatively. Eventually, the brothers were expelled from the village on the pretext of being foreigners from Suriname. In fact, it was mainly because they were Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Cornélis and Hélène Linguet were sent in as special pioneers in 1992. Their knowledge of Sranantongo greatly facilitated their preaching, and because they were of French nationality, they were more readily accepted by the people. For three days each week, they preached in Maripasoula, and for the next three days, they witnessed in Papaïchton, a village one hour from Maripasoula by canoe. At first, they held meetings in their home in Maripasoula. After two years of work, eight persons attended the Memorial. This couple persevered in this remote territory. Their love for the people helped them to endure in the face of numerous problems. Eventually, their patience was rewarded, and two congregations developed.
One who responded to the Bible’s message is Antoine Tafanier, considered to be an important member of his community because he is a close relative of the Gran Man, the supreme authority in the animistic community. Tafanier had two concubines, a common practice along the river. So when Tafanier took his stand for the truth, he had to make adjustments in his life, either marrying one of the two women or remaining single. The two women, living in separate homes and knowing that he was going to choose between them, had a terrible fight. Today, Antoine Tafanier is a happy baptized Witness serving Jehovah along with one wife. What about the other woman? After a time, she also started to study the Bible and is now a baptized servant of Jehovah.
Appreciation for Jehovah’s Witnesses grew in the area. A local association made a meeting place available to them free of charge for three years. When the time came to build a Kingdom Hall, half of the galvanized sheets were donated by these sympathizers. Another local association was in charge of the television station and broadcast the five videotapes of the Watch Tower Society that were then available. The video Jehovah’s Witnesses—The Organization Behind the Name was particularly appreciated by the village residents.
The Witnesses were now established in this formerly hostile area. By 1993, both Maripasoula and Papaïchton had Kingdom Halls, and people living in this area along the Maroni River were having regular opportunities to hear the Kingdom message.
Along the Oyapock River
What was being accomplished along the eastern border of the country, where the Oyapock River flows between French Guiana and Brazil? In 1973, Adrien Jean-Marie gave a good witness in the town of Saint Georges. His first visit lasted three days. During the same year, he returned twice and was able to organize a public meeting with 20 in attendance. A few Bible studies were started by correspondence, but that did not work well because the students were not used to writing letters. In Tampac, a Bush Negro village on the same river, Brother Jean-Marie also found those interested in the Bible’s message.
Ten years later, in 1983, Etiennise Mandé and Jacqueline Lafiteau were sent to give a further witness and to help interested ones in this remote area. When possible, brothers from Cayenne would fly to Saint Georges for a weekend to lend support by sharing in the field ministry with the sisters and by giving public talks. However, much patience was required before fruitage was evident. Sister Mandé recalls: “I started several Bible studies. But before long, the local priest started to oppose our work. Some would say: ‘The priest told us not to pay attention to the Witnesses or to welcome you into our home because you are agents of the Devil.’ Several of my students stopped their studies.” With persistence, though, results did come.
Michel Bouquet and Richard Rose, a special pioneer, also shared in developing interest in the truth in that area. Much witnessing had been done in Saint Georges, but starting in 1989, they were assigned to concentrate on the territory outside that community. Recently, Brother Rose and his wife had the privilege of being the first pioneers from French Guiana to attend Gilead School. They presently serve in Haiti.
Once a foothold was established on the French Guiana bank of the Oyapock River, arrangements were made to work a small territory across the river in Brazil. The town of Oiapoque has 10,000 inhabitants, and it is about 20 minutes from Saint Georges by canoe. The brothers soon realized that there was more interest there than in Saint Georges, so they concentrated on that territory. Brother Moreau recalls: “We used to stay overnight at the back of a store. It was not easy under those conditions, although a nice woman who called herself a ‘sister’ was offering us a place to sleep and a barrel of water to wash ourselves. The young local pioneers laughed when my wife Marylène complained about the smell of the water. Everyone washed in the darkness of the backyard and went to bed. The following morning, however, we discovered with horror that a big rat had drowned in the barrel and had come up to the surface.” But that did not overshadow the good experiences they were having in the ministry.
In this town of Oiapoque, Brother Bouquet took the initiative to buy a parcel of land. He and Brother Rose, along with other pioneers and brothers from Cayenne, worked to build an 80-seat Kingdom Hall with an attached apartment.
In the 1990’s, a special pioneer couple, the Da Costas, arrived in Oiapoque to help. They made it a point to visit all the schools and offer the headmasters the practical book Questions Young People Ask—Answers That Work. They also asked permission to offer this book to all the pupils. This was granted. After hearing what the book contained, all the students and all the teachers asked for copies. They placed 250 books.
Brother da Costa reports: “We had an excellent discussion with the commander of the local military camp, and we offered him a copy of the book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. He accepted it and asked for help in dealing with the drunkenness and immorality of his men in the camp. We offered to give a talk to the men. He liked this idea and promised that there would be a small group the following week. When we came to give the talk, we found 140 soldiers waiting for us. All paid good attention to what was said. We left 70 magazines; we had no more with us because we did not expect to see so many people at our meeting. This arrangement continued for weeks. Because these soldiers do not stay long in one spot, we lost track of most of them.” Yet, many responded favorably to the help given.
A young woman named Rosa had studied the Bible with the Witnesses in Brazil, but she had not fully responded to the good news. When she heard about a chance to make a lot of money by working in a gold mine in French Guiana, she abandoned her apartment and her Bible study and arrived at Oiapoque with the intention of entering French Guiana illegally. Of course, to live among men at a gold mine in the midst of the forest would not be safe for a woman. Before she left for the mines, a concerned sister in Oiapoque helped her to reconsider her situation. She was deeply moved by the Bible’s counsel at Matthew 6:25-34, and she changed her mind. Rosa dedicated her life to Jehovah and returned home. After several years of separation, she was reunited with her husband.
There is now a congregation of 25 publishers in Oiapoque. The efforts of the five publishers in Saint Georges are also bearing fruit. The first resident of Saint Georges to take a stand for the truth was Jean René Mathurin. Today he serves as a ministerial servant, and his wife, as a regular pioneer.
Joyful Assemblies
In Bible times, worshipers of Jehovah were instructed to assemble regularly for worship. (Deut. 16:1-17) Similarly, assemblies and conventions have been a highlight for modern-day worshipers of Jehovah in French Guiana. Even when the publishers were few in number, the brothers did not shy away from the responsibility of organizing assemblies. A brother relates: “In the 1960’s, our district conventions lasted eight days. There were four Bible dramas. The actors had to learn their roles by heart, and the handful of publishers had to work very hard. Fortunately, a large number of brothers from Martinique and Guadeloupe used to come to assist with the assemblies.” Their presence was deeply appreciated by the brothers. Many still warmly remember the days when most of the local brothers would go to the airport to welcome the delegates arriving from Martinique and Guadeloupe.
These gatherings were truly occasions of rejoicing. Each assembly was a spiritual feast, and the brothers felt as did the Israelites to whom Jehovah said: “You must rejoice before Jehovah your God.”—Lev. 23:40.
The more experienced brothers were kept very busy. They cared for organization of the convention, gave discourses, and often acted in several dramas. It was not unusual for a brother to be in three dramas and give five or six talks.
The fact that substantial meals were prepared and served at lunchtime added to the work. The menu sometimes included pig, lizard, agouti, turtle, and armadillo. In some cases while at the convention, the brothers had to hunt or fish for the food that was served.
Finding places to assemble has always been a challenge. In the beginning, the Valard’s home was used. The brothers built a shed in the yard, and every year the shed was extended to cover the growing audience. When the attendance surpassed 200, however, it was necessary to look for a larger place. At first, the only places available for them to rent were handball or basketball courts. The brothers would construct a stage and ask the attendees to bring their own chairs. It was not easy, but the brothers viewed the situation in a positive way. The young ones never hesitated to give up their seat to older ones, even if that meant standing up all day.
For years, dance halls were rented for assemblies. When the Saturday session finished, the brothers had to empty the hall quickly because the musicians were arriving to prepare for dancing that would last all night. Early in the morning, the brothers went back to clean the hall and make it ready for the Sunday morning session. Of course, this was not the sort of place that people generally viewed as suitable for a religious meeting. When the brothers met in the Guyana Palace, Au Soleil Levant, and Au Canari, it brought mockery from people in the territory. As time passed, however, these places too were no longer large enough to accommodate the growing number of people attending the assemblies.
Finally, the brothers decided to build their own Assembly Hall, following the model of Assembly Halls in Martinique and Guadeloupe. It had a metal framework with a roof of galvanized sheets. It was large enough to accommodate about a thousand people, yet it could be easily dismantled. The next order of business was to find a piece of land where this Assembly Hall could be erected for use. Jean-Daniel Michotte made part of his property available. This arrangement lasted for several years.
An Extraordinary Building Project
As interest in the truth grew, a larger Assembly Hall became necessary. The brothers began looking for property large enough to construct a 2,000-seat Assembly Hall. After searching for several years, they found a well-situated 7.5-acre [3 ha] property at a reasonable price. Since the local brothers did not have the needed background in engineering and construction, the France branch was asked to assist. The project that was devised was truly extraordinary. It was carried out in 1993. The construction included a 21,500-square-foot [2,000 sq m] Assembly Hall, five Kingdom Halls, three apartments for special pioneers, and three missionary homes, and they were all built in just eight weeks!
Much of the material was shipped from France in 32 large containers. Tractors, trucks, buses, blocks, galvanized sheets, and other building materials, as well as a large supply of food, were among the cargo. Regional Building Committees in France that were involved in the project worked very hard.
During the course of the project, some 800 brothers and sisters came from France at their own expense to work with 500 local brothers and sisters on four different sites. The westernmost site was 150 miles [250 km] from the easternmost site, so good communication was needed. The French brothers came in shifts during the two-month period, but at one point there were 500 from France working with 422 local Witnesses. Providing accommodations for all the workers was a challenge. Many local families hosted two or three French workers; no one stayed in a hotel. Transportation for the workers was also required. One brother relates: “I would make a detour and drop off some workers at the site on my way to work and then pick them up after work. We did our best to make the workers feel at ease.”
While the main group was in Matoury at the site for the Assembly Hall (which was also designed to accommodate a Kingdom Hall), others were in Sinnamary to build a Kingdom Hall and a small missionary home. In Mana, another Kingdom Hall and a missionary home were being constructed. In the Sranantongo section of Mana, a Kingdom Hall with an apartment for the special pioneers was being built. In Saint-Laurent, a 330-seat Kingdom Hall and a missionary home for six were built. Two congregations meet there. This large Kingdom Hall is used for the Sranantongo conventions, often attended by up to 600 persons.
After this mammoth construction task, some of the French brothers decided to settle in French Guiana. In addition to contributing their building skills, they have blessed the congregations by serving as elders, ministerial servants, and members of building committees. Later, some shared in the construction of new branch facilities.
Need for a Branch Office
The French Guiana branch office started operating in 1990 in a rented home at Montjoly, a town near the capital. David Moreau was appointed to serve as Branch Committee coordinator. While serving in Martinique since his graduation from Gilead School in 1981, he had frequently cared for assignments in French Guiana. With him on the Branch Committee were Jean-Daniel Michotte, Paul Chong Wing, and Eric Couzinet. Later, Christian Belotti was assigned to serve along with them. The congregations greatly appreciated receiving direction locally through mature brothers who were very familiar with their needs.
When the branch was formed, there was a ratio of 1 Kingdom publisher for every 173 persons in the country. The 660 publishers included 14 missionaries assigned to various parts of the country. The ongoing growth of publishers—in some years as high as 18 percent—made it necessary to look for more suitable office facilities. In 1992 the branch office was moved to Matoury, a short distance from Cayenne. Then in 1995 the Governing Body granted approval to construct a building better suited to our needs. Two years of work were required for the new complex to become a reality. What a great source of rejoicing it became to the brothers, and what an excellent witness was given!
Challenges of the Ministry
Preaching the good news in this country requires hard work, self-sacrifice, and love. Sincere Bible students observe this. One of these said to the Witness who was studying with her: “Really, I can see the love and the devotion that you manifest toward me. For months, even when it was raining, you came regularly to teach me about the knowledge of the good news. So in return, every Sunday, I’ll be at your meetings.” That is what she did, even bringing some friends.
At times, to reach the place where a study is to be conducted, the publishers have to walk over a tree trunk laid over a ditch. This becomes more challenging when the trunk is partially floating. David Moreau, with arms stretched out to keep balance, was walking ahead of a pioneer sister when he heard a splash behind him. The sister courageously climbed back onto the trunk, washed herself when she arrived, and conducted her Bible study as if nothing had happened.
In another location, Brother Bouquet arrived by canoe at a village when the ocean tide was out and the riverbank was thick mud. As he walked toward the village, he sank into the mud up to his knees. After about 80 feet [25 m], he finally reached dry ground. The kind villagers gave him water to wash his legs; then he began his ministry.
It is more than the remoteness of their villages and the differences in language that make reaching the Amerindians difficult. In an effort to protect these territories from the inroads of civilization, the government restricts public access. Systematic preaching is not permitted in their villages. Nevertheless, when Amerindians visit nearby villages to buy necessities, Jehovah’s Witnesses try to share with them the marvelous hope of a world free from all sickness, including malaria, which is a scourge to many people here.
For some, keeping appointments and attending meetings at a certain time require a major change in their thinking. Thirty years ago the natives never wore watches, and no one was in a hurry. Being on time for meetings was a new concept. One sister was grateful when she arrived during the prayer, only to discover that it was the closing prayer! On another occasion, a missionary who was preaching in Saint Georges asked a man whether the village of Régina was far away. The man answered: “Not far.” “So, how far?” he asked. “Only nine days walk to reach there.” This view of time also shows why some, though they like the truth, postpone making a decision to serve God.
Some have had to choose between tribal laws and Bible principles in connection with family life. At times, their decision to walk in Jehovah’s ways has resulted in an outpouring of fury by the village chief. In one village, the special pioneer and his wife who were serving in that area were sentenced to death by the village chief. To escape execution, they fled the village and then were transferred to another assignment 180 miles [300 km] away.
Despite these challenges, people from all backgrounds and walks of life are responding to the invitation: “Let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.” (Rev. 22:17) This past year, a peak of 1,500 shared in preaching the good news in French Guiana. On an average, 2,288 Bible studies were being conducted with interested people. On April 19, there were 5,293 who attended the Memorial of Christ’s death. It is our earnest prayer that many more will make the truth their own, thus becoming true disciples of Jesus Christ.
[Full-page picture on page 224]
[Picture on page 228]
Olga Laaland
[Picture on page 230]
Left to right: Christian Bonecaze and Xavier Noll
[Pictures on page 234]
Michel and Jeanne Valard
[Picture on page 237]
Constance and Edmogène Fléreau
[Pictures on page 238]
(1) A wooden path through the rain forest, (2) Eric Couzinet and Michel Bouquet with supplies, (3) An Amerindian village
[Picture on page 241]
Elie and Lucette Régalade
[Pictures on page 251]
An eight-week international building project: (1) Assembly Hall in Matoury; Kingdom Halls and other accommodations in (2,3) Mana, (4) Saint-Laurent, and (5) Sinnamary; (6) Witnesses from French Guiana, along with hundreds from France, shared in the work
[Pictures on page 252, 253]
Branch office and Bethel Home in French Guiana, with the Branch Committee (left to right): Paul Chong Wing, David Moreau, Jean-Daniel Michotte, Eric Couzinet

