Announcements
● Literature offer for July and August: Survival book for a contribution of $1.00. Any brochure, but especially Life on Earth or Divine Name for 30¢ each, may be used as an alternate offer. September: Peace and Security; if none in stock, any other 192-page book for $1.00 contribution. October: Subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for a contribution of $4.00 for each one-year subscription.
● You will be pleased to know that a large-print edition of The Watchtower in Spanish will be published, beginning August 1, 1985. This will be of benefit to those with limited eyesight. It will be a regular-size magazine of 32 pages and contain only the study articles with questions. The price will be the same as the regular semimonthly edition. Individual subscriptions and distributors’ copies should be ordered through the congregation. To order, use the regular Watchtower subscription slip (M-1) or the Distributors’ Order form (M-202) and mark clearly in the upper right-hand corner, “LARGE PRINT.”
● October 8 and October 22 issues of Awake! will be special issues with full-color covers. Orders for additional copies of these special issues should be sent in no later than the end of July.
● New Publications Available:
Sing Praises to Jehovah
Large size​—Japanese
Small size​—Japanese
Survival Into a New Earth​—Chinese, Korean
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Reduced size)​—French, Iloko, Japanese, Tagalog
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Luhya-Samia, Marquesian, Nyiha
From Kurukshetra to Armageddon​—And Your Survival—​Italian
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Cebuano, Iloko, Korean, Tagalog
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Estonian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Album with complete Greek Scriptures (set of 23; congregation and public: $35.75; pioneers: $22.75)​—Japanese
Deuteronomy (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—Japanese
Joshua (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Japanese

