Are You Working as a Family Toward Spiritual Goals?
1 As a dedicated people we have the goal of serving Jehovah faithfully. We also eagerly look forward to receiving the gift of eternal life. Of course, we are not interested just in our own faithfulness and salvation. We want to help others reach these goals, and especially do we want to help our own family.​—John 1:40, 41; 1 Tim. 5:8.
2 Just as a mountain is climbed step by step, we, too, can progress step by step in our Christian course. To this end we set spiritual goals for ourselves. This is not limited to individuals. Families can also have goals in connection with meetings, field service, and family study. Are there improvements to be made? Can certain members of the family be helped to reach the goal of full-time service? A family discussion can help toward the attaining of goals determined upon. When these are reached, other theocratic goals can be set. Thus, step by step, spiritual progress can be made.
MEETINGS
3 Some families may need to set a goal of getting to the meetings on time. This can be a real challenge for large families, for those with difficult work schedules, or where there is a problem with transportation. Cooperation and good organization are necessary.
4 Another practical goal for the family to consider is that of commenting at meetings. Some members of the family may prefer to read a short comment. However, making brief and specific comments in one’s own words denotes spiritual progress and is rewarding. Family members can assist one another in preparing their comments. They can also help one another to make progress in the Theocratic Ministry School. This may include listening to younger family members rehearse their assignments, showing them how to use an outline, correcting their pronunciation of words, and so forth. The goal of becoming a good teacher or an excellent public reader is worthy of diligent effort.​—1 Tim. 4:13.
FIELD SERVICE
5 Some families need to achieve regularity in the field service. Does your entire family share in the field service the first Sunday of each month? What about the goal of helping family members learn the current Topic for Conversation or a new magazine presentation? There is also the goal of starting a home Bible study or the goal may be greater regularity in conducting an already established study.
FAMILY STUDY
6 For some families it may be a real challenge to adhere faithfully to the schedule for a family study. On occasion it may be necessary to reschedule the study. But this should be the exception. Another excellent goal is to read the weekly Bible assignment regularly, perhaps even including it in the family study. For most persons, the actual reading of the material assigned for the week only takes 20 to 25 minutes. It can add to one’s knowledge of the Scriptures and it makes the review of Bible highlights each week more interesting.
7 There are many other goals that individuals and families can set for themselves. For example, what about a family effort toward auxiliary pioneer service this summer? Additionally, with good organization and cooperation, can the family sponsor at least one of its members as a regular pioneer? There is also the goal of becoming a ministerial servant or an elder. Young brothers may have Bethel service as a goal. These goals are attainable, but they require diligence and hard work. As we strive to reach our personal and family goals, the quality of our service to Jehovah will improve, all to his honor and glory.​—Ps. 96:7, 8.

