Boldly Preaching the Good News
1 As Jehovah’s Witnesses we have many reasons to be courageous and outspoken in preaching the Kingdom message. First of all, we represent Jehovah. Second, the importance of the message itself requires that we speak with confidence. The assurance that he is with us and will infuse power into us should cause us to declare the truth fearlessly. (Jer. 1:17, 19) Additionally, the example of others who have persevered in doing God’s will in spite of hardships and obstacles can give us heart.
2 Appreciating the importance of the good news should encourage us to proclaim it with freeness of speech. These Kingdom truths are not from a human source but are ‘through divine revelation.’ (Gal. 1:11, 12) The Kingdom is the touchstone by which all mankind are to be judged. Thus, Jesus showed that our fearlessly preaching the good news was more important than even our present lives.​—Mark 8:34, 35.
TRUST JEHOVAH
3 Opposition to the message only deepens our resolve to preach with boldness. (1 Thess. 2:2) Accurate knowledge of Jehovah and faith in his Word produce an internal strength that dispels fear of those who may try to hinder us. (1 Pet. 3:13, 14) Are we not also encouraged by Jesus’ promise that he would be with us until the conclusion of the system of things? (Matt. 28:20) As we boldly preach, we can confidently say as did the psalmist: “Jehovah is on my side; I shall not fear. What can earthling man do to me?”​—Ps. 118:6.
4 Closely considering the record of faithful men can produce courageous perseverance in God’s service. Peter and the other apostles were noted for their outspokenness in preaching. (Acts 4:13; 5:29) No sooner had Paul been converted than he began witnessing “with boldness” and he continued to do so. (Acts 13:46; 14:3) We can also draw strength from “so great a cloud” of pre-Christian witnesses, as well as from the modern-day examples of our brothers in such places as Malawi, Turkey, Korea, and parts of Eastern Europe. Their record of faith and boldness in preaching stimulates us to press on courageously.​—Heb. 12:1.
OFFER SURVIVAL BOOK
5 We have good reason to speak with boldness as we offer the Survival book during July. Although some householders may show an interest in the message, we are likely to encounter in others a measure of indifference and apathy. How will we respond? Will the attitudes of those we meet cause us to hold back from preaching with conviction and fearlessness? Will we allow unfavorable conditions in the community to dampen our zeal? If we appreciate the value of the message we bear and see mankind’s need for a sure prospect for survival, we will not shrink back.
6 Prayer is another means by which we develop bold persistence in the ministry. Paul observed that “prayer on every occasion in spirit” could result in the “ability to speak . . . with freeness of speech . . . , with boldness.” (Eph. 6:18-20) During times of distress, Jehovah quickly responded to the prayerful call of the psalmist by ‘making him bold in his soul with strength.’ (Ps. 138:3) May our united prayers on behalf of one another pave the way for us to show “all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.”​—Phil. 1:14.

