Help Others to Progress in the Ministry
1 At Luke 22:32 Jesus exhorted Peter to ‘strengthen his brothers.’ Peter did just that. His faithful ministry was a source of strength to his Christian brothers. (1 Pet. 5:12) Just as we appreciate it when we are helped to have a regular share in the field service, so do others. Ask yourself: Who in your congregation need encouragement to progress in the ministry? How can they be helped?​—1 Thess. 5:11.
2 One way is by helping them to become effective in presenting the Topic for Conversation. For example, suggest appropriate introductions for your area. Show them how questions may be asked to involve the householder and how to tie in the scriptures effectively. Suggest that they work with different brothers and sisters and learn from their presentations. (Prov. 20:18) Arrange for practice sessions that simulate actual conditions existing in the field. (Prov. 27:17) Much can be done to help new or less experienced publishers at meetings for field service, after the book study, when traveling to the territory, or within the family group.
BE A SOURCE OF ENCOURAGEMENT
3 There is a vital work for every Christian to do. We are urged to ‘brace up our minds for activity.’ Be aware of those in the congregation with particular needs, such as the fatherless boys, the elderly, and those with unbelieving mates. Can you schedule time to work with them in the field service? (1 Pet. 1:13; Eccl. 4:9, 10) A fine opportunity for this is in magazine activity on the second and fourth Saturdays.
4 Pioneers, you are in an excellent position to be helpful. Your encouraging experiences can have a good effect on others. (Acts 15:3) Why not plan to have someone join you on a Bible study or on a return visit? When making these arrangements, be sure to let the publisher know what point you hope to cover so he can share in the discussion. Your zealous activity in preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom will encourage others to do the same.
5 Elders are privileged not only to set a zealous example in proclaiming the Kingdom but also to help their brothers and sisters to improve their abilities in this service. Congregation Book Study conductors and the service overseer can review the Congregation’s Publisher Record cards from time to time in order to be aware of trends developing with regard to a person’s field service. Thus, they will be in a good position to help in training Kingdom proclaimers to become proficient in various features of service. They can help members of the flock to fight discouragement due to difficult territory or problems of life that may interfere with their service. Meetings for field service that will be convenient for the publishers should be regularly scheduled, and special service arrangements can be made for holidays. The elders should be alert to the needs of the congregation in this regard.
HELPING OTHERS BRINGS JOY
6 There is much satisfaction and joy that results from assisting someone else to share fully in Kingdom preaching. (Neh. 8:10) During these last days, make use of every opportunity to help others to experience with you the joy of working shoulder to shoulder in Christian unity!​—Zeph. 3:9.

