Presenting the Good News​—With Discernment
1 “A man of discernment is cool of spirit.” (Prov. 17:27) The wisdom of these words is often proved true in our preaching activity. For example, we may come face to face with a sign that says, “No Soliciting.” Or, we may be asked to leave a building where we have been witnessing. In other areas, a custodian or a manager may refuse to grant entrance to a building. What can we do in these instances?
2 “No Soliciting.” Our work of preaching the good news and leaving literature with people for a freewill contribution to cover printing costs does not constitute solicitation for funds. Yet, some people will object and refer to our preaching work as soliciting. If so, we can kindly explain that our work is not commercial, that it is a missionary and evangelizing work, and that we are ministers. In so doing, our utterance should be ‘always with graciousness, seasoned with salt, so as to know how we ought to give an answer to each one.’ (Col. 4:6) If such a sign is enforced or if authorized persons insist that we are not welcome, we should quietly leave and perhaps try witnessing there at another time.
3 “Asked to leave the premises.” If a publisher is asked to leave a building where he has been preaching, he can tactfully show that his work is of a religious nature of utmost importance and is a public service. If the objection is to calling on Sunday, try to make arrangements to return on another day. If, after calmly talking to the person, you are ordered to leave, you should do so. It is not wise to insist on one’s rights and contribute to further disturbances or even unnecessary arrests. If advisable, the publisher can return on another occasion or write a personal letter giving a witness to those who live there. If you return, discernment may dictate calling at only a few doors or homes. Then return later to visit a few more. If you keep an accurate record of all residents, all may eventually receive a witness.
4 “Entrance to a building is refused.” Discernment calls for the words of Proverbs 15:1: “An answer, when mild, turns away rage, but a word causing pain makes anger to come up.” Thus, as mentioned before, it is usually best not to insist on one’s rights. However, in some places where entry is refused, making an appointment to talk with the superintendent of the building to explain our work may help to obtain permission to preach therein. Also, it may be possible to get into a building or an area in some normal, legal way, and call on one or more families at a time and in a manner unobserved by those who object. Of course, this should be done discreetly. At all times the dignity of our work should be maintained so that we “do all things for God’s glory.”​—1 Cor. 10:31.
5 “The good news has to be preached.” (Mark 13:10) As we approach the end of this system, it is expected that Satan will continue to make it more difficult for us to reach sheeplike ones. May we use discernment as we preach in order to reach as many as we can with the hope from God’s Word.

