Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
□ What is the theme of modern-day Biblical evangelism?
The core of the true evangelizer’s message today is the good news of God’s Kingdom in the hands of his appointed Ruler, Jesus Christ. It includes all the truths Jesus spoke and that his disciples recorded. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20)​—1/1, page 4.
□ Why is it necessary to continue preaching the good news in territories where there is little or no result?
Jehovah, through Christ Jesus, has commanded that ‘the good news be preached in all the inhabited earth.’ (Matthew 24:14) When people refuse to listen, this gives us an opportunity to show the depth of our love and devotion to Jehovah by persistently doing what is right. Also, our love moves us to warn our neighbors as to what the future holds for mankind. (1 John 5:3; 2 Timothy 4:2)​—1/1, page 26.
□ What benefits does the full-time ministry bring to many Kingdom publishers?
It helps them to cultivate more fully the fruitage of the spirit, to express more love for people, to become more efficient in the ministry, and to trust Jehovah to a greater extent. Hence, they enjoy a closer relationship with Jehovah.​—1/15, page 26.
□ To what direction and purpose of God did all Bible writers point in spite of their differences in presentation?
They all showed what Jehovah God will do to make mankind happy and also what humans individually must do in order to receive God’s approval.​—2/1, page 7.
□ What are some of the rewards and benefits from being honest?
A climate of trust and confidence is developed, leading to healthy attitudes and relationships. Honesty also contributes to a clean conscience, and it gives peace of mind, so that one can face others without fear of embarrassment. (Hebrews 9:14; 1 Timothy 1:19)​—2/15, page 7.
□ Whose prayers does the almighty God hear and answer?
Jehovah hears prayers offered to him through the right channel, Jesus Christ; in the right manner; and with the right attitude of mind and heart. God answers such prayers according to his divine will and at his chosen time.​—3/15, page 7.
□ What important event occurred in the 20th year of King Artaxerxes’ rulership (455 B.C.E.)?
Permission was granted Nehemiah to go back and rebuild Jerusalem and its walls. This command was the start of the “seventy weeks” of years of Daniel’s prophecy, pointing forward to Jesus’ appearance as “Messiah the Leader” on time in the year 29 C.E. (Daniel 9:24, 25; Nehemiah 1:1; 2:1-9)​—3/15, pages 28, 29.
□ How are family problems best handled?
In love, for the Bible counsels, “Let all your affairs take place with love.” Also, “Love covers a multitude of sins.” (1 Corinthians 16:14; 1 Peter 4:8) This should be a deep-seated love that is willing to overlook the imperfections of other members of the family that might otherwise irritate and grate on one’s nerves.​—4/1, pages 6, 7.

