Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Jehovah Blesses Persistence
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES feel a deep love for Jehovah God and responsibility to their fellowman, moving them to try to give everyone the opportunity to hear the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14) That is why a sister was determined to preach to soldiers and their families at the military compound in her territory.
Each time she tried, she was denied entry by the captain in charge. She relates: “So I decided to see the commanding officer, a colonel. When I telephoned his secretary, he refused to put me through to the colonel. I planned to visit the colonel at his home, for he lived away from the barracks. When I did, he asked me where I came from. Fortunately, I was born on the small main island in Fiji. Out of respect he listened to my request and said he had heard of Jehovah’s Witnesses but had never had our work explained to him. It gave me a wonderful opportunity to witness to him, and he accepted three Bible study aids from me. He told me to be at his office at the barracks at 9:00 a.m. the next Tuesday. When another sister and I arrived, the guards had already been advised of our visit and told us that permission was granted for us to preach in the compound. The guard commander said: ‘I am now informing all officers that on Friday all doors are to be open to you, and even though all of us have different religions, yours could be the one for sounding the warning of the Kingdom of heaven and the end of the world.’
“When we arrived on Friday,” she continues, “a military sound car went through the camp announcing: ‘Two elderly women will be in the camp sounding a warning to you, so please open your doors and listen to them. Refrain from arguing with them or creating animosity.’ We worked the camp from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., placing 100 books and 200 magazines. And the result? Many return visits have been made and many Bible studies started.”
From another island in the South Pacific that was recently opened to the preaching work by special pioneers comes an interesting experience. These special pioneers are opposed by the United Church leaders. During the visit of the circuit overseer, they had difficulty making a return visit, as the village chief, influenced by the church leaders, refused to allow Jehovah’s Witnesses into the village. When they arrived, the chief was not there, so the interested person was called on and a fine witness was given. As they left, a large canoe was seen approaching, and obviously it had engine trouble, since people were paddling. Yes, it was the village chief arriving too late to stop the return visit. On returning home, the pioneers told the circuit overseer in pidgin: “Me fella thinkim might angel now breakim engine belong him.”
So Jehovah blessed the persistence of these brothers in obeying his command to preach “this good news of the kingdom.”

