
LIFE STORY
Allowing Jehovah to Direct My Path
AS TOLD BY KEITH EATON






AS A teenager, I chose a path for myself, a secular career that I thoroughly enjoyed. But Jehovah invited me to take a different path, generously offering: “I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go.” (Ps. 32:8) Allowing Jehovah to direct my path has led to a spiritual career of beautiful opportunities and blessings, including 52 years serving in Africa.



FROM THE BLACK COUNTRY TO THE WARM HEART OF AFRICA

I was born in 1935 in Darlaston, part of the Black Country, a region of England named after the black smoke that filled the air from many foundries and other factories. When I was about four years old, my parents began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. In my early teens (14-15 years old), I became convinced of the truth and got baptized in 1952 at the age of 16.
About the same time, I started a commercial apprenticeship in a large factory that produced hand tools and parts for motor vehicles. I began training to be a company secretary, work that I thoroughly enjoyed.
I faced an important decision when a traveling overseer invited me to begin conducting the midweek Congregation Book Study in my home congregation of Willenhall. But I had a dilemma. At the time, I was associating with two congregations. During the week, I attended the congregation nearest to my workplace in Bromsgrove, some 32 kilometers (20 mi) away from home. And on the weekends, when I went back to my parents’ home, I attended the congregation in Willenhall.
Desiring to support Jehovah’s organization, I accepted the traveling overseer’s invitation, although this meant leaving the apprenticeship I enjoyed so much. Allowing Jehovah to direct my path on that occasion opened the door to a life that I have never regretted.
While attending the Bromsgrove Congregation, I met someone​—an attractive, spiritually-minded sister named Anne. We got married in 1957, and together we enjoyed the privileges of regular pioneering, special pioneering, traveling work, and Bethel service. Anne has been a source of joy throughout my life.
In 1966 we were thrilled to attend the 42nd class of Gilead. Our assignment was Malawi, popularly known as the warm heart of Africa because of its kind and welcoming people. Little did we know that we would not be welcomed there for long.



SERVING DURING DRAMATIC EVENTS IN MALAWI





The Kaiser Jeep used in traveling work in Malawi



We arrived in Malawi on February 1, 1967. After an intensive monthlong language course, we started out in district work. We drove a Kaiser Jeep that some imagined could drive anywhere, even through rivers. But despite such expectations, we could ford only the shallowest of water. At times, we stayed in thatched mud huts that needed a tarpaulin under the roof during the rainy season. It was quite an introduction to missionary work, but we loved it!
In April, I became aware of trouble brewing in the country. I heard a speech on the radio by Malawi’s president, Dr. Hastings Banda. He claimed that Jehovah’s Witnesses did not pay taxes and that they interfered with politics. Of course, these accusations were false. We all knew that the real issue was our neutrality, especially our refusal to buy political party membership cards.
By September, we read in the newspaper that the president had accused the brothers of causing trouble everywhere. He announced at a political convention that his government would act quickly on a resolution recommending that Jehovah’s Witnesses be banned. This ban went into effect on October 20, 1967. Shortly thereafter, police officers and immigration officials arrived at the branch office to close it down and deport the missionaries from the country.




Being arrested and deported from Malawi in 1967 with fellow missionaries Jack and Linda Johansson



After three days in prison, we were deported to a country controlled by Britain​—Mauritius. However, the authorities in Mauritius would not permit us to stay as missionaries. So we were assigned to Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe). On arriving there, we ran into a belligerent immigration officer who refused us entry, saying: “You’re prohibited from staying in Malawi. They won’t let you stay in Mauritius, and now you’re here because it’s convenient.” Anne began to cry. It seemed that nobody wanted us! At that moment, I wanted to leave and go straight back home to England. Finally, the immigration authorities allowed us to stay overnight at the branch office on the condition that we report to their headquarters the following day. We were exhausted, but we continued to leave things in Jehovah’s hands. By the next afternoon, we unexpectedly received permission to stay as visitors in Zimbabwe. I will never forget how I felt on that day​—I was convinced that Jehovah was directing our path.



A NEW ASSIGNMENT​—SERVING MALAWI FROM ZIMBABWE





With Anne at Zimbabwe Bethel, 1968



At the Zimbabwe branch office, I was assigned to work in the Service Department, caring for Malawi and Mozambique. The brothers in Malawi were being severely persecuted. As part of my work, I translated reports sent in by the Malawian circuit overseers. Working late one evening to complete a report, I wept over the violent abuse my brothers and sisters were experiencing.a Yet, I was also deeply moved by their loyalty, faith, and endurance.​—2 Cor. 6:4, 5.
We did everything possible to provide spiritual food to the brothers remaining in Malawi and also to those who had fled to Mozambique to escape the violence. The translation team for Chichewa, Malawi’s most widely spoken language, relocated to a brother’s large farm in Zimbabwe. He kindly erected homes and an office for them. There they continued their vital work of translating Bible literature.
We arranged for the circuit overseers in Malawi to attend the Chichewa district convention every year in Zimbabwe. There they obtained the convention talk outlines. On their way back to Malawi, they shared the material with the brothers as best they could. One year during their visit to Zimbabwe, we managed to organize a Kingdom Ministry School to upbuild these courageous circuit overseers.




Delivering a talk in Chichewa at a Chichewa/​Shona convention in Zimbabwe



In February 1975, I traveled to visit Witnesses from Malawi who had fled to camps in Mozambique. These brothers were keeping right in step with the rest of Jehovah’s organization, including putting into operation the elder arrangement. The new elders had arranged many spiritual activities that included giving public talks, discussing the day’s text and The Watchtower, and even holding assemblies. They had organized the camps just like a convention, with departments for cleaning, food distribution, and security. Those faithful brothers had accomplished so much with Jehovah’s blessing, and I left encouraged beyond measure.
In the late 1970’s, the Zambia branch office began caring for Malawi. Still, I kept the situation in Malawi close to my heart and in my prayers, and so did many others. On several occasions, as a member of the Zimbabwe Branch Committee, I met with representatives from world headquarters, along with responsible brothers from Malawi, South Africa, and Zambia. Each time, we asked the same question, “What more can we do for the brothers in Malawi?”
As time passed, the persecution lessened. Brothers who had fled the country were filtering back to Malawi, while those who had remained were gradually finding relief from the cruel treatment they had suffered. Nearby countries were legally recognizing Jehovah’s people and lifting restrictions. Mozambique followed suit in 1991. But we wondered, ‘When will Jehovah’s Witnesses in Malawi be free?’



RETURNING TO MALAWI

Malawi’s political situation eventually changed, and in 1993 the government lifted the ban on Jehovah’s Witnesses. Soon thereafter, I was talking to a missionary who asked, “Will you be going back to Malawi?” I was then 59 years old, so I responded, “No, I’m too old!” However, that very day we received a fax from the Governing Body inviting us to return there.
We loved our assignment in Zimbabwe, so this was a hard decision for us. We had put down roots and developed some wonderful, long-standing friendships. The Governing Body very kindly offered not to change our assignment unless we were willing. So we could easily have chosen our own path and stayed in Zimbabwe. But I remember thinking about how Abraham and Sarah left their comfortable home in their older years in obedience to Jehovah’s direction.​—Gen. 12:1-5.
We decided to follow the direction from Jehovah’s organization and returned to Malawi on February 1, 1995, the 28th anniversary of our original arrival date there. A Branch Committee was formed, consisting of me and two other brothers, and we were soon at work reestablishing the activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses.



JEHOVAH MAKES IT GROW

What a blessing to see Jehovah make the work grow rapidly! The number of publishers shot up from about 30,000 in 1993 to over 42,000 in 1998.b The Governing Body approved plans for a new branch office to care for the growing needs in the field. We acquired a 12-hectare (30-ac) plot in Lilongwe, and I was appointed to the construction committee.
Brother Guy Pierce of the Governing Body gave the dedication talk for the new facilities in May 2001. Over two thousand local Witnesses attended, most of whom had been baptized for more than 40 years. These faithful brothers and sisters had endured years of indescribable hardships under the ban. They were materially poor but spiritually rich beyond measure. And now they were delighted to tour their new Bethel. Everywhere they went, Bethel echoed to the sound of Kingdom songs sung in African-style harmony, which made the entire event the most moving experience I have ever witnessed. It was living testimony that Jehovah richly blesses those who faithfully endure trials.
After the branch construction was completed, I was delighted to start receiving assignments for Kingdom Hall dedications. The congregations in Malawi were benefiting from the accelerated program for building Kingdom Halls in lands with limited resources. Previously, some congregations met in shelters made from eucalyptus trees. They used grass reed mats for a roof and long mud benches for seating. Now the brothers enthusiastically baked bricks in kilns that they had constructed and built beautiful new meeting places. But they still favored benches because, as the saying goes, There is always room for one more on a bench!
I have also been thrilled to see Jehovah help people grow spiritually. Young African brothers especially impressed me as they willingly volunteered their services and quickly gained experience through divine education and practical training. They took on greater responsibility in Bethel and in the congregations. The congregations were further strengthened by newly appointed local circuit overseers, many of whom were married. These couples chose to serve Jehovah more fully by postponing the joy of having children, despite cultural and, in some cases, family pressure.



SATISFIED WITH MY DECISIONS





With Anne at Britain Bethel



After 52 years in Africa, I experienced some health problems. The Governing Body approved the recommendation of the Branch Committee that we be reassigned to Britain. We were disappointed to leave an assignment we loved, but Britain’s Bethel family is taking very good care of us in our older years.
I am convinced that allowing Jehovah to direct my path in life has been the best decision I ever made. If I had relied on my own understanding, who knows where my secular career would have taken me. Jehovah knew all along what I needed to ‘make my paths straight.’ (Prov. 3:5, 6) As a young man, I was fascinated to learn the details of the work at a large company. Yet, Jehovah’s global organization provided a spiritual career that more than satisfied me. For me, serving Jehovah was and continues to be a very fulfilling life!



Malawi’s theocratic history is published in the 1999 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses, pp. 148-223.
Malawi now has over 100,000 publishers.

