
Who Really Is Jesus Christ?

“Now when he entered into Jerusalem, the whole city was set in commotion, saying: ‘Who is this?’ The crowds kept telling: ‘This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee!’”—MATTHEW 21:10, 11.



WHY did the arrival of Jesus Christa in Jerusalem on that spring day in 33 C.E. cause such commotion? Many in the city had heard about Jesus and the extraordinary things he had done. They kept telling others about him. (John 12:17-19) Yet, little did the crowds know that in their midst was a man whose influence would spread around the world and span the centuries down to our day!
Consider a few examples of the far-reaching influence that Jesus has had on human history.
  The calendar commonly used in many parts of the world is based on the year when Jesus is thought to have been born.

  Some two billion people—about a third of the world’s population—call themselves Christians.

  Islam, with more than a billion members worldwide, teaches that Jesus is “a greater prophet than Abraham, Noah, and Moses.”

  Many of Jesus’ wise sayings have, in various forms, entered everyday speech. Among them are the following:
‘Turn the other cheek.’—MATTHEW 5:39.

‘Go the extra mile.’—MATTHEW 5:41.

‘No man can serve two masters.’—MATTHEW 6:24.

‘Do not cast your pearls before swine.’—MATTHEW 7:6.

‘All things that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them.’—MATTHEW 7:12.

‘Count the cost.’—LUKE 14:28.



Jesus’ influence is beyond question. Yet, people hold widely different ideas and beliefs about him. Hence, you may wonder, ‘Who really is Jesus Christ?’ The Bible alone tells us where Jesus came from, how he lived, and why he died. Knowing those truths about him can have a profound effect on your life—now and in the future.



“Jesus,” the personal name of this prophet from Nazareth, means “Jehovah Is Salvation.” The word “Christ” is a title that means “Anointed One,” signifying that Jesus was anointed, or appointed by God to a special position.

