Christian Conduct in School
1 If you are a Christian youth still in school, you need strong faith to keep your integrity. You are being exposed to bad associates and to situations that can test your faith. It is important that you apply Peter’s counsel to “maintain your conduct fine among the nations, that . . . they may as a result of your fine works of which they are eyewitnesses glorify God.” (1 Pet. 2:12) You need courage and determination to meet this challenge.
2 In or out of school, you are bombarded by the contaminating influences of premarital sex, obscene language, tobacco, and abuse of drugs. Every day, you encounter temptations that threaten to corrupt your record of good conduct. Like adults, you must “put up a hard fight for the faith” if you are to endure such trials.​—Jude 3; see July 15, 1991, Watchtower, pages 23-6.
3 At school, there are patriotic ceremonies and worldly holidays. Do you know what national and religious holidays are promoted in your school? If a challenging situation arises, could you “hold a good conscience, so that . . . they may get ashamed who are speaking slightingly of your good conduct”?​—1 Pet. 3:16.
4 You may be tempted by the lure of school sports activities or social gatherings. You must be alert to recognize how these seemingly enjoyable activities can compromise your faith. There is a need to choose associates with whom you can enjoy “an interchange of encouragement,” each one being built up through the other’s faith.​—Rom. 1:12.
5 You Can Endure, With Jehovah’s Help: Satan is constantly testing your faith. The trials you must endure can be severe, but the rewards make it all worthwhile. (1 Pet. 1:6, 7) You cannot successfully endure on your own; you must look to Jehovah for help. Jesus urged his disciples: “Keep on the watch and pray continually, that you may not enter into temptation.” (Matt. 26:41) Discipline and self-control are vital.​—1 Cor. 9:27.
6 Always remember that you are accountable to Jehovah for your conduct. (Eccl. 11:9) Even though what you do may not be observed by others, Jehovah is aware of what you do and will render judgment. (Heb. 4:13) A sincere desire to please him should move you to ‘work out your salvation with fear and trembling.’ (Phil. 2:12) Reading God’s Word daily is a great help. It is filled with excellent counsel and fine examples to imitate.​—Heb. 12:1-3.
7 Parents, you play a vital role. You need to supervise your children, be aware of problems they face, and provide help when it is needed. Do you have a good rapport with your children? Have you inculcated in them an appreciative understanding of God’s laws and principles? When faced with pressures or temptations, are your children strong, or do they give up easily? Do they get discouraged because they have to be different from their peers? As parents, you have the responsibility to help them. (Deut. 6:6, 7) If you do your job well, you can help them be victorious in the fight for the faith.​—Prov. 22:6.

