Offering Ourselves Willingly for Every Good Work
1 A worldly publication made reference to Jehovah’s Witnesses, saying: “It would be difficult to find members of any other group who work as hard at their religion as do the Witnesses.” Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses work so hard and with such a willing spirit?
2 One reason is that they are imbued with a sense of urgency. Jesus recognized that he had a limited time in which to finish his work on earth. (John 9:4) While the glorified Son of God goes subduing in the midst of his enemies today, Jehovah’s people realize that they have a limited time to do their work. Therefore, they keep offering themselves willingly for sacred service. (Ps. 110:1-3) With more workers needed to bring in the harvest, there can be no letup in their efforts. (Matt. 9:37, 38) Hence, they endeavor to imitate Jesus, who set a perfect example of willingness and diligence in his work.​—John 5:17.
3 Another reason Jehovah’s Witnesses work whole-souled as to Jehovah is that their worldwide organization is different from all other groups. Worldly religious organizations typically require only a minimum of time and effort from their adherents. What they believe has little or no effect on their daily lives, their dealings with others, or their pursuits in life. Lacking the motivating power of true faith, they have insisted that their shepherds ‘speak to them smooth things,’ assuring them that their token effort is sufficient. (Isa. 30:10) Their clergy have obliged by ‘tickling their ears,’ instilling a spirit of apathy and spiritual laziness.​—2 Tim. 4:3.
4 What a contrast among Jehovah’s people! Everything about our worship involves effort, exertion, and work. Every day and in everything we do, we practice what we believe. While the truth brings us much joy, it involves “a great deal of struggling” for us to fulfill what it requires. (Compare 1 Thessalonians 2:2.) Just caring for the responsibilities of daily living is enough to keep most people busy. However, we do not allow these concerns to prevent us from putting Kingdom interests first.​—Matt. 6:33.
5 What we are given to do in Jehovah’s service is so beneficial and urgent that we are moved to ‘buy out’ time from other pursuits and use it more profitably on spiritual matters. (Eph. 5:16) Knowing that our godly devotion and willing spirit please Jehovah, we have the greatest incentive to keep on with our hard work. With the rich blessings we receive now and prospects of the life to come, our determination is to continue “working hard and exerting ourselves” in behalf of Kingdom interests.​—1 Tim. 4:10.
6 Devotion and the Spirit of Self-Sacrifice: Most people today give material needs and interests priority over everything else. They feel fully justified in focusing attention on what they will eat, drink, or wear. (Matt. 6:31) Not being content with necessities, they are motivated by the goal of enjoying good living to the full now and ‘having many good things laid up for many years, so they can take their ease, eat, drink, and enjoy themselves.’ (Luke 12:19) The typical churchgoer feels that any personal effort required by his religion is an encroachment upon his rights. The idea of abandoning or even curtailing some materialistic pursuit or giving up a pleasurable interest is repugnant. With his thinking centered upon himself, cultivating a spirit of self-sacrifice is unreal, impractical.
7 We view this matter differently. God’s Word has elevated our thinking so that we think God’s thoughts instead of those of men. (Isa. 55:8, 9) We have goals in life that transcend fleshly pursuits. The vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty and the sanctification of his name are the most important issues in the entire universe. The magnitude of these issues is so great that, in comparison, all the nations “are as something nonexistent in front of him.” (Isa. 40:17) Any attempt to live our lives in a way that ignores God’s will must be viewed as foolishness.​—1 Cor. 3:19.
8 So while some material things are needed and others are useful in carrying on our Kingdom activities, we perceive that these are not really “the more important things.” (Phil. 1:10) We adhere to the spirit of 1 Timothy 6:8 in limiting our pursuit of material interests and wisely endeavoring to keep our hearts focused on ‘the things unseen that are everlasting.’​—2 Cor. 4:18.
9 The more we think God’s thoughts, the less anxiety we have about material things. When we contemplate what Jehovah has done for us already and the marvelous blessings he has promised for the future, we are willing to make any sacrifice he asks of us. (Mark 10:29, 30) We owe our very existence to him. Were it not for his mercy and love, we would have no enjoyment of life now and no future whatever. We feel obliged to give of ourselves, since everything we are doing in his service ‘is what we ought to be doing.’ (Luke 17:10) Anything we are asked to give back to Jehovah, we part with cheerfully, knowing that we will “reap bountifully.”​—2 Cor. 9:6, 7.
10 Willing Workers Are Needed Now: From its very beginning, the Christian congregation entered into a period of intense activity. A thorough witness had to be given before the overthrow of Jerusalem in 70 C.E. During that time Jesus’ disciples were “intensely occupied with the word.” (Acts 18:5) Rapid expansion made it necessary to train more evangelizers and skilled shepherds and to enlist their help. Men with experience in dealing with secular authorities as well as capable ones able to supervise the collection and distribution of material things were needed. (Acts 6:1-6; Eph. 4:11) While a few served prominently, most remained in the background. But all of them ‘exerted themselves vigorously,’ working together wholeheartedly to get the work done.​—Luke 13:24.
11 Although there was relatively little need for vigorous activity on a worldwide scale during the many centuries that followed, a great revival of Kingdom activity began when Jesus took his Kingdom power in 1914. At first, few realized that the need for workers in behalf of Kingdom interests would become so great, requiring the help of millions of willing ones in lands all around the globe.
12 Today the organization is deeply involved in a great variety of projects that have taxed our resources to their limits. Kingdom activity is moving ahead on a grand scale. The urgency of our times moves us to exert ourselves and to use every asset at our disposal to accomplish the work at hand. With the end of the entire wicked system of things drawing so near, we anticipate even more intense activity in the days ahead. Every dedicated servant of Jehovah is being called upon to offer himself willingly in the urgent ingathering work.
13 What Needs to Be Done? We can truthfully say that there is “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) In many territories the harvest is ripe, but the workers are few. We are invited to do our part not only in being more thorough in witnessing throughout our own territory but also in meeting the challenge of serving where there is a greater need.
14 It is commendable to see how Witnesses in all parts of the world offer themselves willingly for other activities. These may range from volunteering in the construction of places of worship, serving at conventions, and assisting with relief efforts in times of disaster to cleaning the local Kingdom Hall on a regular basis. In connection with the latter activity, there is the matter of always making sure the Kingdom Hall is left in a clean and orderly condition after each meeting. Completing tasks that may be considered menial demonstrates a proper understanding of Jesus’ words at Luke 16:10: “The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much, and the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also in much.”
■ Giving Support to the Activities of the Congregation: While each congregation functions as part of the overall organization and receives direction from “the faithful and discreet slave,” it is made up of individual Kingdom publishers. (Matt. 24:45) Its accomplishments depend largely on how much each Witness is willing and able to do. The congregation focuses on getting the good news preached in its territory, making new disciples, and then strengthening them spiritually. Each one of us can contribute toward this work. We can also set goals for ourselves in personal study, meaningful participation in the meetings, and assistance to others in need within the congregation. These activities offer many fine opportunities for us to demonstrate our willingness.
■ Taking the Lead in Positions of Oversight: Jehovah has entrusted the supervision of each congregation to its appointed elders. (Acts 20:28) These are men who have reached out in order to qualify for this privilege. (1 Tim. 3:1) Virtually every brother in the congregation has some potential for qualifying for greater responsibilities. Many brothers are developing spiritually and need to keep growing under the guidance and loving assistance of the congregation elders. These men should be diligent students of the Bible and our publications. They can demonstrate their willingness by being submissive to the spirit-appointed elders, imitating their faith, and cultivating the qualities looked for in overseers.​—Heb. 13:7, 17.
■ Taking Up the Full-Time Service: The congregation functions primarily to preach the good news. (Matt. 24:14) What a blessing when zealous ones intensify their efforts by enrolling as pioneers! This usually involves making adjustments in their personal life. Additional adjustments may be required for them to continue in this special field of service. But those who hold on to this privilege instead of giving up after a year or so because of some temporary discouragement are sure to experience Jehovah’s rich blessing. Loving elders and other mature ones can contribute to the success of the pioneers, encouraging them by word and deed. What a fine spirit is demonstrated by young people who go directly into the pioneer work upon finishing school! The same is true of adults who enroll as regular pioneers as soon as their secular obligations are reduced. What satisfaction it brings to a dedicated Christian when he thus cooperates with Jehovah’s speeding up of the ingathering work!​—Isa. 60:22.
■ Sharing in the Construction and Maintenance of Meeting Places: Literally hundreds of modern Kingdom Halls as well as many Assembly Halls have been constructed. Amazingly, almost all the work has been done by our brothers and sisters who have willingly volunteered their time and skills. (1 Chron. 28:21) Thousands of willing workers keep these facilities in good repair by performing whatever tasks may be required. (2 Chron. 34:8) Since this work is one aspect of sacred service, those assisting offer themselves willingly, not asking to be reimbursed for their service in this regard, any more than they would ask to be paid to preach from house to house, give public talks in the congregation, or help with assembly or convention work. These volunteers freely offer their services in planning and constructing places of worship to Jehovah’s praise. They eagerly assist with such things as completing legal documents, keeping records of accounts, making purchasing contacts, and calculating the amount of materials needed. These loyal servants of Jehovah do not add some type of overhead charge or in any way seek to profit materially either directly or indirectly from services they render, since all their talents and resources are dedicated to Jehovah. (See February 1992 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4, paragraph 10.) This activity requires diligent workers who perform their services “whole-souled as to Jehovah.”​—Col. 3:23.
15 What is it, then, that makes the willingness of Jehovah’s people unique? It is the spirit of giving. Their generous giving involves more than money or material things​—they “offer themselves willingly.” (Ps. 110:3) This is the essence of our dedication to Jehovah. We are rewarded in a special way. We experience “more happiness” and we “reap bountifully” because what we do is appreciated by others, who give to us in return. (Acts 20:35; 2 Cor. 9:6; Luke 6:38) Our greatest Benefactor is our heavenly Father, Jehovah, who “loves a cheerful giver.” (2 Cor. 9:7) He will repay us a hundredfold, with blessings that will last forever. (Mal. 3:10; Rom. 6:23) So when privileges in Jehovah’s service are made available to you, will you volunteer yourself willingly and answer as did Isaiah: “Here I am! Send me”?​—Isa. 6:8.

