Parents Who Rejoice!
1 If you are a young person living in a Christian home, there is a special way you can make your parents happy. If you pursue a righteous course, “your father and your mother will rejoice.” (Prov. 23:22-25) Your parents naturally want the best for you. Nothing could please them more than to see you make the truth your own and dedicate your life to Jehovah.
2 You can be thankful to have parents who are in the truth. From your birth, they have fed, clothed, and housed you as well as nursed you through times of sickness. Even more important, they have endeavored to teach you about Jehovah and his righteous ways; this is training that can ensure your everlasting life. (Eph. 6:1-4) How can you show your appreciation?
3 Make the Truth Your Own: Your parents have tried to teach you to take the truth seriously, make spiritual progress, and keep close to Jehovah’s organization. You can show appreciation by taking an interest in the family study without having to be coerced. Demonstrate a desire to attend meetings, taking the initiative on your own to get ready so that the family can arrive on time. Sit with your parents during the meetings, and pay close attention by following along in the publications being studied. Reach out for a share in the meetings by commenting. Show yourself to be a willing student in the Theocratic Ministry School, accepting assignments and doing your best to fulfill them. Volunteer to help care for tasks around the Kingdom Hall, where your assistance would be useful. Involvement in such activities can keep your heart focused on what is good for you spiritually.
4 Set Progressive Goals: Reach out for a meaningful share in field service, showing a desire to qualify as a publisher. Keep up with the weekly Bible reading or, even better yet, read the entire Bible on your own. Make up your mind that you are going to meet the requirements for dedication and baptism. Your parents can help you to plan your curriculum in school carefully, with a view toward acquiring training that will equip you for a full share in Jehovah’s service. Concentrate on developing the kind of reputation that will prompt others to recommend you for special privileges such as pioneering or Bethel service. (Acts 16:1, 2) Achieving goals can help you “make sure of the more important things, so that you may be . . . filled with righteous fruit.”​—Phil. 1:10, 11.
5 Youth is a time to learn, to gain experience, and to acquire skills in dealing with others. It is a time when you can enjoy life without all of the pressures and responsibilities that come with adulthood. Solomon said: “Rejoice, young man, in your youth, and let your heart do you good in the days of your young manhood.” (Eccl. 11:9) If you set your heart on serving Jehovah in your youth, you will reap blessings that will last forever.​—1 Chron. 28:9.
6 If you “pursue righteousness” instead of “the desires incidental to youth,” you will relieve your parents of a heavy burden of anxiety and heartache. (2 Tim. 2:22) You will give your own heart cause to rejoice. (Prov. 12:25) Most of all, you will bring joy to your Creator, Jehovah God.​—Prov. 27:11.

