From Our Readers
Good Health
Thank you for the article “Good Health Is Good for Business.” (February 22, 1987) Although I don’t work outside the home, I sure work a lot better at home since I started regular exercise a year ago, and also I am 80 pounds lighter.
J. W., United States
Acne
Your article on acne was of special interest to me, since this problem caused me much irritation when I was a teenager. (February 22, 1987) What helped me was a remedy that an old Bolivian Indian gave me. Here it is. Eat lots of natural yogurt, preferably unsweetened. Wash the face daily with water to which lemon juice has been added (one lemon to a liter of water). Apply honey to the face once a week, leaving it on for at least one hour.
J. D. S., Brazil
We are pleased that the remedy helped. “Awake!” does not endorse any particular remedy. What works for one person may not always work for another.​—ED.
Hope for the Mentally Ill
We were extremely impressed by your articles on “Hope for the Mentally Ill.” (September 8, 1986) Our group, Nova Scotia Friends of Schizophrenics, has been in existence since 1981. We have undergone considerable stress and problems as friends and relatives of loved ones who suffer from schizophrenia. We are gradually succeeding in getting the illness “out of the closet” where it can be faced and dealt with. Your research and accurate reporting in the three articles is excellent and goes a long way in helping to educate the public so that we can gain their understanding and support.
C. L. C., Canada
A Birth? Or an Abortion?
I read your articles on “A Birth? Or an Abortion?” (April 8, 1987) I found these excellent, well written and informative. I write not only as a reader but also as a physician to commend you. I face patients with decisions of an abortion. I will give this issue to those patients contemplating a termination. I write from experience in this matter. Not that I perform abortions but that at one time I was almost an abortion. My mother got pregnant just a few months after giving birth to my sister. Both she and my father elected that she have an abortion, since they couldn’t afford to have another child so soon. On the way to the doctor’s office, my mother changed her mind. I was born one year and two days after my sister. I am now a physician in obstetrics-gynecology, a husband, and a father. I hope these articles will help patients to see the importance of life to our heavenly Father.
R. R., M.D., United States
Thankful for What I Have
I have just finished reading “Thankful for What I Have” by Lindsay Stead. (May 8, 1987) It is the most heart-tugging story I have read in a long time. It makes me feel very guilty now when I think of how I sometimes complain for no reason at all. The account brought tears to my eyes.
S. v. A., Zimbabwe

