Announcements
UNITEDLY PREACHING THE KINGDOM
It is the happy privilege of Jehovah’s witnesses world-wide to preach unitedly the kingdom of God as having begun. From study of the Scriptures they have come to understand clearly that we are living in the parousía, properly translated from Greek into English as “presence,” of the Lord. It being that his presence began in 1914, it was then “the kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king for ever and ever.” (Rev. 11:15) To acquaint as many people as possible with this urgent information, during August Jehovah’s witnesses will continue their diligent house-to-house preaching work, offering to people two Bible-study aid books and two booklets on a contribution of $1. More and more preachers are joining in the ranks of the witnesses and are being richly blessed as they share in the happy work of preaching the Kingdom. Would you like to share? Contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses for information or write us.
DIVINE WILL INTERNATIONAL ASSEMBLY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
July is the month that Jehovah’s witnesses the world over have waited for with keen anticipation. On the 27th day of this month their big international assembly in New York city begins. For eight glorious days thousands of delegates from more than a hundred lands will feast upon spiritual fat things and be strengthened by Christian fellowship. Two immense stadiums, Yankee Stadium and the Polo Grounds, will be used for the entire period of the convention. A fine program is planned for each day to instruct, encourage and upbuild all in attendance. All persons of good will toward Jehovah God are invited to attend every day of the assembly. It will be an experience they will not want to miss. On the afternoon of August 3 at 3 p.m. a special talk will be given by N. H. Knorr, president of the Watch Tower Society. Its title is “God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near?” During the assembly it will be widely advertised throughout New York and vicinity. Every reader of The Watchtower is urged to hear this talk and to attend other sessions of the assembly if it is at all possible for them to do so.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
August 17: Find Your Place in the New World Society. Page 433.
August 24: Beware that You Do Not Lose Your Place! Page 440.

