Recordings That Bring Praise to Jehovah
“ONE day spent at Bethel playing music is worth a thousand spent elsewhere.” “I consider it the highest musical privilege presently in existence.” “I feel it is an honor to use the talents that Jehovah so graciously bestowed on me possibly to attract others to the truth with music.” These are some of the comments from professional musicians, Jehovah’s Witnesses, who have volunteered their time and effort to produce music with a unique orchestra.
Why would these musicians freely volunteer their talents when they could be doing the same kind of work for profit? Let them answer for themselves. Jim has played double bass for 22 years with the New York Philharmonic orchestra. He stated: “I feel extremely privileged to come to the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses and record music.” Joe, violinist and guitarist, has recorded music professionally. He feels this way: “It is an answer to my prayers to be used by Jehovah with anything I have.” Harold, a pianist, has had many fine privileges of responsibility as a minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He has always kept his professional music career secondary to his ministry. He says: “Recording music for Jehovah’s Witnesses is one of the most enjoyable privileges I have had in Jehovah’s organization.”
In these days when the recording business is a fiercely competitive, multimillion-dollar industry, it may seem hard for some to believe that 60 people would come together to record music for four days without accepting any monetary reward and even at their own expense! However, the sponsor of this recording project is the Watchtower Society​—the nonprofit organization that publishes this magazine. And everyone involved with the orchestra ​—from conductor to technician—​is a minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Their motive for working so hard? To bring praise to God.
From Printing to Recording
How, though, did the Watchtower Society​—well known for its printing operations—​become involved in making sound recordings? In 1966 the Society arranged for a costumed Bible drama to be presented at its yearly district conventions. This dramatic portrayal of ancient Bible events was so well received that similar presentations became regular features at these conventions.
Back then, the first Bible dramas were presented live. Later, it was decided that prerecorded tapes could be produced to add music and sound effects to the presentations. Thus, the actors on stage would simply mime the voices already recorded on tape. The Society had its large headquarters staff at Brooklyn to draw from to provide actors and technicians, and a recording studio was established. But when the decision was later made to produce original music for these dramas, a new challenge presented itself.
Assembling an Orchestra
A search began for composers and musicians among Jehovah’s Witnesses in North America who would be willing to donate their time and talents to producing Christian music. Over the years, the Watchtower orchestra has grown to nearly symphonic proportions​—60 to 70 volunteers. Quite a few among them are professional musicians. However, they will tell you what their primary profession is. David has played cello with the Denver symphony orchestra for several years. His view of the music industry has been affected by the truth of God’s Word. He expressed it this way: “I have scaled down my personal ambition and desire for advancement in the music world. I am glad to support my family as a musician and also have time to engage in the full-time ministry.”
John’s view also has, as he put it, “changed dramatically. Although I was still working on Broadway as a bassist when I was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I began to see that it was hard to balance my love for Jehovah and my love for music. I found the music industry to be a master. I could not give my whole soul to Jehovah in the preaching work when I knew I had to play music at night. There are too many opportunities to compromise our faith. So I started in the full-time ministry.”
Nearly 50 of the participants in the Society’s music recording projects, including music copyists and technicians, serve in local congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses as elders or ministerial servants. About 35 are able to devote their full time to the ministry, including service at Brooklyn Bethel and Watchtower Farms.
In 1980 the Society expanded the work of this unique orchestra. Arrangements of songs used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as an enjoyable feature of their worship were made available on cassette tapes. Delegates at the 1980 district conventions were thrilled by the release of Kingdom Melodies No. 1​—the first of a series of music tapes produced by the Watchtower orchestra for the praise of Jehovah.
Tom, a professional musician for many years, has been involved in the Society’s music recording projects for the past 15 years. He remarked: “It is true that our efforts fall short musically of what can be accomplished by a professional symphony orchestra. But what we may lack in experience is certainly made up for in zeal and enthusiasm.” Sallie has years of experience as a professional violinist. She appreciates “the spirit of cooperation that exists here that none in the world can match.” Bill, a retired percussionist, summed it up, saying: “The orchestra still isn’t the New York Philharmonic in quality, but I think we do well. I love it! I earnestly look forward to each recording session.”
Dramas and Bible Readings
The voices for the Bible dramas are recorded in the Society’s studios. Members of the Brooklyn headquarters staff serve as actors and actresses. Drama scenes are recorded separately and then edited together. Finally, sound effects and music are added.
Since 1978 the Society’s recording facilities have been put to yet another use​—recording the Holy Scriptures. Over the years, since the first release of the cassette of The Good News According to John, the entire Bible has been recorded. Now anyone with a hearing ear can benefit from God’s Word.
How are such recordings made? Let’s look in on a recording session. An ordained minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses is reading from the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. To help him put meaning into the reading and to look carefully after the recording quality, there are three others sitting behind a soundproof window in the control room​—the engineer, who operates the recording console to make sure the equipment is functioning properly; the follower, who carefully checks the reading for accuracy of content; and the director, who provides helpful guidance on pronunciation and speech qualities to the reader.
While these three are busy with the recording, an editor removes page-turning noises and other unwanted sounds from previous recordings by physically cutting the recorded tape with a razor blade. A proofreader then carefully listens to the final version to be sure nothing has been left out.
Producing music, drama, Watchtower, and Bible-reading tapes is a lot of work, but letters from all over the world expressing appreciation for these tapes indicate that it is well worth the effort. Have you had opportunity to benefit from these unique recordings? The publishers of this magazine would be more than happy to help you obtain them. After all, they do more than provide you with instruction and enjoyment. They bring praise to Jehovah himself.
[Pictures on page 25]
Professional Witness musicians share in all sections of the orchestra
[Pictures on page 26]
The different sections of the orchestra combine to make music that is recorded in the Watchtower studio

