VOL. XXXVII. MAY 1 NO. 9 
A. D. 1916-A.M.6044 



CONTENTS 

The Christian's Warfare Against Pride . 131 

Mental Strongholds to Be Cast Down . 131 

Pride Leads to Mental Unbalance . . 131 
"Jesus Died and Paid It AH" . . .133 

Legal Phase of Ransoming Work . .133 

The Cripple at Lystra 134 

Memorial Supper Reports 136 

The Counsel at Jerusalem . . . .137 

Necessity for These Restrictions . 137 

Liberty is Not License . . . .138 
Faith Demonstrated by Works . . . . 139 

Faith Distinguished From Credulity . 139 
Preaching the Gospel a Necessity . . 140 

Many Ways of Preaching the Gospel . 140 
"Your Brethren That Hated You" . . .141 
Requests for Pilgrim Visits . . . . 141 
Some Faithful Witnesses 142 

Some Letters on the Subject . . . 142 
"How Wonderful!" (Poem) 143 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



SCRIPTURE STUDIES AND SCENARIOS-VARIOUS 

For the information of our readers we give below a list of 
the languages into which the various volumes of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES have been translated. Most of these can be 
supplied from the head office at Brooklyn. 

Volume I. In English, German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian, 
Italian, French, Greek, Hungarian, Spanish, Polish, 
Hollandish, Finnish, Arabic, Slovak, Rumanian, Armenian, 
Lettish, Chinese, Japanese and Korean. We have also the 
English Braille, American Braille and New York Point. 

Volume II. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume III. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume IV. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume V. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume VI. English, German, Swedish, Finnish, Greek. 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO is supplied in Spanish, Italian, 
Greek, Polish, Armenian, German, Finnish, Swedish and English, 
in one or more styles of binding. See WATCH TOWER, 
October 1, 1915, for prices and styles of binding. 



We are put to much inconvenience by the failure of 
our readers to promptly and plainly notify us when they 
change their address. Old as well as new address should 
be mentioned. 



R5889:page 131 

THE CHRISTIAN'S WARFARE AGAINST PRIDE 

"The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through 
God to the pulling down of strongholds; casting down 
imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth 
and bringing into captivity every thought to the 
obedience of Christ."— 2 Corinthians 10:4,5. 

SOLDIERS of the Cross are of a different kind 

and are differently armed from the soldiers 

of the world. Ours is a fight against the 

spirit of the world and against the flesh. 

It is the fight not only against the imperfections 

that came into our flesh through 

our forefather's disobedience, but against 



the natural opposition of the flesh to sacrifice. 

The flesh instinctively struggles to 

avoid sacrifice. Moreover, our fight is 

against unseen spiritual foes. The world have their 

swords and their guns as weapons of warfare. And the 

Lord has provided us an armor; namely, the breastplate of 

righteousness, the helmet of salvation, the shield of faith, 

the Sword of the Spirit, and the sandals of "the preparation 

of the Gospel of Peace." These are all weapons 

of defense, except the Sword. The Sword is an aggressive 

weapon.— Ephesians 6:1 1-18. 

In the case of the Christian, "the Sword of the Spirit, 
which is the Word of God," is to be handled to accomplish 
good, to be used in opposition to Satan and sin. 
But the thought of this Scripture seems to be, not that 
we are commissioned to fight the world, but that we are 
to strive to be loyal to the Lord, to fight sin in ourselves 
and wherever it might properly be under our jurisdiction, 
and to repel the attacks of the Adversary. The 
exercise of our powers in bringing self into subjection 
means a great deal in the way of sacrifice, much in the 
way of battling. God has given us "exceeding great and 
precious promises." The New Creature is made strong 
by these promises— strong in proportion as he perceives 
the significance of these promises, and feeds upon them. 

MENTAL STRONGHOLDS TO BE CAST DOWN 

The Apostle is pointing out that these strongholds 
which we are to pull down are in ourselves. Sin is entrenched 
in our minds, in our imaginations. Pride, selfishness 
and various other kinds of sin, are entrenched in us 
through the long centuries of the downward tendencies 
of our race. These things have dug deep trenches in 
our system; they are firmly fastened there. But, urges 
St. Paul, "Let not sin have dominion over your mortal 
body." Destroy the stronghold. Bring your entire being 
into subjection to the will of God. 

By way of pointing out what these strongholds are— 
that they are mental strongholds— the Apostle says, "Casting 
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth." 
Our imaginations may be of many kinds. We 
may be beset by false doctrines and superstitions that 
have come down to us from past ages. The Word of the 
Lord is the only thing that can effectually cast these down 
and make us see God's real character, make us see His 
glorious promises to the Church now and to the world in 
the future. The Word of the Lord is the only thing 
that will cast down imaginations— ignorance, superstition, 
pride, unholy ambitions, idle speculations, and every 
form of thought that would lead us astray and hinder 
the work of grace in our hearts and minds. These imaginations 
of the natural mind exalt themselves against the 
true knowledge of God, the Spirit of God— "high things," 
I lie Apostle calls them. 

We are to "mind not high things." The Apostle does 



not mean that we are not to mind the high things that 
are spiritual; for in another place he says, "Set your 
affections on things above, not on things on the earth." 
(Colossians 3:2.) In other words, Set your affections on 
the very highest things. But the "high things" of the 
world are very different; they exalt themselves against 
the things which are truly high, which are of God. The 
Lord's children are to be humble, not high-minded, not 
to be carried away by the empty honors, projects and 
ambitions of earth. The desire to have a place among 
men, to shine in society, to have wealth and influence, to 
have whatever things would bring us into high esteem 
amongst mankind, is a temptation that the disciple of 
Christ must guard against. 

It has been noted by those who have the care of the 
mentally defective that a great deal of difficulty lies in 
the imagination. It is said that if one visits an insane 
asylum, he will find one here who thinks he is a king; 
there another, who imagines that she is a queen; another 
who imagines he is fabulously rich and could draw checks 
for millions. The organ of self-esteem has been too 
large. The Lord only knows how much the individual 
himself has had to do in cultivating this tendency. But 
he has always more or less to do with the matter; the 
high imaginations and the desire to be great obtain 
dominion over him— get the mastery. 

PRIDE LEADS TO MENTAL UNBALANCE 

The same thing applies to Christians. After coming 
into the Church of Christ, they are still liable to the ambition 
to become some great one, to do some great thing, 
to find or promulgate some great doctrine, to discover 

R5889 : page 132 

some new interpretation of Scripture or some new type. 

All these are "high things that exalt." Our Lord gave 

a discourse upon this subject, telling us that when we are 

invited to a feast, we should not take a high seat, but 

a low seat— and perhaps afterward we might be exalted. 

To desire these things and to seek for them is to have 

"strongholds" of pride and unholy ambition in the imagination, 

aspirations for exaltation and honor. Then 

comes the thought that we are great, that we are worthy 

of attention, of special notice. Mental unbalance is there. 

The fact is that we are all insignificant, of very little 

importance in the execution of the Lord's Plan. 

The Lord could have done all His great work without 
us and our cooperation, probably more easily than with 
us. But He very graciously permits us to have a part in 
His work, for our own good and blessing. He is dealing 

R5890:page 132 

with us as children and is training us. Having begotten 



us of His Holy Spirit, He helps us to overcome our weaknesses 

and rewards us if we do overcome them. He 

drills and disciplines us to fit us for a noble and glorious 

future. A part of this drilling as soldiers of the King of 

kings is our fight against self-esteem and a desire for 

great things, high things, according to the standards of 

this "present evil world." 

"BRINGING INTO CAPTIVITY EVERY THOUGHT" 

The thought of casting down unholy and unprofitable 
imaginations is also borne out in the final words of our 
text, that we are to "bring into captivity every thought 
to the obedience of Christ." Whatever we do we have 
first thought about. We sometimes say, "I acted before 
I thought." What we mean is that we acted before we 
gave the matter serious thought. No thought should be 
harbored in our minds which is not in full harmony with 
the Word of God. As Christ was obedient to the Father 
in everything— saying, "Let not My will, but Thine, be 
done"— so every one of us should bring our thoughts into 
obedience to Christ. Our Redeemer is our Exemplar. 

All the members of Christ's Body must have the same 
mind that was in Christ, must manifest the spirit of our 
Master. "Let us humble ourselves, therefore, under the 
mighty hand of God, that He may exalt us in due time." 
(1 Peter 5:6.) No one can wholly follow the Lord without 
much of the spirit of humility, without bringing his 
thoughts into subjection to the Lord. This is not the 
time to exalt ourselves and to show how we can shine. 
But we are to "show forth the praises of Him who hath 
called us out of darkness into His marvelous light" 
(1 Peter 2:9), who has called us with this Heavenly 
Calling, not for our own sakes merely, but for His own 
glory and the blessing of others. God's glory is to be 
our chief concern always. We are to be efficient servants 
of the Lord, through His grace, not of our own strength. 
If we are to be great in the end, we must be humble, we 
must gladly be servants of all now. We must be glad to 
serve, not only when there is honor attached, but when 
the service is unnoticed or unknown. 

God has arranged for our learning certain lessons of 
self-control, bringing ourselves into full obedience to God 
in a voluntary way, with a view to our being His representatives 
by and by, and of then enforcing obedience to 
God's requirements on the part of the world. It is a 
generally accepted principle that no one is qualified to 
rule others who has not himself learned obedience. At 
the cost of great suffering, our Lord Jesus learned what 
obedience means. He promptly and fully submitted Himself 
to God. This Spirit of Christ is to be manifested 
and developed in us, that we shall thus be ready for the 
future work of The Christ, the work of the Millennial Age. 

In proportion as the Truth is received and assimilated, 
it brings to us the spirit of a sound mind. It does not 
bring us perfect soundness of brain; but where rightly 



received, it brings meekness, teachableness, thoughtfulness, 
seriousness. It leads us to take careful heed to the 
instructions of our Heavenly Guide. It thus gives balance 
to the judgment, greater than we had ever before known. 
This should increase as we go on in the good way and 
become disciplined soldiers in the army of the Lord. But 
if the Truth is not received in the spirit of the Truth, 
in the love of it, it might not only fail to be of any benefit, 
but might engender a spirit of pride and boastfulness. 

This quality of pride seems to be particularly associated 
with all kinds of insanity. Many of the inmates 
of insane asylums are affected with a large degree of 
self-esteem— thinking of themselves more highly than they 
ought to think. Their minds are unbalanced in that direction 
to a notable degree. We cannot be too careful 
to cultivate nearness to the Lord, which always brings 
humility and a proper realization of our own unworthiness 
and littleness before Him. 

KEEPING CLOSE TO CHRIST OUR ONLY SAFETY 

Satan is especially alert to trap the Lord's children 
in this "evil day." We might give an illustration which 
we have used before, but which seems well to picture 
wherein lies our special danger and our entire safety. 
Suppose we should consider a large circle, with Christ as 
the Center of that circle. Suppose the circle contained 
an abundance of space, so that there might be varying 
degrees of closeness to the Lord. Let the outer edge of 
that circle represent the utmost limit of God's care over 
His children. Any one, then, nearing the outside line 
would be coming more and more into a place of danger. 
We believe that in proportion as any of us live close to 
the great Center of the circle— our Lord Jesus— we are 
safe. In proportion as we fail to do this, and allow ourselves 
to drift or to wander away from Him, we shall be 
getting near the danger point, and are amenable to the 
evil influences from outside. Should we wander entirely 
over the outer line, our case would be beyond recovery. 

The Lord has in a way put around the human race a 
barrier against danger. This barrier is, largely, man's 
will. Those who have given up their wills, their minds, 
to the Lord, to have His will done in them, are particularly 
liable to severe and subtle attacks of the Adversary. 
He especially seeks to delude and entrap the 
true children of the Lord, thus again to bring them into 
bondage to sin. Upon such as come under his influence, 
the delusion is gradual. 

We are all born with unsound minds. As to the degree 
of unsoundness we need not quarrel. The armament 
which the Lord gives us is not merely a knowledge 
of how to quote Scripture. Neither is it merely to have 
the ability to dispute and to debate, though that ability 
is very good in its place. The real thing that God is 
looking for is in our hearts. He is not looking to see how 
much you know; for He could pump a good deal of 



knowledge into you in a few minutes if He so desired. 
But the Lord is looking to see to what extent you are 
meek, patient, fully submitted to His will. Let us have 
more and more of the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of a 
sound mind, and the earnest desire to help one another. 
"The Lord shall judge His people." (Hebrews 10:30.) 
If they get into trouble through not being sufficiently 
watchful, the Lord will give them some experiences 
which will be good for them, if rightly received. 
Let us remember the warning words of the Apostle Paul: 
"If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged" 

R5890:page 133 

of the Lord. ( 1 Corinthians 11:31.) This means that 
when we neglect to judge ourselves, He has to do it for 
us. Then we are being chastened with a view to our 
correction, that we might attain unto the Heavenly reward 
and favor that is to be ours as New Creatures in 
Christ, if we remain humble and faithful unto death. 
If we continue to be meek and filled with the spirit of 
humility, not craving present honors and exaltation, but 
willing in perfect patience to await the Lord's own good 
time, our exaltation will come; and we shall share our 
Savior's Throne and His glory forevermore. 

"O blows that smite, O wounds that pierce 

This shrinking heart of mine! 
What are ye but the Master's tools. 

Performing work Divine! 
How blest that all these seeming ills 

That draw my heart to thee 
Are each a proof that Thou hast set 

Thy seal of love on me!" 



R5890:page 133 

"JESUS DIED AND PAID IT ALL" 

THE Ransom of our race by our Savior is a 
matter of deep interest to the Lord's people, 
and one which apparently is very difficult to 
understand clearly. We view the subject 
from different standpoints. All see the same 
thing, but all do not see the details. 

God might have told us that He had arranged 
a way by which Justice and the dignity 
of His Court of the Universe could be 
upheld and man nevertheless be released 
from the sentence of death imposed upon him six thousand 
years ago. There was no need of His telling us 
anything about the Ransom. It would have been sufficient 
for us that God should have told us that He had attended 
to the matter properly. But instead, God reasons with us 



in the Scriptures, and there explains the process of His 
Government by which He could be just and yet be the 
Justifier of sinners. This process which God had all to 
do with and man had nothing to do with is Scripturally 
styled the Ransom— the giving of the perfect life of Jesus 
to be the full, complete offset for the forfeited life of 
Adam, the father of our race. 

From this viewpoint, if one went no further into the 
matter, one might say, "Jesus has died and the world 
has been ransomed"— just as the Scriptures speak of Jesus, 
even while He was in the flesh, as being the Messiah, the 
King of Glory. Even when He was a babe the angels 
sang, "Unto you is born this day in the city of David, a 
Savior, who is Christ [Messiah] the Lord." Their statements 
included not only the babe and what had already 
been accomplished in His birth, but all the great work 
which He would do in the future. As a matter of fact, 
the babe was merely called a Savior because He would 
in llie future save His people from their sins. The babe 

R5891 :page 133 

was merely called the Anointed— Messiah— because it was 
foreseen of God that He would make a consecration at 
Jordan, be begotten and anointed of the Holy Spirit, 
finish His work of sacrifice and be exalted to Heavenly 
glory, not only, during this Age, for the Church which is 
His Body, but also for the willing and obedient of the 
world of mankind during the Millennium. Thus we see 
that the babe was not the Savior except in the prophetic 
sense that He was to be the Savior. He was not King 
except in the sense that He was born and came into the 
world to that end. He was not the Deliverer then, nor 
has He even yet delivered all His Church; whereas, after 
the deliverance of the Church, comes the deliverance of 
the world from the reign of Sin and Death. 

Similarly the word ransom may be, and often is, used by 
us all in a prophetic sense— as including the entire work 
of Redemption down to the very end of the Millennial 
Age; as we read, "I will ransom [deliver by a ransom] 
them from the grave."— Hosea 13: 14. 

LEGAL PHASE OF RANSOMING WORK 

But as we come close to these various questions and 
analyze them, we see new beauties, new divisions of 
matters, which at first seem to be indivisible. We see, 
for instance, that the first step toward ransoming the 
world was taken when the Logos left the glory which He 
had with the Father and humbled Himself to become the 
Man Jesus. The first feature in the ransoming work was 
our Master's consecration of Himself at Jordan, followed 
by His life of devotion even unto death. The completion 
of His sacrifice was the completion of the Ransom-price, 
but it was not the completion of the Ransom-work. Indeed, 
the Ransom-work could not even begin until the Ransom-price 



had been provided— not paid. 

We sometimes have spoken of Jesus as having paid 
the Ransom when He died, but such expression was not 
accurate. The price of obedience to the Father's will was 
death, and our Lord's death constitutes the price. In one 
sense Jesus paid it when He surrendered His life; but in 
another and more accurate sense. He did not pay it, but 
merely placed it in the hands of the Father as the price 
to be appropriated, or made applicable later. 

The Ransom-price has been in the hands of Divine 
Justice— in the Father's hands— ever since Jesus died, 
but only as a deposit, because the time had not come for 
it to be paid over officially. If the Divine Plan had been 
for Jesus to take possession of the world and to set up 
His Kingdom at Pentecost, then it would have been proper 
for Him to have paid over to the Father the Ransom-price 
fully and completely— appropriating it as the offset 
to Father Adam's sin and sentence on behalf of all his 
race. But had that price been formally paid over, the 
proper and logical thing would have been for the Father 
to put the whole world immediately into the hands of 
Jesus, and for the Millennial Reign to begin. 

RANSOM-PRICE DEPOSITED WITH DIVINE JUSTICE 

There was, however, another feature to the Divine 
Plan: God did not wish to turn over the Kingdom to 
Jesus until the great Seventh Day, the Millennium. He 
did wish that during the intervening more than eighteen 
centuries a Church class should be called out from amongst 
the world, to be the Bride and Joint-heir of His Son in 
the Kingdom. Hence the Ransom-price for the sins of 
the whole world was merely left unappropriated, while 
Jesus dealt with the Church. 

And since the Father's Plan for the Church was that 
they should sacrifice or surrender their earthly interests 
and receive, instead. Heavenly interests and the Divine 
nature, therefore it was not necessary to give the Church 
Restitution— the thing which the Ransom-price will secure 
for the world of mankind. Hence, instead of giving the 
Church a direct share in the Ransom-price, which would 
mean Restitution, the Lord's provision for them is different; 
namely, an imputation of merit covering their blemishes, 
so that they might present their bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. 

All, therefore, that Jesus has done with the Ransom-price 
is to impute a share of that price as covering the 
shortcomings of those who desire to become His disciples 
and joint-heirs. He has not appropriated it to them 
actually, as in Restitution, but by imputation— justifying 

R5891 :page 134 

them from all sin, and thus permitting them to be accepted 
of the Father as members of the House of Sons, by the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit. 



And how beautiful is the thought that, when shortly 
our Lord will pay over the Ransom-price for the sins of 
the whole world, and have the world immediately turned 
over to Him for Restitution work, the Church will be 
with Him in glory sharing His honor and His Throne, 
as now they share in His sufferings and His ignominy! 

PRACTICAL PHASE OF RANSOMING WORK 

When the Ransom-price shall then have been given 
to justice in exchange for the world of mankind, and when 
the purchased world of mankind shall have been turned 
over to the Purchaser, the legal phase of the Ransoming 
work of Jesus and the satisfaction of Justice in the release 
of mankind from the penalty of death will be complete. 
Then, however, another part of the ransoming will 
begin and will operate; namely, the giving of the benefits 
of the ransom to Adam and his family. This phase of 
the Ransom-work will continue for the thousand years of 
Messiah's Kingdom, bringing Restitution to man and his 
earthly home— to all the willing and obedient of Adam's 
race— the unwilling being destroyed in the Second Death. 

Then the Ransomer will have completed His work of 
ransoming the human family in its two phases: First, 
its legal phase, the satisfaction of Divine Justice by the 
giving of a life for a life; second, its practical phase, the 
restoring or recovering or delivering of the redeemed from 
the bondage of Sin and Death to the liberty of the sons 
of God.— Romans 8:21. 



R5891 :page 134 

THE CRIPPLE AT LYSTRA 

-MAY 21. -ACTS 14:8-20.- 

HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF-ST. PAUL AND BARNABAS PERSECUTED- 

SLANDERED AND MALTREATED BY PROFESSEDLY RELIGIOUS 

LEADERS-A NOTABLE MIRACLE-HONESTY 

REWARDED WITH STONES-HOMEWARD BOUND-VISITING 

THE CITIES WHERE THEY HAD BEEN PERSECUTED- 

TRIBULATION NECESSARY FOR PERFECTING OF THE SAINTS. 

"He giveth power to the faint; and to him that hath 
no might He increaseth strength."— Isaiah 40:29. 

LEAVING Antioch of Pisidia, St. Paul and 
Barnabas went to Iconium, about one hundred 
miles distant. There also they preached 
the Word faithfully; and there also opposition 
was aroused and persecution threatened. 
The record is that "when there was 
an assault made, both of the Gentiles and 
also of the Jews, with their rulers, to use 



them despitefully and to stone them, they 
were aware of it, and fled unto Lystra." 
They did not permit fear to hinder them from preaching 
the Gospel with courage, neither did they fear threats; 
but when the persecution took a positive form, they fled. 
In so doing, they were following the Lord's instructions. 
He did not say, "Be fearful of persecution, withhold 
your Message and put your light under a bushel"; but He 
said the very reverse. Nor did He say, "Be fearful, and 
flee when there is no danger." On the contrary He said, 
"When they persecute you in one city, flee ye to another." 

Arriving at Lystra, they began afresh to preach the 
Gospel, as courageously as though there had been no 
previous opposition. Amongst the auditors was a cripple, 
presumably a Jew or a proselyte, who manifested much 
interest in the Apostle's words. Perceiving that the man 
had faith, St. Paul stopped in his sermon and called out to 
him, "Stand upright on thy feet!" This was a thing that 
the man had never before done; but he had the necessary 
faith and obeyed the Apostle's command. Thus a 
miracle resulted, evidently to the astonishment of the 
entire congregation. The effect upon the people was electrical; 
and they shouted in their own dialect, "The gods 
have come down to visit us!" 

The city of Lystra figured as the scene of a mythological 
event. The tradition was that Jupiter and Mercury, 
two of the gods of mythology, had once come to Lystra 
in the form of men, and had been refused lodgings everywhere 
until they came to the lowly hut of a poor man, 
who entertained them to the best of his ability. The gods 
rewarded him by turning his hut into a gorgeous temple, 
and punished the remainder of the citizens with a flood. 
This tradition was very old, and was perpetuated by a 
statue of Jupiter at the city's gate as its protecting god. 

It is easy to discern how a comparatively ignorant and 
superstitious people might jump to the conclusion that the 
visit of St. Paul and Barnabas was a repetition of this 
visit of Jupiter and Mercury, handed down to them 
through tradition. St. Paul they called Mercury, because 
in their tradition Mercury was the orator, the speaker; 
and Barnabas they called Jupiter. Forthwith the priest 
of Jupiter prepared to offer a sacrifice of oxen before 
the statue of Jupiter at their city gate, in honor of the 
supposed gods present with them as men, in the persons of 
Barnabas and St. Paul. 

NOBILITY OF THE MISSIONARIES 

The missionaries were probably quietly conversing 
with some of the more interested ones, when they heard of 
the commotion in the city and of the sacrifice about to 
be offered. Not for a moment did they think of taking 
advantage of the superstition of the people to make of 
themselves some great ones. Nor did they attempt to 
turn the event to a service of the Truth by claiming that 
God was Jupiter, that our Lord Jesus was Mercury, and 



that they themselves represented the Father and the Son. 

On the contrary, most earnestly and simply did they 
entreat the people to desist, explaining that they were 
nothing but imperfect men like the populace themselves— 
"men of like passions"— that their mission was the very 
reverse of what the Lystrians supposed, and that Jupiter 
and Mercury were only products of imagination, ignorance 
and superstition. The two ran in amongst the excited 
populace while the latter were preparing for the sacrifice; 
and even then with difficulty, amidst protests of their own 
nothingness, did they restrain the people from sacrificing 
in their honor. Noble men they were; and their faithfulness 
to the Lord and to the Truth attested the wisdom 
of sending them on this missionary tour. 

From this incident we may draw a lesson, helpful to all 
of the Lord's people who are to any extent His ambassadors, 
representatives, teachers of the Truth. The Truth 
itself, especially in the light of our day, is so wonderful, 
so brilliant, that it naturally reflects some of its brilliancy 
upon those who represent it, causing men to marvel and 
to say, as of old, "Whence hath this man this wisdom?" 
(Matthew 13:54.) In some instances it might lead to an 
undue deference, to an ascription of undue honor, and to 
a subserviency which would not be proper for the Lord's 
ambassadors to receive, and which they should as promptly 
and as thoroughly repudiate as did St. Paul and Barnabas 
refuse the honors which the Lystrian populace were about 
to bestow upon them. 

From the worldly viewpoint, however, this would be 
an unwise course. Those who will accept flattery, adulation 

R5891 :page 135 

and honor more than is due are likely to be prospered 
in this course to some extent by the Adversary, and are 
apt to find that the worldly spirit likes to worship worldly 
heroes. The only wise course for the Lord's servants, 
therefore, is that followed by these missionaries of our 
lesson— to repudiate the entire matter, to confess that they 
are men of like passions with others, and to hold up the 
Word of God, hiding themselves behind it and ignoring 
self altogether. 

Not alone will this course be profitable as respects the 
finding and the development of the true children of God, 
whom He is now gathering out of the world, but it will 
be profitable also for the Lord's ambassadors! for in this 
way they will grow in the Lord Jesus' grace and character-likeness, 
of which humility was a prominent trait. Thus 
they will best abide in the love of God. 

TRUE SOLDIERS OF THE CROSS 

In pointing out to the Lystrians the fact that their ideas 
were vanities, the Apostle well knew that this could 
not bring him the favor of his hearers; for it is not human 
nature to appreciate being told of our follies. To work his 



way into their good graces lie would have needed to tell 
them a lie— that they were very wise, that their course was 
a very proper one, etc. Therefore in his endeavor to be 
candid and to serve the Truth, he risked their disappointment 
and displeasure. Undoubtedly, as God's mouthpiece, 
he shunned not to declare the whole Message of God, 
whatever its results might be. 

Here are good lessons for all of the Lord's people. 
It requires comparatively little courage to be a soldier 
of the Cross and faithful to the Truth amongst those of 
like precious faith and obedience. But it requires great 
courage to resist improper honor of men when we know in 
advance that this resistance will not only deprive us of 
their honor and friendship, but make us ignoble in their 
sight, and turn them into enemies. True soldiers of the 
Cross still have the same trial; and it requires hardness— 
a hardening campaign of experience in the Lord's service 
—to endure these things and come off joyful in them. 

The babes in Christ, the weak, the untried, those who 
have not passed through trials and experiences, and developed 
character, are not hardened, and could not stand 
such experiences. Hence it is that the Apostle advises 
the Church that even proper exaltation to a position of 
service in the Church should not be accorded to a novice, 
lest he should be puffed up, and thus be injured himself, 
as well as be injurious to others. (1 Timothy 3:6.) It requires 
time and seasoning either to rightly accept and appreciate 
honors and dignities along proper lines, or to 
decline those along improper lines. 

St. Paul pointed out to his hearers that in times past 
God had been permitting all nations to walk in their own 
ways, and had interfered particularly in the affairs of 
only the one nation— Israel. All other nations had been 
permitted to take their own course, except in so far as 
they might cross some feature of the Divine Plan. Thus 
the Prophet had expressed the matter to Israel: "You 
only have I known of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) 
The Apostle's reference to "times past" (Verse 16) 
implies the change of dispensation which had just occurred 
in connection with the death of our Lord Jesus, the cutting 
off of Israel from any special favor, and the throwing 
open of the Gospel Call to all who have ears to hear— 
"to the Jew first and also to the Greek." 

Now God was sending a Message of instruction to all 
nations, in order that they should turn from such vanities 
and should recognize the only living and true God and 
His Son, the world's exalted Redeemer whom the 
Father had ordained to become its Ruler in due time, to 
put down sin and death and to bless with His Reign of 
Righteousness all the families of the earth. The Apostle 
also pointed out that although God had left the nations 
without the instructions of the Law Covenant and the 
prophecies, He had given them some indications of His 
care, in making provision for their necessities— causing 
the sun to shine and the rain to fall upon the just and the 
unjust, upon the evil and the good. 



STONED FOR SPEAKING THE TRUTH 

The sudden change of public sentiment which resulted 
from the Apostle's plain statements of the Truth led the 
Lystrians to look at the missionaries with very different 
eyes, now that, according to their own declarations, the 
two were only common men like themselves. We may even 
suppose that they felt rather humiliated that their superstition 
had aroused them to do reverence to men who 
repudiated it and acknowledged their unworthiness of it. 

While the populace was in this spirit, certain Jews 
came thither from Antioch and Iconium, explaining to the 
Lystrians that the missionaries were imposters, working 
upon the credulity of the people, "turning the world upside 
down," raising questions about theology, and disturbing 
the minds of the people. The populace was ready 
for just such leading in the reverse direction, and disposed 
to feel that somehow, if these two men were not 
really Jupiter and Mercury, they were pretenders and 
falsifiers, who had deceived the people and who should 
be put to death. As a result, St. Paul was stoned, dragged 
outside the city, and left for dead. 

How erratic is the fallen human mind, in its condition 
of superstition and ignorance! How easily the priest of 
Jupiter could lead the ignorant to make gods of men, and 
how readily he could lead them in an opposite direction, 
equally wrong! But although the greatest of all the Apostles, 
and one of the most remarkable orators and logicians 
which the world has ever known, was in their midst, how 
few, comparatively, could he influence in the right direction— 
for the Truth and righteousness, in obedience to God! 

In many respects the world is the same today as it 
was then, although civilization and general intelligence 
have done much to lift it out of that abject benightedness 
which leads to idol worship, although Mohammedanism, 
Confucianism, Churchianity and a certain kind of Christianity 
have put a veneer of respectability, reason and 
common sense upon it. Nevertheless, under this veneer 
the masses are still in a very unsatisfactory condition. 
They are still disposed to be humbugged, disposed to appreciate 
those who are boastful and pretend to be 
great, disposed to worship that which demands worship 
rather than that which is worthy of it, disposed to misunderstand 
God and His Plan and to consider these from 
a devilish standpoint rather than to appreciate the lengths, 
breadths, heights and depths of the Love of God. 

A REMARKABLE EXPERIENCE 

But God was not through with the Apostle Paul. He 
was not stoned because of God's indifference, nor because 
of the Almighty's lack of power to protect His servant. 
On the contrary, it is quite probable that the Lord was 
teaching the Apostle some great lesson, valuable both to 
himself and to the Church to whom he ministers even today 



in the matter of these experiences. Quite probably 
the Apostle, while being stoned, remembered afresh the 
death of St. Stephen, to which he had consented. Quite 
probably, too, the result was a fresh realization of his own 
unworthiness to be so prominent a representative of the 
Lord and of His Truth. 
Had the incident of the sacrificing not been thus 

R5891 :page 136 

followed by some trying experience, who knows but that 

the Apostle might have felt a little of self-gratulation, 

such as would be natural to any man who had renounced 

voluntarily honors thrust upon him. He might have been 

disposed to glory in his strength of character; but his 

experiences led him in an opposite direction, as he himself 

subsequently wrote. (Romans 5:3-5.) All of the Lord's 

faithful ones may learn good lessons here— learn to trust 

in the Lord's providences in all of their affairs, not only 

in those which seem favorable, but also in those which 

are apparently working disadvantage and disaster. Concerning 

St. Paul the Lord had said, "I will show him how 

great things he must suffer for My name's sake." (Acts 9:15,16.) 

From this lesson we may infer that when the 

Lord's servants are permitted to suffer for His name's 

sake— not for wrong-doing, not for anger, malice, hatred, 

strife, evil speaking, etc., but for His sake— it is an attestation 

of the Lord's favor, in the acceptance of their sacrifice, 

as in the type Abel's sacrifice was accepted with fire. 

As the disciples stood about the prostrate form of St. 
Paul, supposing that he was dead, the Apostle arose and 
returned to the city. 

HOMEWARD BOUND 

Their entire public preaching at Lystra was at an end; 
and the next day the missionaries went to Derbe, a distance 
of thirty-five miles. This implies that the Lord 
wrought a wonderful miracle in St. Paul, in that he was 
able to continue his journey on the very next day after 
having received so severe treatment as a stoning unto 
apparent death. The Lord sometimes works marvelously 
for His people, as in this instance. At other times He 
leaves them to the general vicissitudes of life as other men. 

No particulars are given regarding the ministry of the 
Truth at Derbe. We may presume thai it was without 
special incident. Having gone thus far, the missionaries 
determined to retrace their steps, instead of proceeding 
and returning homeward by the nearer route— via Tarsus, 
St. Paul's home city. Apparently their motive in so doing 
was their realization that the little groups of believers at 
Lystra, Iconium and Antioch in Pisidia would by this 
time need some encouragement and establishment in the 
Truth; that because of the fierce opposition in these 
places there would probably be more or less contention 
and trouble, and questions would arise which the new converts 



would not be competent to answer. 

This was pastoral work; and in the homeward journey 
there is no intimation that the missionaries attempted 
further mission work. They had no expectation whatever 
of converting all the people in these cities. They understood 
the Plan of God too well to have any such expectations 
as modern mission workers seem to have. They 
knew very well that the mission of the Gospel was not 
to convert the world, but to select out of the world a 
special people for His name. (Acts 15:14.) They had 
witnessed the Truth to these people, and had confidence 
that the Lord was with them and that only such as had 
the hearing ear would be reached, either by the missionaries 
or by those who had already been enlightened. 

Accordingly the two contented themselves with the 
work of upbuilding the "little flock." encouraging them 
to make their calling and election sure to a place in the 
Millennial Kingdom which, in God's due time, the Age 
to come, shall be used of the Lord in the world's blessing, 
the world's conversion, the world's uplift. 

Doubtless the brethren in these various places were 
surprised that if the Gospel were of God, its servants, its 
ministers, should be so at the mercy of the forces of 
evil. This may have tended to shake their confidence considerably; 
for the natural expectation would be that God 
would protect His servants. St. Paul explained this to 
the believers, declaring that tribulations are necessary for 
the perfecting of the saints, for the trial of faith, for the 
testing and the preparing of those who would be joint-heirs 
with Christ in the Kingdom; and that after the permission 
of evil shall thus have served its purpose of keeping 
the "little flock" separate from the world and of polishing 
and refining them for the Kingdom, then the time 
will come when Satan shall be bound, and when the 
righteous shall no more be persecuted, but shall reign as 
joint-heirs with their Lord and Head in His Kingdom. 



R5891 :page 136 

MEMORIAL SUPPER REPORTS 

The Memorial Supper seems to have been very generally 
observed on Sunday night, April 16th— the Anniversary. Reports 
mention especially a very deep spirit of solemnity 
and reverential joy on the part of the Brethren participating— 
so far as reports have yet reached us. The corroboration 
which the events of our day are giving to our 
hopes and prospects as found in the Bible seems to have a 
solidifying influence. At times faith seems almost to give 
way to sight. The fact that we may be here a year or two, 
or possibly more, before the Kingdom will be fully set up is 
not disappointing, because the Lord's people are finding so 
many opportunities for service that their hands, hearts and 
heads are fully engaged— laboring on this side of the veil in 



cooperation with the glorified members on the other side. 

The Brooklyn Congregation is henceforth known as the 
New York City Ecclesia, because our principal services are 
now held in the New York City Temple, although the Tabernacle 
in Brooklyn is also used on every Sunday by a considerable 
number. We had a splendid meeting, which, apparently, 
everybody present enjoyed with a deep spiritual zest. 
We thought together of the original Passover Supper and its 
Antitype, and the Memorial Supper instituted by our Lord 
and of the meaning of the emblems— of our eating the broken 
flesh and participating in the shed blood of our Savior, and 
how these represent also our fellowship, or common union, 
with our Master in His ignominy, suffering, death, guaranteeing 
for the faithful a share with their Master in the Heavenly 
Kingdom and Glory. 

The number participating, as shown below, does not include 
a number of suburban Classes which previously communicated 
with us, but which have now so grown that it is 
considered wise for them to have their own celebration. 

This list below shows the Classes from which we have already 
heard, whose participating numbers were above fifty. 
The figures show quite a substantial increase in the numbers 
of the deeply interested and fully consecrated ones, which rejoices 
us greatly. However, we are especially joyed with the 
thought of the deeper and deepening Christian experiences 
which are manifest amongst the Brethren everywhere. We 
trust that this earnest devotion to the Lord will continue. 
"Faithful unto death" is the term of enlistment for all the 
Soldiers of the Cross: 

New York City, N.Y 1041 Cincinnati, 188 

Chicago, 111 612 Indianapolis, Ind 184 

Boston, Mass 507 Columbus, Ohio 177 

Pittsburgh. Pa 424 Dayton, Ohio 175 

Los Angeles, Cal 422 San Antonio, Tex 175 

Philadelphia, Pa 354 Milwaukee, Wis 169 

Toronto, Can 288 Kansas City, Kan 159 

Cleveland, 258 Buffalo, N.Y 158 

Portland, Ore 255 Baltimore, Md 136 

Vancouver, B.C 253 Toledo, 127 

St. Louis, Mo 244 Denver, Col 123 

Seattle, Wash 235 Springfield, Mass 115 

Washington, D.C 221 Oklahoma City, Okla 1 1 2 

Providence, R.I 202 Spokane, Wash 1 10 

Houston, Tex 109 New Brighton, Pa 69 

Louisville, Ky 108 Hartford, Conn 68 

Roseland (Chicago), III.. 107 Rockford, 111 68 

St. Paul, Minn 100 Duquesne, Pa 67 

Worcester, Mass 98 Schenectady, N.Y 67 

Binghamton, N.Y 91 Wilmington, Del 60 

Everett, Wash 90 Reading, Pa 60 

Richmond, Va 88 York, Pa 57 

Allentown, Pa 86 Cumberland, Md 57 

St. Joseph, Mo 83 Paterson, N.J 57 

Scranton, Pa 75 Erie, Pa 53 



Grand Rapids, Mich 74 Jacksonville, Fla 52 

Pasadena, Cal 74 Wichita, Kan 51 

Altoona, Pa 70 Montreal, Can 50 



R5892:page 137 

THE COUNCIL AT JERUSALEM 

-MAY 28.-ACTS 15:22-33.- 

THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCIL OF THE CHURCH-'THE 

SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND" IN SETTLING DOCTRINAL DIFFERENCES 

-THE YOKE OF THE LAW COVENANT VS. CHRISTIAN 

LIBERTY-THE DECISION OF THE APOSTLES ON THE 

QUESTIONS AT ISSUE-LESSONS FOR OUR DAY-LIBERTY 

IS NOT LICENSE. 

"The Liberty wherewith Christ hath 
made us free."— Galatians 5:1. 

WHEN St. Paul and Barnabas had made their 

report to the Church at Antioch, both the 

congregation and their missionaries rejoiced 

in their mutual service for the Gentiles. 

The Lord's Cause was indeed quite 

prosperous everywhere for a season. But 

this period of peace, prosperity, growth in 

knowledge and in numbers was followed by 

a season of contention and differences at 

Antioch. From Jerusalem, the headquarters 

of the Lord's work, there came certain brethren, 

Hebrews by birth, who, perceiving that the Gentile Christians 

ignored circumcision, raised a great commotion on 

that score, claiming that as circumcision would not save 

without Christ, neither would Christ's salvation be operative 

without circumcision. 

The minds of many in the Church were disturbed by 
these assertions, and for a time a split in the Church 
seemed probable. But better counsels prevailed; and 
their beloved brethren, St. Paul and Barnabas, were 
sent to Jerusalem, as a committee to confer with the 
Apostles and Elders there. Today's Study tells of this 
conference and its results. 

Incidentally we remark upon the wisdom shown by 
these early Christians. They had "the spirit of a sound 
mind." (2 Timothy 1:7; James 3:17,18.) They had 
indeed great confidence in St. Paul and Barnabas, and 
realized that under the administrations of these two 
faithful brethren the Church at Antioch had already 
received great blessings from the Lord; and that this 
fact rather contradicted the idea that they could not be 
esteemed proper subjects for Divine favor without circumcision. 
They acted wisely, therefore, in considering 
that the Lord's will on the subject was positive; and 



that His will would be indicated through the Apostles, 
to whom He had said, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on 
earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall 
loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven." (Matthew 16:19; 
John 20:21-23.) The Apostles might therefore 
properly be expected to know whether or not the Gentile 
Christians were free from that obligation which had 
been placed upon all the descendants of Abraham. 

THE JERUSALEM CONFERENCE 

At the Conference, the kindly deference of the Apostles, 
one to the other, is quite marked. It is also noticeable 
that they based their conclusions on what they found 
written in the Old Testament Scriptures and on their leadings 
of Divine providence. For several years the Truth 
had gradually become more and more plain to them. 
They saw that the special favor of God to the Jews had 
given place to a general favor toward people of every 
nation, so that all men everywhere who believed in the 
Lord, accepted His promises and consecrated their lives 
in harmony therewith, might henceforth have equal privileges 
and advantages with those of Hebrew birth. They 
knew of God's covenant relationship with the nation of 
Israel; and it took time for them to become convinced 
that the Divine Program had taken another step forward. 

Similarly, in the end of this Age there are many who 
realize that only a "little flock" has been called of God, 
and has responded, sacrificed under that High Calling. 
It is difficult for these to grasp the thought that a change 
of dispensation is at hand; and that God purposes to 
complete the work of this Age for the Elect and then 
to inaugurate a new work for the non-elect— for the benefit 
of "all the families of the earth." 

The conclusions of the Conference are given us in few 
words; namely, that so far as God is concerned. He had 
recognized believers of Gentile birth by bestowing upon 
them His Holy Spirit in just the same way in which He 
had recognized believers of Hebrew birth, and "put no 
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts 
by faith." (Acts 15:9; 10:44-47.) What more could be 
asked? These Gentiles had received all this favor from 
God without having come under the bondage of the Law 
Covenant. Why, they wisely asked, should they put a 
yoke upon the Gentiles when God had made no such 
requirement? They realized that the Law Covenant 
was indeed a yoke so heavy that neither they nor their 
fathers had been able to bear it. Christ had relieved 
them of the yoke of the Law Covenant. Why should 
they put it upon brethren to whom the Lord had not 
given it?— Romans 3: 19. 

Even going beyond this, they recognized that in some 
respects the Gentiles held the superior position; for they 
were free from the Law, never having come under that 
yoke. Hence the statement, "We [Hebrews] believe that 
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be 



saved, even as they [Gentiles]." 

THE CONCLUSION OF THE MATTER 

In Verses 22-29 of today's Study we have the decision 
of the Apostles on the question at issue. They not only 
wrote it out, but sent it at the hand of two of their trusted 
brethren— Judas Barsabas and Silas— with St. Paul and 
Barnabas, that the Church at Antioch might have the 
matter in both written and oral testimony. The declaration 
was that the disquieting teachings had not been 
authorized by the Apostles at Jerusalem. Then they 
briefly summed up, not as law, but as "necessary things," 
the following: (1) Abstain from meats offered (sacrificially) 
to idols; (2) And from blood; (3) And from 
things strangled; (4) And from harlotry. 

It was not intimated that abstinence from these things 
would make one a Christian; for nothing but faith in 
Christ and consecration to Him and endeavor to walk 
in His steps could constitute any one a Christian. By 
these recommended abstentions, they declared, "It will 
be well with you"— you will find these recommendations 
profitable to you as followers of the Lord. As a matter 
of fact, the Apostle Paul has pointed out most forcefully 
that "Love is the fulfilling of the Law" (Romans 13:10); 
for love for God would control the life as respects holiness, 
and love for our neighbor as for ourselves would 
control as respects earthly justice. 

THE NECESSITY FOR THESE RESTRICTIONS 

The things recommended by the Conference were necessary 
to a preservation of the Body of Christ, composed 
of Jews and Gentiles of different education and sentiments. 
Without discussing whether or not harm could 
come to the meats sold in the markets, by reason of pagan 
ceremonies in connection with the killing of animals, the 
Conference advised that these be abstained from, because 
Jews would certainly consider the eating of such meats as 
participation in heathen idolatry— even though from the 
broad standpoint of fact the idol, being nothing but wood 
or stone or metal, could neither profit nor injure the food. 
Nevertheless, it was advisable that the Gentile Christians 
abstain from the use of their liberty in this direction, 

R5892 : page 138 

out of deference to the weaker brethren, Jews and Gentiles, 
who could not so deeply philosophize and whose 
consciences might be injured. 

A similar thought attaches to the prohibition of the 
use of blood. To the Jew it was forbidden. (Leviticus 17:10-14.) 
Under the Law Covenant, blood was made 
a symbol of life; and to partake of it would therefore 
imply responsibility for the life taken. Moreover, in 
the typical ceremonies of the Law the prohibited blood 



was used as a symbol to represent the sin-offering; for 
atonement for sins was effected by the blood. To emphasize 
these typical lessons the Jew had been forbidden 
to use blood. There may be other reasons, sanitary or 
otherwise, connected therewith, but not yet known to us. 

These prohibitions had never come to the Gentiles; for 
they had never been under the Law Covenant. But so 
deeply rooted were the Jewish ideas on this subject that 
it was necessary to the peace of the Church that the 
Gentiles should observe this matter also. The things 
strangled meant animals taken in traps, whose blood was 
not shed, or drained out by bleeding to death, as the 
Jewish Law required of all meats that were to be eaten. 
This restriction was necessary to the harmony between 
the two branches of Spiritual Israel— that which came 
from Judaism and that which came from the Gentiles— 
previously separated by the Law Covenant. If the Gentile 
brethren did not wish to be contentious and cause 
division in the Church, they would surely be willing to 
restrain or sacrifice their liberty respecting these matters. 

The last restriction specified was harlotry. The idol 
worship which prevailed at the time of our Study had 
connected with it a great deal of sensuality, which would 
be contrary to the Spirit of Christ in every sense of the 
word. It is difficult, however, to understand why one 
moral precept should be thus separated from others and 
placed on the list with ceremonial requirements. We 
incline to ask why were not included profanity, drunkenness, 
idolatry, adultery, false witness, murder, etc. Are 
we to understand that the Gentiles are free to commit all 
crimes not stipulated by this Conference? 

Surely not! Rather, all the requirements of the Law 
are included in the one Law of the New Creation- 
Love for God and man. Love would cover profanity, 
murder, theft, false witness, adultery; but the Law of 
Love would not so thoroughly cover the items enumerated 
by the Council at Jerusalem. We are to recognize 
that the Apostles were Divinely authorized to bind things 
on earth; and that they were so guided in their public 
utterances that they bound nothing unnecessarily, nothing 
contrary to the Divine will. It is our opinion, therefore, 
that these items thus superadded to the Law of 
Love should be observed by all Spiritual Israelites as 
representing the Divine will. As a matter of fact, nearly 
all the butchering for our markets is in harmony with the 
Jewish regulations, although many Jews decline to recognize 
this, and eat only such meats as have been inspected 
and approved by their rabbis. 

GOOD RESULTS FROM THIS WISE COURSE 

The message sent by the Conference to the Church at 
Antioch was received in faith by all, and caused great 
rejoicing in the Church. Harmony prevailed, unity of 
spirit, fellowship amongst the members. The secret of 
this lay in the fact that the Lord was recognized as having 



the supervision of the affairs of the Church, and as 
guiding her course and directing her way through the 
appointed channels, the Apostles. 

Similarly today, where honesty of heart prevails 
amongst the Lord's peoples, schisms, divisions, should be 
unknown. The Lord's guidance and instruction should 
be sought— His Word through His Apostles. Moreover, 
since the Apostles fell asleep, the Lord has been pleased 
to use faithful brethren in the Church as finger-boards 
to indicate the right path, in harmony with His Word 
through the Apostles and Prophets. The thing necessary 
to each is the honest conscience, the humble spirit, and 
the pure heart. 

We rejoice at the evidences that in the early Church 
there was such a spirit of broadmindedness as is represented 
in today's Study. We rejoice to know that when 
an important subject was to be considered, with a view 
to discerning the mind of the Lord, there was full liberty 
granted for as much dispute or debate, in a proper manner, 
as was necessary to bring the entire subject before 
those who had it under consideration. There is a difference, 
however, between discussion inside the pale of faith 
and disputes outside that boundary. As St. Paul says. 
"Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to 
doubtful disputations"— do not receive him to dispute his 
doubts— what he does not believe. (Romans 14:1.) Let 
him have a full opportunity for hearing the faith discussed. 
If his doubts do not then disappear, he will 
probably drop out of the assembly. 

AS TO WHO COMPOSE THE CHURCH 

In harmony with this we are not to recognize disputes 
respecting the FOUNDATION PRINCIPLES of the Gospel 
of Christ. The Church is composed only of those who 
recognize the foundation— that Christ died for our redemption 
from sin and its penalty; that all who would 
share His blessings must accept the simple facts of His 
death for us and His resurrection by the power of God for 
our ultimate deliverance; and that then, in harmony with 
the desire to be His disciples, they must consecrate themselves 
fully to Him, to do His will and to serve His cause. 
These foundation principles of the Church of Christ are 
not subject to dispute. Those who reject these principles 
are not of the Church, and should not be heard in the 
Church. They are intruders— doubtless wolves in sheep's 
clothing— of evil intentions and ultimate results. 

But as respects discussions amongst those who are 
truly the Lord's, opportunity for freedom of discussion 
on any point of importance, within reasonable limits, 
is absolutely necessary to spiritual health and progress. 
To shut it off means to crush proper activities of thought, 
and in many instances means to accumulate a force which 
would ultimately result in an explosion, which would be 
damaging in some respects at least. Let us remember the 
Golden Rule in this matter. Let us accord to others the 



same reasonable liberty, inside of foundation principles, 
that we would like to have them accord us, if our positions 
were reversed. 

LIBERTY IS NOT LICENSE 

Our Golden Text is a precious one. The value of 
true liberty amongst the Lord's people cannot be over-estimated. 
It becomes a part of their very life. But because 
of a wrong conception of union, the spirit of true liberty 
was crushed out of the Church shortly after the Apostles 
fell asleep in death; and the Dark Ages resulted, with 
all their ignorance, superstition, blindness, persecution, 
etc. The Reformation movement of the Sixteenth Century 
was only a re-awakening of the spirit of liberty 
mentioned in our Text— liberty to think inside the foundation 
lines of the doctrines of Christ, liberty to believe as 
much or as little more, in harmony with this, as mental 
conditions and circumstances will permit, without being 
branded a heretic or persecuted by brethren, either in 
word or in deed. 

R5892 : page 139 

Strange to say, a peculiar combination of too much 
liberty and too little liberty is creeping over Christendom 
today. The too little liberty feature objects to any discussion 
of the doctrines of Christ and the teachings of the 
Apostles, for fear that some difference of opinion should 
be manifested. This is an endeavor to have an outward 
union without a union of heart and of head. The general 
trend along this line favors the covering over, the concealment, 
of truths as well as of errors, in the wrong assumption 
that the appearance of union will serve the 
purpose of real union, and will be really effective as respects 
the prosperity of the true members of the Body of 
Christ. Such a false union is coming, however, and will 
cause prosperity in the nominal Church, but only for a 
brief season. The culmination of the Time of Trouble 
will overwhelm all. 

On the other hand, the too great liberty feature is 
that represented by the teachings of Higher Critics and 
Evolutionists. Any attempt to contradict these unscriptural 
doctrines is tabooed, as tending to stir up strife and 
thus to destroy the unity of the Church. Thus the too 
great liberty and the too great bondage features are 
working together in the nominal church systems to expel 
and ostracize the Truth and all who love it, all who wish 
to "stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
us free." Let all who are the Lord's people and who have 
tasted of true Christian liberty see to it that they stand 
fast in that liberty; and as soon as an attempt is made to 
restrain their liberty, if not sooner, let them get completely 
out from all the bondages of human systems, in 
order that they may stand firmly and loyally with the 
Lord, our Redeemer, our Instructor, our King. 



R5892:page 139 

FAITH DEMONSTRATED BY WORKS 

"I will show thee my faith by my works."— James 2:18. 

FAITH is a mental conviction respecting things 

not positively proven to the senses, but received 

on supposedly good authority. There 

is another quality that seems very closely 

allied to faith; namely, credulity. The difference 

between these two appears to be 

that faith requires, and inquires for, good, 

sound evidence and authority for its basis. 

There are people who are very much prejudiced, 

and who seem to reason very little 

about anything. Sometimes they are credited with having 

a great deal of faith, whereas the truth is that they have 

a great deal of credulity. The faith that is of the responsible 

kind is that which the Christian is called upon to 

exercise. He exercises faith in God. If he doubted God's 

existence, God's character, he would not be in any sense 

prepared to receive the Message which the Father has to 

send at this time. 

Having gotten a glimpse of the great Divine Character 
through the Book of Nature, we properly enough, 
before exercising faith in the Bible, make inquiry into the 
personnel of the writers— who they were, what were their 
characters, who did they claim to be, what evidences are 
there that they were true, and do these evidences agree. 
In other words, faith does not jump at conclusions, but 
makes investigations and sees that it has some reasonable 
ground for its existence. If it were solid ground, it 
would be knowledge. Faith is not knowledge. Therefore 
Faith inquires for reasonable ground upon which to build. 

FAITH DISTINGUISHED FROM CREDULITY 

With the Bible open, the Christian has before him a 
field of faith-knowledge— knowledge of things not seen by 
the natural eye— all of which he may continually be proving. 
While ever satisfied with what he has been demonstrating, 
he must necessarily be manifesting his faith by 
the way, proving that which is good. His mental processes 
being active, he should realize how one feature of the 
Divine Plan fits into another. Thus his faith grows into 
larger faith, deeper faith, stronger faith. In time his 
faith becomes a conviction so strong that he might be 
willing to stake his life on what he believes to be the truth 
in the Divine promises. He accepts those promises as 
something real, something that he knows about— not something 
received in a vague, unsatisfactory manner. 

On the other hand, credulity is prejudice. The heathen 



are credulous; for they are blindly prejudiced. Many 
Christian people seem to be beset by the same spirit of 
credulity, and seem to mistake it for faith. We are not to 
forget that there are two great powers at the present time 
—the power of Good and the power of Evil. We are not 
to forget that for six thousand years the power of Evil 
has had the upper hand on earth. God has permitted 
Satan to have a great deal of power in the world. But 
it is a deceptive power. To Satan's misleading spirit 
powers we accredit much of the superstition that has 
fastened itself upon humanity. 

For instance, there was a time when we thought it a 
manifestation of great faith to see three gods in one God, 
and one God in three gods. From our mistaken viewpoint 
we said, "One cannot reason this out; it is all of 
faith." The fact that somebody had said that there are 
three gods in one God, and one God in three gods, was 
not a basis for faith. So then, it was not faith that we 
had in a Trinity, but credulity. With many other things 
it was the same; we were not exercising faith. And so it 
would seem to have been with very many in the past. 
They must have swallowed many things with a very 
slight amount of mental mastication. We believe that such 
conditions still exist. 

We notice our Christian Science friends. Many of 
them are very noble people, very estimable people in some 
respects; yet in our judgment they hold certain doctrines 
that are not matters of faith, but of credulity. They have 
theories respecting sin, respecting error. Because these 
theories seem to fit certain experiences in life, they have 
accepted these as a basis for what they call faith, and 
have seemed to receive them aside from all processes of 
reasoning. The basis for their doctrine seems to be that 
they have experienced healing as a result of faith. They 
do not seem to see that Satan has power to mislead. We 
fear that many of them are being misled by Satan's deceptions. 
We see a similar condition amongst Mormons. 
They too have theories, and have healing. It is the same 
with the Seventh Day Adventists. The Adversary is misleading 
all these people as respects the Call of this present 
Age; they are being side-tracked. They are not, therefore, 
to receive the highest blessing, which goes only to 
the faithful who walk in the footsteps of Jesus. 

COMBATTING WRONG DEDUCTIONS IN EARLY CHURCH 

The Apostle in our text says, "I will show thee my 
faith by my works." This is part of an argument that he 
has been putting up. There was a theory prevalent in 
the days of the Apostle, that works amounted to nothing 
—that it was faith which counted. The Apostle James is 
combatting that thought. Faith is all very well; but you 
must have works also! The Apostle says, "You show me 
your faith without works, but I prefer to show you my 
faith by my works." There was some perversion of St. 
Paul's teachings that had gotten into circulation at that 



time. St. Paul had said that by the works of the Law no 

R5892 : page 140 

flesh could be justified. The Jews, who had the Law, 
had not been able to keep that Law; neither would St. 
Paul or any other human being be able to keep that Law, 
in order to justify himself in God's sight. The only way 
to do this was by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and not 
by the Law of works. 

We are not to understand St. James as in any sense of 
the word opposing St. Paul in this thought, but rather as 
opposing the wrong deductions from St. Paul's teaching; 
to wit, "It does not matter what kind of works I have. I 
have strong faith; God will not pay any attention to the 
works. I can work the works of the flesh; and having 
plenty of faith in God, I shall be all right." St. James 
points out that this is not true. Faith in God and in 
Christ and in the forgiveness of sins is proper; but there 
must be works to accompany it. Just as surely as we have 
faith it will manifest itself in some way, and these works, 
if not good, will be bad works, indifferent works. A good 
tree will produce good fruit. A pure fountain will send 
forth pure water. 

This seems to be the Apostle's argument. Surely we 
all agree with him, and are all seeking to show forth our 
works. The world cannot appreciate our faith, because 
they cannot read our hearts. But God appreciates our 
faith. Abraham was the father of the faithful. God 
loved him and treated him as a friend. He was called the 
"Friend of God." But, says the Apostle, God required 
that Abraham should show his faith by doing some works; 
he must have some works to prove that he had faith; he 
will test us by our works as to the strength of our faith. 



R5893:page 140 

PREACHING THE GOSPEL A NECESSITY 

"Woe is unto me if I preach not 
the Gospel."— 1 Corinthians 9:16. 

WOE is a word not so often used today as 

formerly. It was a common word in the 

old English; but there is a meaning attached 

to it at present, we think, that was 

not in the original word. Nearly all who 

read the parable where the Lord speaks of 

"weeping and gnashing of teeth" seem to 

have the thought that it means eternal torment. 

Woe, when used in the Bible, means 

the same to some minds. So these construe 

our text to mean, "I shall go to eternal torment if I do 

not preach the Gospel." This is because of the creeds. 



traditions and customs that have come down from the 
Dark Ages, when the people were forbidden the Bible. 

We understand the Apostle to mean here: "I should 
be very unhappy if I could not preach the Gospel; it 
would be a cause of great distress to me. In view of 
my former course of persecution, and the Lord's great 
mercy to me, it would mean a loss of His favor and 
blessing should I refrain from proclaiming His Message." 
The context seems to bear out this thought. So it should 
be a great distress to those to whom the Lord has granted 
the illumination of His Truth, if the opportunity of 
preaching this glorious Gospel were taken from them. 

From one standpoint, the Apostle's words would apply 
only to the public ministry of the Word. From another 
standpoint, any one of God's consecrated people is a 
minister, ordained to preach; for ordination means commission, 
right, authorization. This commission to preach 
the Gospel is mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah. (Isaiah 61:1-3.) 
There the Church is brought to our attention 
through the great Head of the Church, Christ Jesus, who 
is represented, primarily, as the speaker. We read: "The 
Spirit of the Lord is upon Me; because the Lord hath 
anointed Me to preach good tidings unto the meek; He 
hath sent Me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim 
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to 
them that are bound; to preach the acceptable year of the 
Lord, and the Day of Vengeance of our God; to comfort 
all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, 
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for 
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; 
that they might be called trees of righteousness, the 
planting of Jehovah, that He might be glorified." 

MANY WAYS OF PREACHING THE GOSPEL 

Here the commission of the Holy Spirit to Messiah 
was prophetically announced, long in advance. The Body 
members of the Messiah, who have received the same 
anointing through Him, have also received this commission 
to preach the Gospel. If the disciple of Christ 
properly appreciates the privilege of being a messenger 
of God, an ambassador for God, it would be a woe indeed 
to him if he could not proclaim the Message, to the extent 
of his ability and opportunity. 

There are some who have the thought that there is 
no way to preach except by a public discourse from the 
platform. But this seems not to be the Bible thought of 
preaching. Jesus talked to the people by the seaside, and 
along the way; sometimes He sat upon the edge of the 
well and preached the Message of salvation; He preached 
to His disciples up in the mountain; sometimes He journeyed 
with them and talked. And so with us. Whatever 
way or time we may have for preaching the Good Tidings 
we should use. 

The word Gospel means glad tidings, good news. We 
are to tell the "good tidings of great joy." This may be 



done in the daily walk of our life, as we meet the butcher, 
the baker and the grocery man, or our neighbors and 
friends. It may be done by literature sent through the 
mails, or by handing out a tract, a book, or by preaching 
from the platform. All of this is preaching the Gospel, 
making known the Good Tidings; for preaching means 
merely to make known, and does not relate to the manner 
in which the knowledge is imparted. 

BASIS AND SUPERSTRUCTURE OF THE GOSPEL 

Many tracts contain no Gospel; they contain tidings 
of great misery. These we would not wish to circulate; 
for the more we spread such tidings the less preaching of 
the Gospel we would do. We are to remember that our 
Lord Jesus especially identified the Gospel with the 
Kingdom. Therefore we should preach the Good Tidings, 
the Gospel of the Kingdom. This has been God's 
method for gathering the Church, and is to be the witness 
to the world. We still have the opportunity for making 
known this good Message of the Kingdom. The Basis 
of this Gospel is the death of our Lord Jesus Christ as a 
Sacrifice for sinners. His resurrection and His ascension 
to the right hand of the Father. Its superstructure is 
the salvation of the Church and of the world— "whosoever 
will." The blessings of God are all through Christ. 

The rich blessings of the Lord for both Church and 
world are to follow the Second Coming of Jesus. Then 
the Church is to be glorified and exalted; and the world 
will enter upon the Era of Blessing God has promised 
shall come with the full establishment of His Kingdom. 

Whoever, therefore, understands this real Gospel, and 
appreciates his own ordination to preach it, must necessarily 
feel unhappy if he should be hindered from preaching 

R5893 : page 141 

it. Some can preach in several ways. Others can 

preach in nearly every way. Some can preach in very 

few ways; but all can preach in some way. The more 

we do, the more happy we should be. So we thank God 

that we have so many helps in our day— books, free literature, 

Bible Concordances, etc. We greatly appreciate 

all these and are seeking to make good use of them to 

the blessing of others as well as for our own upbuilding. 



R5893:page 141 

YOUR BRETHREN THAT HATED YOU 

"Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for My 
name's sake, said. Let the Lord be glorified; but He shall appear 
to your joy, and they shall be ashamed."— Isaiah 66:5. 



HOW beautifully reasonable is the Message of 

God's Word ! Many of the followers of 

Jesus, young in faith and possessed of but a 

small measure of the Holy Spirit, would be 

inclined to threaten their enemies with dire 

vengeance from God, even as the Apostles 

James and John at first desired to call down 

fire from Heaven upon the Samaritan city 

because the people had refused to sell them 

bread for the use of Jesus and His disciples. 

Where in the Bible do we find one word of threatening 

in respect to those who persecuted Jesus unto death, or 

those who have persecuted His followers? The simple 

statement is, "They shall be ashamed." The Lord's declaration 

through Daniel's prophecy is, "Many of them that 

sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake." some to shine 

as the brightness of the firmament— the saintly, the Church 

of glory— others to be ashamed— to have shame and lasting 

contempt.— Daniel 12:2,3. 

And even here our Common Version Bible oversteps 
the matter and declares, "Everlasting shame and contempt," 
whereas the Hebrew text says merely "lasting 
shame and contempt." The shame will last as long as the 
wrongdoer continues to be in his shameful condition of 
opposition to the Lord and to His Message. The contempt 
will last as long as the individual's course shall be a contemptible 
one. But as soon as reformation sets in, the 
shame will begin to depart; and eventually there will be 
neither shame nor contempt to those who will manifest a 
proper appreciation of the character of our God and the 
principles of His Government, when under the instructions 
of the Kingdom they shall come to understand them. 

So then, dear brethren, since the Messianic Kingdom 
will be administered by those who have suffered for the 
name of Christ, receive persecutions patiently, joyfully. 
As the Lord advised, "Rejoice and be exceeding glad." 
Everything that we may suffer for the Lord's sake, for 
the Truth's sake, will. He assures us, eventually bring us 
an everlasting reward, if we are rightly exercised by it, 
if we become character copies of God's dear Son. 

The names of all who suffer for righteousness' sake, 
we are assured, are written in Heaven; but we shall be 
glad to have a little memorandum on earth, too, from 
those who desire to send their names in to us. Make the 
record just as brief as possible, head it I.H.S., and 
crowd it down into a few words on a postcard, even 
though you enclose the postcard in an envelope. We want 
your address on one side and this brief review on the 
other side; and we will keep these cards on file. 

In addition to telling us very briefly something about 
what the Truth has cost you, you may add one line about 
your family, and then a brief word respecting your talents, 
abilities and experience. Who knows but that we might 
be able to suggest something for you in future? 

In addition to this card, we suggest that any brothers 
or sisters who have special literary talents as writers or 



as editors, and other special education, or such as are 
lawyers, doctors, or fluent preachers, send us a brief letter 
respecting their financial standing— accompanying the 
above mentioned card. 



page 141 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

AS THE WATCH TOWER list includes thousands of 
new readers we make the following explanations 
afresh: 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
out of donated funds sends forth instructors, 
lecturers, styled "PILGRIMS." It pays their 
expenses of every kind. Thus they become in 
a special sense its representatives, meeting with 
Bible Students everywhere. Some of these are 
specially qualified for public service as well as 
for semi-public studies with the friends; others 
are less qualified for public service, but excellent 
in Class meetings. The SOCIETY uses great care in the 
selection of these to the intent that their presentations of the 
Truth, expositions of the Scriptures, etc., may be along helpful 
lines— profitable every way and especially for the upbuilding 
of the Lord's people in the most holy faith. 

It is expected that the Classes inviting such Pilgrim service 
will provide for the Pilgrim's necessities at one of their 
homes, or otherwise, during his brief stay of from one to 
two days. Luxurious or extraordinary preparation for these 
Brethren is not expected, but merely their comfortable provision. 
By this we mean a clean, comfortable bed and wholesome 
food. Any one not being able to furnish these reasonable 
requirements should not propose to entertain the Pilgrim. 
The Class inviting Pilgrim service should consider itself 
responsible and should see that these reasonable comforts 
are provided. The Pilgrims are expected to address 
meetings every night, also afternoon meetings wherever these 
are possible— or otherwise to visit the Brethren who may be 
sick either spiritually or physically. The morning is often 
necessary for traveling. The Pilgrim should not be kept up 
too late at night. "Moderation" should govern, in this as in 
all things, as the Scriptures direct. 

We invite Classes desiring Pilgrim visits to send in their 
requests at once, addressing the SOCIETY, care PILGRIM DEP'T. 

We desire that post-cards be used in making applications 
for these visits, and specially desire replies to all of the following 
questions. The questions need not be repeated, but 
merely indicated thus: (a), (b), etc.: 

(a) How many Bible Students in your vicinity use the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet on Sunday? (Give full street 



address and name of auditorium.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the Pilgrim invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 

(h) Do you desire Sunday for Special Public Lectures? 
(i) How frequently do you desire such Special appointments? 
(j) Give seating capacity of Auditorium you could secure, 
(k) What attendance do you think could be secured for well 

advertised public sessions in good Auditorium? 
(1) Would a suitable place be found for meetings not specially 

advertised? 
(m) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in accordance 

with suggestions of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume 

VI., chapters 5 and 6? 

If so, give name and full address of each. 
(n) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) to 

whom notices of Pilgrim visits should be sent. (Please 

notify Pilgrim Dept. as to any change or removal.) 
(o) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop, 
(p) How many miles from station is meeting place, and 

which direction from station? 
(q) Would Pilgrim be met at station? 
(r) If not, how should Pilgrim go from said station? 
(s) Give writer's full name and address. 
(t) Any additional remarks. 



R5894:page 142 

SOME FAITHFUL WITNESSES 

FROM an English newspaper. The Rugby Observer, 
March 3, we quote the following:— 

The first conscientious objectors to come 
before a Rugby Tribunal made their appearance 
yesterday before the Rural Authority. 
There were three claims. Two were made by 
Colporteurs living at Biltonhill and in the employ 
of a Tract Society, and their objection 
was to either combatant or non-combatant 
service. 

The first, a widower, on his application 
wrote that while he appreciated the noble 
sacrifices that had been and were being made on 
behalf of King and country, the reason of his application 
was that five and a half years ago he became a 
Christian, and that he then vowed to God that he would 
give himself to His service and work out his life to the best 
of his ability on the principles of Christianity. He would 
regard employment in any branch of military service as a 
complete violation of his oath to the King of kings; he 
would feel that in his own conscience he would have broken 
a sacred oath to the Almighty. 

Addressing the Tribunal, applicant said when he accepted 



the principles of Jesus Christ he knew that sooner or later 
it would cost him something, and he had realized that as the 
spirit of militarism had permeated all the institutions of the 
country, it would need courage to hold to those principles. 
But while he realized that militarism had no room for conscience, 
he was determined to be guided by his conscience in 
the matter. He had sworn allegiance to the King of kings, 
and while he had all respect for those who had sworn to 
England's King, he was bound in honor to the Lord. 

"I HAVE NO COUNTRY" 

The President: "Don't you think it is quite compatible 
with the Christian life to defend your country?" 

"I have no country, sir. I gave up my citizenship. While 
I have always realized the privileges of being born in this 
country, and have been surprised at the privileges granted 
by the conscience clause in the Military Act, and had decided 
to stand to my principles even if that clause had not been 
added— yet my oath of allegiance is to the King of kings." 

Replying to further questions appellant said the instructions 
of Jesus Christ were that they were to use no violence 
to any man. Jesus Christ instructed: "It is said you should 
love your friends and hate your enemies; but I say unto you, 
love your enemies." 

Rev. Challenor: We are aware of the Sermon on the 
Mount, but there is non-combatant service you could take up. 

Applicant: Do I understand that I am discussing whether 
I am to take up non-combatant service? 

Rev. Challenor: In the R.A.M.C. your work would 
be like that of the Master, to alleviate suffering. 

Applicant: In this I should consider what the Master 
would do. It may seem to be very good to alleviate the sufferings 
of the brave soldiers at the front, but I hear them 
say on coming back, "It is ten hells in one." Take a man 
who is in the jaws of death, and I am asked to nurse him 
back to life. For what purpose? To send him back to those 
ten hells in one. No, I am of the opinion that it would be 
better to let him die and await the Lord's coming. 

Mr. Flowers: Do you refuse to take the military oath? 

Absolutely. I have taken my oath to the King of kings. 

Rev. Challenor: Many other people have taken an oath to 
the King of kings. 

Applicant: I hope they will have determination to keep it. 

Mr. Wratislaw: Suppose a burglar entered your house, 
would you not resist him? 

I have no house here. 

But suppose you had? 

Well, a burglar usually enters a house to look for wealth. 
If I saw a burglar in my house, I should ask him what he 
was after. If he said "wealth," I should say, "Well, I am 
going to help you find it, because I have none." 

Yours is a paid service, surely. 

I receive nothing in the form of wages from the Society. 

Does not the Tract Society pay a commission to its men? 

That is so. If I do no work I get no pay. 



Replying to ;i question as to whether he would not defend 
his mother from violence, applicant quoted the incident of the 
betrayal of Jesus Christ when Peter was reproved for taking 
up a sword. No cause, he said, was grander than that, but 
Christ rebuked Peter for using the weapon. 

Mr. Wratislaw: You will not fight and you will not tend 
the wounded. Are you prepared to go to one of the military 
prisons in Germany and say, "I am willing to put myself in 
this prison that one of those wounded soldiers may go back?" 

Applicant: I should ask myself, "What would the Master 
do?" I remember that while our Lord was on earth John 
the Baptist was in prison, but our Lord did not release him; 
He allowed him to be beheaded in prison. I am prepared 
to go to prison. I am prepared to go to prison for my own 
conscience. If a man is imprisoned unjustly the Lord will 
deal with his captors, not I. 

But you do not mind seeking the shelter of this country? 

If this country denies me the privilege of living in it I am 
quite prepared to take a passport to leave it. 

I hope you would accept it. 

Exemption from combatant service only was granted. 

Applicant: My conscience will be the final decider in this 
matter, and I shall keep to my conscience at all costs. 

SHARP PASSAGE WITH APPLICANT 

The previous applicant's companion sought exemption on 
similar grounds. He said he had consecrated his life to the 
Lord's service from the age of 14 years, and participation in 
any form of military service would violate the principles of 
Christian truth to which he had pledged himself. He said 
his views were identical with those of the previous applicant. 

Asked by the Rev. Challenor if he did not consider it his 
duty to alleviate the sufferings of the wounded, he replied 
that if he did not undertake such service he would not be 
there to attend to the wounded. 

The President: If you were in that incident in the Bible 
you would not be the good Samaritan? 

To my understanding the parable is not applicable to military 
service. I would gladly help any one who needed it, but 
to work in non-combatant service is to assist those engaged 
in combatant service. He added that the citizenship to which 
he belonged was the citizenship of Heaven. 

Exemption from combatant service was granted. 

Applicant: I would like you to understand that my determination 
is not to serve in any branch of military service, 
and you as a Tribunal, have a right to give me the exemption 
I claim. You have been instructed by the Local Government 
Board to give me exemption in such circumstances. At the 
same time, I shall appeal if you will not grant it. 

The President: You can appeal to the County Tribunal. 

Applicant: You have the power and you have the intelligence 
to judge my claim. 

The President: Perhaps the County Tribunal will have 
more intelligence than we have. 

Applicant: It might be so of course. 



SOME LETTERS ON THE SUBJECT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As you are aware, compulsory military service has been 
enacted in this country within certain limits. I come under 
the provisions of the act and would like to have your advice, 
which for the past fourteen years I have esteemed and sought 
to follow as presented in the DAWNS and TOWERS. 

I applied for total exemption from all forms of military 
service, but succeeded in getting exemption from combatant 
service only. A special non-combatant corps is being formed 
for conscientious objectors to combatant service. Do you 
think a properly educated conscience would be violated by 
engaging in such a service, if compelled to do so? A number 
of the brethren in Glasgow have been refused even exemption 
from combatant service at the first appeal court, but 
I expect all will get recommended at the second and practically 
final appeal court for non-combatant service. Not to 
appear when called by the military authorities would mean 
trial by a civil court as a deserter and then a handing over 
in charge of an escort to the army officials. To refuse to 
drill, etc., after that, I suppose, would mean repeated punishments, 
ending probably in a court martial and a sentence of 
death. Do you think a properly educated conscience would 
make us endure all that rather than engage in non-combatant 
work? I would be deeply grateful for an early reply, as I 
may be called upon to decide for myself very soon. With 
fervent love as ever, 

Your brother in Christ, ALEX. KIRKWOOD. 

Reply by the Editor 

The question is one for the conscience of each individual. 
For our part, it would seem to be a participation in the war 
if one were to engage in laying out and digging trenches, 
putting in foundations for cannon, etc.— the things implied 
in the term "engineering." 

It would seem to the Editor a somewhat different case if 
a soldier of the Cross were demanded by an earthly government 
to enter the hospital work— such as the Red Cross— 
for relief of the sick and wounded, etc., even if the care of 

R5894 : page 143 

the wounded and the nursing of them back to health would 
the sooner prepare them for slaughter. 

The Editor's conscience would not balk at Red Cross hospital 
work. 



DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 
Greetings in the name of the Lord from all of like precious 

R5895 : page 143 



faith in this place, who are anxious to assure you of a deep 
and constant love for you. 

At the suggestion of these we are writing to inform you 
of a wonderful manner in which the Lord has used His 
people here to witness His glorious character and Plan— in 
a way so unexpected and with such clear evidence that we 
are but instruments in His hands. 

You are aware of the position in which many of our dear 
younger brethren are now placed by reason of governmental 
legislation, and we are assured, beloved Pastor, that you are 
entering into these experiences with us, in that if one member 
suffer the others suffer with that one; even as it has been 
our privilege to enter (in spirit) the measure we have known 
to be laid upon you. 

It was necessary for six brethren to appear before a local 
Tribunal three days ago, this particular tribunal being regarded 
as one of the "warmest" in the country; and it was 
therefore with the expectation of a rough time and with no 
anticipation of an opportunity of witnessing to any appreciable 
extent that these brothers faced the ordeal. 

But the Lord has His hand in matters, and His power 
was manifested in a most wonderful way. It was our conclusion 
that here also was fulfilled, "Take no thought what 
ye shall speak, for in that hour it shall be given unto you," 
as the brothers in turn, young in years and young in the 
Truth (most of them only two or three years old "in the 
Lord"), stood up to these mighty ones (which they surely 
were, having years of knowledge behind them, and being 
lawyers and business men, all of them city counselors, or 
aldermen. Truly, "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings 
Thou hast perfected praise"! 

The power of the Truth confounded the mighty, too. The 
whole was something they had not met before, and had not 
reckoned with. To see these youths standing up to the 
learned ones, meeting their arguments with a reasonable answer, 
and replying in the spirit of the Master, was a witness 
most effectual— by far the best extension work we had done 
for some time. 

In quietness and confidence is surely our strength. The 
applicant had no control of the subject; he had simply to 
answer questions put to him in rapid succession by several 
members of the Tribunal; but it was remarkable what a 
comprehensive witness was given. The first brother's main 
theme was the errors of Christendom, whilst the second 
pointed out the Law we are under— not the Mosaic, but the 
Law of Christ; whilst the third had no alternative but to 
cover the terms of our covenant, and what it means to us; 
the next the establishment of the Kingdom; and the last 
emphasized the answers of the one preceding him and dealt 
with the destruction of the present order of things to make 
way for the better one under Messiah's Kingdom. 

"God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform" 
and a great witness has gone forth to a class we could not 
hitherto reach. And, then, all the papers have published 
something upon the subject. The Truth has thus been 



brought into prominence more than ever. 

The decisions are against the brethren, so we take it to 
be the Lord's will that another witness should be given. I 
am glad to tell you that all the brethren are one in mind 
and attitude in the matter, and are rejoicing in the privilege 
of sharing experiences so like the Lord's and in having such 
opportunity of demonstrating their faithfulness to Him. 

And now, dear Brother, we must thank you for your able 
ministry of the Truth of God to us, and we thank Him for 
the knowledge received through you, our beloved Pastor. 

How valuable is the knowledge the Lord has permitted 
us to have! We are appreciating it more and more as the 
days go by, for so many do not know the things of which we 
have knowledge, and consequently the strange happenings of 
today disturb them much and they have not the "peace which 
passeth knowledge." 

Be assured, dear Pastor, that we continually bear you up 
at the Throne. May the Lord sustain you to the end! We 
rejoice with you in the increasing evidence that our deliverance 
draweth nigh. With fervent love from all, 

Yours in the Lord, .—England. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in our Lord Jesus! As you will no doubt have 
been informed, the Military Service Act has been passed in 
Great Britain, which gives the Military authorities power to 
call to military service every able-bodied man in the country 
between the ages of 18 and 41. It is Conscription pure and 
simple. Provision was made for conscientious objectors to 
be partially or totally exempted from the Act, if their objection 
was proved to be a bona fide, conscientious one. Many 
of the dear brethren throughout the country have already been 
up before the appointed Tribunals, claiming exemption from 
military service, either combatant or non-combatant. In eveiy 
case that I know or have heard of the claim for total exemption 
has been disallowed, but mostly all have been granted 
to have non-combatant military duties. As the desire of the 
brethren is to be outside of the Act entirely, believing that 
it is only another way of engaging in military operations, 
most of them, I understand, are appealing to the Appeal 
Tribunals for the full benefits of the total exemption clause, 
which was provided in the Act for conscientious objectors. 
I myself have appealed and am waiting to appear before this 
Second Tribunal, the Appeal Tribunal. The Act provides for 
a third or Final Tribunal to be held in London, but it is 
within the power of the second or Appeal Tribunal, to keep 
any case from going further than the Second Tribunal. 

When up before the First Tribunal held in the Town Hall, 
Newcastle, on seeing that I was showing from the Scriptures 
that a Christian was breaking the Law of his God to engage 
in warfare with carnal weapons, the military representative. 
Colonel Hicks, asked me the question, "What did Jesus mean 
when he told his disciples to sell their garments and buy 
swords?" Wondering just how to put the matter in few 



words so that they could understand the meaning of the incident 
recorded in Luke 22:36, the first sentence I uttered was 
interrupted by two or three members of the Tribunal, and the 
question was waived by further questions. 

Requesting your prayers for myself and all the dear 
brethren who are being severely tried, and with much love. 

Your brother in our dear Lord. JAMES HAMILTON. 



NO DISCOURAGEMENT AMONGST THEM 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in our Lord and Head! 

You are probably conversant with the trend of matters 
here in regard to the Military Act. So far as we are aware, 
all the brethren affected have asked for exemption in accordance 
with the conscience clause embodied in the Act. 

The Tribunals to determine the validity of these claims 
are now sitting; but up to the present none of the brethren 
have succeeded in obtaining a complete exemption. There 
seems to be an entire disregard of the letter of the law in 
most of these cases. The brethren are, however, appealing 
to a further Tribunal in the hope that eventually they may 
obtain the full benefits of the Act. 

You will be glad to know that though present circumstances 
are proving a test to all, and especially to the younger 
brethren, yet so far as we know there is no discouragement 
amongst them. Most are glad to have this privilege to witness 
openly and to suffer for the Lord and the principles of 
the Truth. With continued love as ever. 

Yours sincerely in His service, W. CRAWFORD.— England. 



CANADIAN CONSCRIPTION IMPOSSIBLE 

A brother of considerable information on this subject 
writes us to the effect that Canada, being a Colony and not 
a sovereign State, could not legally conscript her citizens for 
overseas service. She could, however, conscript for home 
service— for defense of Canada. 



R5895:page 143 

"HOW WONDERFUL!" 

"He answered all my prayer abundantly, 

And crowned the work that I had brought. 

With blessing more than I had thought— 
A blessing undisguised, and fair, and free. 
I stood amazed and whispered, 'Can it be 

That He hath granted all the boon I sought? 

How wonderful that He for me hath wrought! 



How wonderful that He hath answered me!' 
"O faithless heart! He said that He would hear 

And answer thy poor prayer, and He hath heard 
And proved His promise. Wherefore didst thou fear? 

Why marvel that thy Lord hath kept His Word? 
More wonderful if He should fail to bless 
Expectant faith and prayer with good success!" 
—Selected. 



page 144 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 145 
