
7 Will God Hear and Answer?




THE above question elicits a great deal of excitement and curiosity. The Bible shows that Jehovah does listen to prayers today. Whether he hears ours or not is largely up to us.
Jesus denounced religious leaders in his day who prayed hypocritically; they cared only about making a show of their piety. He said that such men would have “their reward in full,” meaning that they would receive only what they wanted most, the attention of men, but not what they needed, God’s hearing ear. (Matthew 6:5) Likewise today, many pray according to their own will and not God’s. Ignoring the Bible principles that we have discussed, they do not get God’s hearing ear.
What, though, about you? Will God hear and respond to your prayers? The answer does not depend on your race, nationality, or social standing. The Bible assures us: “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) Do those words describe you? If you fear God, you hold him in the highest regard, fearing to displease him. If you work righteousness, you seek to do what God says is right rather than following your own will or that of your fellow humans. Do you really want God to listen to your prayers? The Bible directs you to your goal.a
Of course, many want God to answer their prayers with a miracle. Even in Bible times, though, God rarely performed such wonders. Sometimes centuries passed between one recorded miracle and the next. Further, the Bible indicates that the age of miracles ended after the days of the apostles. (1 Corinthians 13:8-10) Does this mean, then, that God does not answer prayers today? Far from it! Consider some prayers that he answers.
God grants wisdom. Jehovah is the ultimate Source of all true wisdom. He is generous with it, sharing it freely with those who want his guidance and who seek to live by it.—James 1:5.
God gives his holy spirit and all of its benefits. Holy spirit is God’s active force. There is no force stronger. It can help us to endure trials. It can fill us with peace when we are troubled. It can help us to cultivate other beautiful and endearing qualities. (Galatians 5:22, 23) Jesus assured his followers that God gives this gift generously.—Luke 11:13.
God enlightens those who earnestly seek him. (Acts 17:26, 27) Around the world, there are people who sincerely seek the truth. They want to know about God—what his name is, what his purpose is for the earth and humankind, how they can draw close to him. (James 4:8) Jehovah’s Witnesses often meet people like that and are delighted to share the Bible’s answers to such questions.
Is that why you have obtained this magazine? Are you looking for God? Perhaps this is how he is answering your prayer.



For more information about how to pray and be heard by God, see chapter 17 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.


