
Teach Your Children
A Kingdom That Will Change the Whole Earth




CAN you guess what Kingdom we mean?—a It is the one Jesus taught us to pray for. He taught us to ask God: “Let your kingdom come.” (Matthew 6:9, 10) For nearly 2,000 years, followers of Jesus have prayed to God that His Kingdom come. Have you prayed about that?—
To understand what a kingdom is, you need to know what a king is. A king is a person who rules. The land he rules over is called his domain. The domain of God’s Kingdom includes the whole earth. When God’s Kingdom comes, everyone on earth will in time enjoy the blessings that his rule will bring to the people.
God’s Kingdom is a heavenly government. At Isaiah 9:6, the Bible talks about the Ruler of this government. Notice what it says about him: “There has been a child born to us, . . . and the princely rule will come to be upon his shoulder. And his name will be called . . . Prince of Peace.”
Do you know what a prince is?— Yes, he is the son of a king. Who is the supreme heavenly King?— You are right if you said Jehovah. The Bible calls him “the Most High over all the earth.” (Psalm 83:18) In the Bible, Jesus is often called “the Son of God.” One reason is that Jehovah gave Jesus life. Jehovah is Jesus’ real Father.—Luke 1:34, 35; John 1:34, 49; 3:17; 11:27; 20:31; Acts 9:20.
God’s Kingdom, which Jesus taught us to pray for, is a special kind of government. It is a “princely rule” because Jehovah makes his Son, Jesus, the Ruler, or King, of the Kingdom. But did you know that others will be chosen to rule as kings with Jesus in his Father’s Kingdom?— Let’s talk about them.
Just before he died, Jesus told his faithful apostles that he was going to “the house” of his Father in heaven. “I am going my way to prepare a place for you,” he said, “that where I am you also may be.” (John 14:1-3) Do you know what the apostles and the others chosen will do in heaven with Jesus?— They “will rule as kings with him.” The Bible even tells how many will rule as kings with Jesus. There will be 144,000.—Revelation 14:1, 3; 20:6.
What do you think it will be like on earth when the Prince of Peace and his chosen 144,000 are rulers?— It will be wonderful! There will be no war. Animals will live at peace with one another and with us. Nobody will get sick or die. The eyes of the blind will see, the ears of the deaf will hear, the lame will run and jump like deer. The earth will grow good food for everyone. And all people will love one another as Jesus taught his disciples to do. (John 13:34, 35) Let’s turn to the verses listed here in the book of Isaiah and read about the wonderful things that will take place.—Isaiah 2:4; 11:6-11; 25:8; 33:24; 35:5, 6; 65:21-24.
Ever since Jesus taught people to pray “let your kingdom come,” millions have learned about that Kingdom. This knowledge has changed their lives. Soon, when that Kingdom comes and replaces all governments of the earth, everyone who serves Jehovah God and his chosen Ruler, Jesus Christ, will enjoy peace, health, and happiness.—John 17:3.



If you are reading with a child, the dash provides a reminder to pause and encourage the child to express himself.

QUESTIONS:
  Why is God’s Kingdom also called a “princely rule”?

  Who will rule with Jesus in his Father’s Kingdom?

  What will it be like on earth under Jesus’ princely rule?




