Be Diligent in “Bearing Thorough Witness”
1, 2. What impresses you about Paul’s view of preaching the good news, and how can we imitate his example of “bearing thorough witness”?
1 Like Jesus and many other faithful servants of old, the apostle Paul was a zealous preacher of the good news, “bearing thorough witness” regardless of the setting. Even while under house arrest, he “would kindly receive all those who came in to him, preaching the kingdom of God to them and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with the greatest freeness of speech.”​—Acts 28:16-31.
2 We too can be diligent in “bearing thorough witness” at all times. That includes witnessing to people we meet in our travels to and from the “Give God Glory” District Convention and while in the host city.​—Acts 28:23; Ps. 145:10-13.
 3. How can we avoid having our informal witnessing turn into only an incidental effort?
3 Incidental or Informal Witnessing? Is there a difference? Yes. Something that is incidental occurs merely by chance or without intention, as if it was not planned or is of little importance. That certainly does not describe our ministry. As was true of Paul, giving God glory by our witnessing is important to us, and it should be our intention to give a witness wherever appropriate in the course of our travels this summer. However, the manner in which we approach others can rightly be described as informal​—that is, relaxed, friendly, and unofficial. This approach can produce good results.
 4. What enabled Paul to witness at his place of lodging?
4 Prepare to Give a Witness: Paul had to make opportunities to witness while under house arrest in Rome. From his place of lodging, he took the initiative to invite the local Jewish leaders to his house. (Acts 28:17) Even though there was a Christian congregation in Rome, Paul learned that the Jewish community in that city had little firsthand information about the Christian faith. (Acts 28:22; Rom. 1:7) He did not hold back from “bearing thorough witness” about Jesus Christ and the Kingdom of God.
5, 6. What opportunities may we have for witnessing informally, and what preparations can we make in order to do so effectively?
5 Think of all the people you may contact in your travels who have only a passing knowledge of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They may not even know that we offer free home Bible studies. Be alert to opportunities to witness to those you meet while traveling, making rest stops, refueling, shopping, staying in hotels, eating in restaurants, using public transportation, and so on. Determine in advance what you might say to initiate a conversation and to give a brief witness. Perhaps in the days ahead you can practice by witnessing informally to your neighbors, relatives, workmates, and other acquaintances.
6 You will need a supply of publications to use when witnessing informally. Which ones? You might use the tract Would You Like to Know More About the Bible? Point to the first five paragraphs, where various reasons are given for reading the Bible. Show the coupon on the back for requesting a free home Bible study. When you find a responsive person, offer the Require brochure. In anticipation of meeting people who speak another language, take along the booklet Good News for All Nations. Page 2 explains how to use it to give a witness. If traveling by car, you may be able to take along a few other basic publications for those who show real interest in the Kingdom message.
7, 8. What caution about our personal appearance and conduct while traveling and during leisure time should we heed?
7 Consider Your Appearance and Conduct: We must make sure that our conduct as well as our dress and grooming will not give others a wrong impression or cause them to ‘speak against’ Jehovah’s organization. (Acts 28:22) This applies not only while attending the convention but also while traveling and during leisure time. The August 1, 2002, Watchtower, page 18, paragraph 14, cautioned: “Our appearance should not be showy, bizarre, provocative, revealing, or faddish. In addition, we should dress in a manner that reflects ‘reverence for God.’ That gives food for thought, does it not? It is not simply a matter of dressing appropriately when attending congregation meetings [or convention sessions] and then throwing all caution to the wind at other times. Our personal appearance should always reflect a reverent, honorable attitude because we are Christians and ministers 24 hours a day.”​—1 Tim. 2:9, 10.
8 We should dress modestly and with dignity. If our appearance and conduct always reflect our belief in God, we will never feel obligated to hold back from witnessing informally because our personal appearance leaves something to be desired.​—1 Pet. 3:15.
 9. What success in witnessing did Paul have in Rome?
9 Informal Witnessing Is Fruitful: During the two years that Paul was under house arrest in Rome, he saw good results from his witnessing efforts. Luke reported that “some began to believe the things said.” (Acts 28:24) Paul himself evaluated the effectiveness of his “bearing thorough witness” when he wrote: “My affairs have turned out for the advancement of the good news rather than otherwise, so that my bonds have become public knowledge in association with Christ among all the Praetorian Guard and all the rest; and most of the brothers in the Lord, feeling confidence by reason of my prison bonds, are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.”​—Phil. 1:12-14.
10. What success in witnessing did a couple have last summer?
10 Last summer, after spending the day at the district convention, a couple had a fruitful experience witnessing informally to a waitress who asked them about their convention badge cards. They told her about the convention and also about the hope the Bible holds out for the future of mankind. They gave her the tract Would You Like to Know More About the Bible? and explained the free home Bible study arrangement. The woman said that she wanted someone to visit her, filled in her name and address on the back of the tract, and asked the couple to make the arrangements. What success might you enjoy this year by being diligent in “bearing thorough witness”?
11. What qualities should we muster in order to advance the good news this summer by “bearing thorough witness”?
11 Thoroughly Advance the Good News: Imagine how happy Paul was when he heard that fellow Christians were imitating his zealous example! May we do all we can to advance the good news by witnessing informally about our Bible-based beliefs as we also benefit from this summer’s district convention.
[Box on page 3]
Publications Needed for Informal Witnessing
■ Would You Like to Know More About the Bible? (tract)
■ What Does God Require of Us? (brochure)
■ Good News for All Nations (booklet)
■ Other basic publications
[Box on page 4]
Do Not Forget Them!
  Forget whom? All the interested ones who attended the Memorial of Christ’s death or the special talk. Have we invited them to attend this year’s district convention? Likely many of them, if given kindly encouragement, would attend. As they enjoy the upbuilding association at the convention and the encouraging spiritual program, they will be drawn closer to Jehovah and to his organization. Why not extend an invitation and see what happens? Give them all the details they need, including the dates of the convention, directions to the convention site, the times for the sessions to begin and end, and the preview of the program that is outlined on the back cover of the June 8, 2003, issue of Awake!

