Disabled​—Yet Fruitful
1 If you are among the many Witnesses of Jehovah who have a disability, you can still have a fruitful ministry. In fact, your circumstances may provide special opportunities for you to give a witness and encourage others.
2 Giving a Witness: Many who must contend with a disability are having a full share in the ministry. For example, one sister whose mobility and speech were seriously affected by an operation found that she could share in magazine work if her husband parked their car near a busy sidewalk. On one occasion, she placed 80 magazines in just two hours! Your special circumstances may also bring you into contact with people who are otherwise hard to reach. If so, view them as your special territory.
3 Your preaching can be very effective! As others observe your determination and the good effect that Bible truth has had on your life, they may be attracted to the Kingdom message. Moreover, when you meet people who are suffering adversity, your experience in life may equip you to provide them with comfort from God’s Word.​—2 Cor. 1:4.
4 Strengthen Others: Were you not encouraged by the life story of Laurel Nisbet, who was confined to an iron lung for 37 years yet helped 17 individuals to come to an accurate knowledge of Bible truth? In like manner, your example can inspire fellow believers to exert themselves in Jehovah’s service.​—g93 1/22 pp. 18-21.
5 Even if your circumstances prevent you from getting out in the ministry as much as you would like, you can still strengthen others. One brother said: “I have learned that even a severely disabled person can be of great service to others. My wife and I have been a sort of anchor for various ones in the congregation. Because of our circumstances we are always here, always available.” However, because of your disability, it is understood that you may not always be able to perform in accord with your zeal. Still, with some help you may be able to have an active share in the ministry. Therefore, if you require some assistance, do not hesitate to bring this to the attention of the elders or others in the congregation who can assist you.
6 Jehovah sees everything you do in order to serve him, and he takes delight in your whole-souled service. (Ps. 139:1-4) As you rely on him, he can empower you to have a fruitful and meaningful ministry.​—2 Cor. 12:7-10.

