Preaching in an Ever-Changing World
1 How quickly things can change! Overnight, a natural disaster, an economic crisis, a political upheaval, or a highly publicized tragedy can become the topic of conversation. Just as quickly, however, people may turn their attention elsewhere. (Acts 17:21; 1 Cor. 7:31) In this ever-changing world, how can we capture people’s attention so as to share the Kingdom message with them?
2 Discern Others’ Concerns: One way of capturing people’s attention is by referring to current events. In urging his listeners to think seriously about their standing with God, on one occasion Jesus mentioned recent tragedies that were on their minds. (Luke 13:1-5) In like manner, when presenting the good news, we do well to tie in a current news item or local issue that touches the lives of those in our territory. However, when discussing such matters, we must use caution not to take sides on political or social issues.​—John 17:16.
3 How can we tell what people are currently thinking about? Perhaps the best way is simply to ask a question and then listen. (Matt. 12:34) Interest in people will move us to note the viewpoint of others and tactfully inquire further. An offhand remark by a householder may reveal a concern held by many in the area and could open the way to give a witness.
4 Preparing a Presentation: In preparing for field service in an ever-changing world, we can make use of the Reasoning book. Helpful suggestions on how to incorporate current events into our presentation are set out on pages 10-11, under “Crime/Safety” and “Current Events.” Similar information can be found in the September 2000 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4. When preparing your presentation, be sure to include an appropriate scripture.
5 As we take note of the ever-changing concerns of those in our territory, we need to adapt our presentation of the good news accordingly. In that way, we talk to people about what is close to their hearts. Thereby, we help many more come to know the One who is unchanging in his qualities and standards.​—Jas. 1:17.

