Retirement​—A Door to Increased Activity?
1 Many hardworking people long for the time when retirement will free them from the toil and pressures of secular work. All too often, though, retirement results in apathy, boredom, and premature aging. The lack of purposeful activity can leave the mind preoccupied with worry over self. A Brazilian newspaper reported that retired public employees complained of problems ranging from ‘dissatisfaction, irritability, insecurity, and loss of identity to depression and the feeling that their world was falling apart.’
2 In contrast, many Christians view this new chapter in their life as a door to increased spiritual activity. One brother who began pioneering two weeks after reaching the age of 65 said: “I have never experienced a period in my life so richly filled with blessings as the past ten years of pioneering.” A couple wrote: “Our real golden years began when we started pioneering.” Yes, for many, retirement offers a golden opportunity to expand their ministry and reap rich blessings from Jehovah.
3 Keeping Busy and Productive: Many who are now retired grew up without the conveniences that are common today and learned to work hard from an early age. Although they may no longer have the vigor of youth, they are still very productive workers. In one branch territory, 22 percent of the pioneers​—some 20,000 brothers and sisters—​are at least 60 years of age. These older ones make a major contribution to the preaching work. Their experience and godly qualities enrich the congregations with which they serve.​—Jas. 3:17, 18.
4 Keeping busy in the Christian ministry contributes to better health and an improved quality of life. An 84-year-old sister who started pioneering when she retired said: “Having many Bible studies with interested people has helped me to stay mentally active. I don’t have a car, so I walk a lot. That keeps me healthy.” An elderly pioneer couple commented: “The service keeps us fit mentally and physically. We are always together. We laugh a lot and enjoy life.”
5 Serving Where There Is a Need: Some retired Christians who have favorable financial circumstances have moved to serve where the need for Kingdom preachers is greater. Others have expanded their ministry to serve in a foreign-language field. Like the apostle Paul, these zealous publishers “do all things for the sake of the good news, that [they] may become a sharer of it with others.”​—1 Cor. 9:23.
6 One couple started pioneering after raising their two sons. After several years of pioneering, they undertook the task of learning the Chinese language. Now well into their 70’s, they recently had the joy of seeing the Chinese group that they have been working with become a congregation. What a blessing couples like these have proved to be!
7 No Retirement From the Ministry: While most people eventually retire from their secular employment, there is no retirement for any Christian from God’s service. All must continue faithful “to the end.” (Matt. 24:13, 14) Of course, with advancing years, some are not able to do as much as they formerly did in Jehovah’s service. But how encouraging it is to see them doing what they can in a wholehearted way! God’s Word assures them that Jehovah will not forget their work and the love that they show for his name.​—Luke 21:1-4; Heb. 6:10.
8 If you are approaching retirement age, why not prayerfully consider how you can make full use of your changing circumstances? With divine help, you may find that retirement opens for you a door to increased activity that brings praise to Jehovah and many blessings.​—Ps. 148:12, 13.

