Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting June 9
Song 81
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the June 15 Watchtower and the June 22 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. Include a scripture in each presentation.
15 min: “The Christian Ministry​—Our Main Work.”a Encourage youths to consider the blessings they can enjoy by entering full-time service. Include comments on the material under the subheading “When Culture and Conscience Clash,” in the November 1, 2000, Watchtower, pages 19-20.
20 min: “Retirement​—A Door to Increased Activity?”b If possible, include a brief interview of a publisher who has used retirement from secular work to do more in Jehovah’s service. Ask what adjustments he has made and what blessings he has experienced as a result.
Song 190 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 16
Song 55
 8 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
12 min: Local needs.
25 min: “Be Diligent in ‘Bearing Thorough Witness.’”c Use the questions that are provided. After discussing paragraphs 5 and 6, include a brief demonstration of witnessing informally to a store clerk and offering the tract Would You Like to Know More About the Bible? Before discussing paragraphs 7 and 8, have them read aloud. In conclusion, read and discuss the box “Do Not Forget Them!”
Song 131 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 23
Song 95
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the July 1 Watchtower and the July 8 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In one of the demonstrations, show the publisher engaging in street witnessing.
20 min: What Can Be Done About Discouragement? A talk and audience discussion based on the November 15, 1999, Watchtower, pages 28-9, up to and including the subheading “Maintaining a Good Attitude.” Review practical suggestions along with Scriptural counsel. Arrange in advance for one or two effective publishers to explain what helps them to maintain joy in their ministry.
15 min: “Preaching in an Ever-Changing World.”d When discussing paragraphs 2-3, ask audience what current events could be used to start conversations in the local territory. When discussing paragraph 4, have a brief demonstration, using one of the presentations noted.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 30
Song 3
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for June. Mention literature offer for July and August. Review two or three of the suggestions on page 6 of the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert for starting Bible studies in the Knowledge book or Require brochure using the direct approach. Have a well-prepared demonstration of one of them.
15 min: “Disabled​—Yet Fruitful.”e Include comments on how others can assist, based on the August 22, 1990, Awake!, pages 22-3, under the subheading “What Can Be Done?”
20 min: Use God’s Word Effectively to Preach the Kingdom. Audience discussion to be handled by the service overseer. With each person we meet in our ministry, we strive to share an upbuilding Scriptural thought about the Kingdom. However, we need to do more than just read Bible texts. We need to explain, illustrate, and apply them. Show how this can be done, using as examples some of the scriptures cited in the Reasoning book, pages 154-5, under the italicized subheading “Human rulers are not providing what mankind urgently needs.” Following the discussion, have a well-prepared publisher demonstrate how to use one scripture effectively on a return visit, giving a concise explanation, a simple illustration, and a brief application that shows the householder how Kingdom rule will benefit him personally. Begin the demonstration with the publisher reading the scripture. Following the demonstration, review how the text was explained, illustrated, and applied. Encourage all to develop the ability to use God’s Word effectively.
Song 171 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 7
Song 165
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local experiences. Relate or reenact experiences that local publishers have had when (1) witnessing to various ethnic groups or people speaking other languages or (2) witnessing in settings other than house-to-house and street work. Encourage all to make good use of the booklet Good News for All Nations and the Please Follow Up (S-43) form when they meet those who speak another language.​—See the September 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 2, Announcements.
25 min: “Making Known the Divine Name.”f Use the questions that are provided. When considering paragraph 4, include comments on the box “Making Known the Name of God,” found on page 124 of the Proclaimers book. Have a capable publisher demonstrate a return visit. Using two or three scriptures from the Reasoning book, pages 196-7, show why it is important to know and use God’s personal name.
Song 197 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

