From City Towers to Wilderness Tundra—Go to the People
NEITHER rain nor snow nor hail nor wolves nor mountain lions nor hostile territory could dampen their spirit of determination. With amazing speed, they galloped across 1,900 miles [3,000 km], crossing open prairie, raging rivers, and deep valleys to carry urgent mail to the West Coast. Who were they?
They were the daring young riders of the pony express.a What sparked such intensity of spirit in these young men? Probably the challenge, the adventure, and the satisfaction of getting the mail through. Interestingly, each rider carried a Bible in his saddlebag along with the priority mail.
More than a century later, a greater spirit of determination, enthusiasm, and devotion is manifested by over 113,000 devoted Kingdom proclaimers across Canada. What is their motivation? Love for God and neighbor inspires them to deliver Kingdom truth by printed page and by word of mouth. This life-giving truth is far more urgent than any mail delivered by the pony express. Yes, it is the precious Kingdom message of the Holy Bible, the very book found in the saddlebags of the pony-express riders.—Proverbs 2:21, 22; Isaiah 2:2-4; 61:2; Matthew 22:37-39; 24:14.
Motivated by Love for Jehovah and for People
Jehovah’s Witnesses love to talk to people about the Kingdom. You will find them doing so in city high-rise apartment towers, in remote tundra communities, in airport terminals, on the streets and other public places, and on the telephone. Why in such varied locations?
Changing life-styles imposed by economic and demographic conditions pose a formidable challenge to finding people at home. In many cases, both husband and wife work to care for the basic material necessities of the family, often to the neglect of spiritual needs. Amid such pressures and stress, they desperately need a heartwarming message of hope. Jehovah’s Witnesses gladly respond. Using discretion and kindness, they create opportunities to bring good news to all sorts of people in an appealing, thought-provoking manner.—1 Timothy 2:3, 4.
In Other Languages: When Jesus commanded his followers to ‘go and make disciples,’ he allowed for initiative and determination in taking the message of hope to people of all languages. (Matthew 28:19) As with many lands, Canada has become a mosaic of different cultures and languages, and many Kingdom proclaimers have adapted by learning new languages.
For example, one couple, who are full-time ministers in Edmonton, Alberta, saw the need in their city to reach people who spoke Mandarin Chinese. First, however, the couple needed to learn the language, so they contacted a university student who spoke Mandarin. He agreed to teach them the language and at the same time learn Bible truths from them. What an ideal situation! Within 24 months these two devoted Kingdom proclaimers were qualified to teach in Mandarin. At the same time, their teacher/student qualified for Christian baptism.
Similar experiences are being enjoyed in other cities as Kingdom proclaimers, motivated by love, learn such languages as Polish, Russian, and Vietnamese.
On the Road: Like the pony-express riders of the last century, who rode alone, some Kingdom proclaimers in the interior of British Columbia are lone riders. A fair amount of their time is spent in their secular work of maneuvering powerful logging trucks through bush country to sawmills. This requires constant contact with other truckers by CB (citizens band) radio, communicating about traffic flow and road hazards.
Creatively, these Kingdom proclaimers use their CB radios in a unique way. They initiate discussions on the CB by citing current events. Then they skillfully refer to the Bible. In one case a fellow trucker responded to what the Bible says about a hope for the dead. (John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:15) The death of a fellow driver in a highway accident deeply disturbed him. He gratefully accepted a Bible study and now can be heard proclaiming the good news to fellow workers and friends. Further, to his joy, a Bible study was started with the widow of his deceased friend. What a reward for taking the initiative to present the life-giving message of truth in this unusual way!
By Air: When it comes to delivering the precious message of truth, zealous Kingdom proclaimers go where the people are, ‘entering villages’ by light aircraft. (Matthew 10:11, 12) A while ago, two plane groups, moved by zeal to declare the good news and at their own expense, flew to the scattered people of the vast expanse of the tundra wilderness. Each aircraft group logged some 2,000 miles [3,000 km] and touched down in 14 different communities, coming within 150 miles [250 km] of the Arctic Circle. These tireless proclaimers continued for seven full days to reach the people isolated by great distances.
And was it all worthwhile? Just think of the positive impact the Bible message had on these communities. The visiting ministers helped to fill a vital spiritual need when they outlined Jehovah’s purpose for a paradise earth in the near future. (Matthew 5:3) Long after the message bearers left, the honesthearted people in the communities would be able to read from the 542 Bibles and Bible study aids and 3,000 magazines that were placed in their hands.—Compare Acts 12:24.
By Telephone: Thousands of city dwellers live in apartment towers that have high-tech security. Even so, dedicated Kingdom proclaimers proceed with zeal and discretion. How are they able to go where these people are? While face-to-face contact is preferred, often the apartment lobby intercom is used with success. When this is not possible, they let their fingers do the work, calling people on the telephone.
One morning an older woman answered her telephone. After a brief, polite greeting, she was asked whether she felt there would be a time when people would be able safely to walk the streets at night. Scriptures were read to reassure her that peace would be abundant in the future. (Psalm 37:10, 11; Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10) She agreed to a telephone conversation the following week at the same time to discuss why we can believe God’s promises. After a month of studying the Bible over the telephone, reading paragraphs from a Bible study aid and asking appropriate questions, the Kingdom proclaimer received praise from the woman for coming up with so many different sermons each week. It was time to describe the study book and to offer her a personal copy. Arrangements were then made for the two to meet personally. Indeed, Jehovah’s Witnesses have demonstrated their love for people, and people are responding, recognizing that Jehovah is with these Christian preachers.—Compare 1 Corinthians 14:25.
By Printed Page: Kingdom proclaimers in the predominantly French-speaking province of Quebec are also going where the people are. One traveling minister observed: “For years the brothers felt that they were not making headway because of the fierce opposition of the church. But through the tireless work of the brothers and their repeated calls, the Bible, which was practically an unknown book and read only by the minority, now has its place in most homes.”
Exciting results are enjoyed as new evangelizers come from all levels of Quebec society, including the medical community. Such is the case of one doctor. His wife, a Kingdom proclaimer herself, would frequently discuss the Bible’s hope with him. An alert congregation elder took the initiative to invite the doctor to the congregation meeting during the time when the brochure How Can Blood Save Your Life? was being studied. He came and even participated. Impressed by the quality and spiritual depth of the discussions, he accepted his own personal Bible study. Now he too is a Kingdom proclaimer.
Effective use of magazines has played an important role in attracting people to the Bible. One never knows which article will be the catalyst to draw someone to the truth. One Kingdom proclaimer offered an issue of Awake! to a neighbor who did not want to listen to the message but was interested in the insect world. The photograph in the November 22, 1992, Awake! article “Chagas’ Disease—A Kiss of Death” intrigued her. Impressed by what she read, she asked for more magazines. A Bible study was started, and within six months she was witnessing to others.
In Public Places: Canadian law allows for freeness of speech in public places, such as airports. At the Halifax International Airport, Kingdom proclaimers discreetly approach travelers between flights, engaging them in conversation. Timely leading questions are used to direct the conversation to the Bible. Since they carry a pocket Bible and literature, they can respond to spiritual needs. Surgeons, scientists, lawyers, pilots, clergymen, policemen, taxi drivers, engineers, teachers, military personnel, and politicians from foreign countries are among those who have heard the Kingdom message in this way and have carried seeds of truth to germinate in faraway places.—Colossians 1:6.
Early one morning at the airport, a man accepted the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. He then said in a calm, slow voice: “Oh, no, not Jehovah’s Witnesses!” Why such a reaction? The man was a devout Muslim who had just been praying in the airport chapel. He had been pleading with God to show him wisdom, insight, and truth. The thought that Jehovah’s Witnesses were an instant answer to his prayer simply amazed him.
Indeed, the courageous Kingdom proclaimers in Canada let nothing stand in the way of their presenting the precious message of the Kingdom. They allow neither foreign languages, rugged dirt roads, remote communities, nor high-security city apartment buildings to deter them. They are determined to deliver God’s message of life to honesthearted truth seekers. Along with their worldwide brotherhood of fellow workers, they unselfishly obey Jesus’ command to ‘go and make disciples.’—Matthew 28:19.
[Footnote]
The pony express was a mail service in the United States that existed for a brief 18-month period from 1860 to 1861.
[Box on page 27]
Successful Kingdom Proclaimers Use the Telephone
  Some have said: “Hello. My name is [give name]. I have been speaking briefly with people in your building about how peace might be achieved. Do you think there will ever be peace worldwide? [Allow for response.] To put your mind at ease, I am not doing a survey or selling anything. Rather, I have been sharing the thought from the Holy Scriptures that God will actually bring peace.” Then the conversation might proceed with a brief Scriptural discussion.
  Others have said: “Good evening. My name is [give name]. I am a volunteer in your area. I have been getting the opinions of individuals living in your building. Many are concerned about personal safety in view of the escalating violence and crime in our area. Is this something that concerns you? [Allow for response.] Do you think there will ever be a time when the whole world will feel secure?” Allow for a reply, and proceed with a Scriptural message.

