Jehovah Fulfills His Promises to Faithful Ones
“He is faithful that promised.”—HEBREWS 10:23.
1, 2. Why can we have complete confidence in Jehovah’s promises?
JEHOVAH asks that his servants develop and maintain a solid faith in him and his promises. With such faith one can completely trust Jehovah to do what he has promised to do. His inspired Word declares: “Jehovah of armies has sworn, saying: ‘Surely just as I have figured, so it must occur; and just as I have counseled, that is what will come true.’”—Isaiah 14:24.
2 The statement, “Jehovah of armies has sworn,” shows that he gives his solemn oath to fulfill his promises. That is why his Word can say: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.” (Proverbs 3:5, 6) When we trust in Jehovah and allow ourselves to be guided by his wisdom, our paths will without fail lead to everlasting life, for God’s wisdom is “a tree of life to those taking hold of it.”—Proverbs 3:18; John 17:3.
True Faith in Ancient Times
 3. How did Noah show faith in Jehovah?
3 The record of Jehovah’s acts toward those with true faith testifies to his dependability. For example, over 4,400 years ago, God told Noah that the world of his day was to be destroyed by a global Flood. He instructed Noah to build a huge ark for preserving human and animal life. What did Noah do? Hebrews 11:7 tells us: “By faith Noah, after being given divine warning of things not yet beheld, showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household.” Why did Noah have faith in something that had never happened before, something “not yet beheld”? Because he knew enough of God’s previous dealings with the human family to appreciate that whatever God says comes true. So Noah was confident that the Flood would also take place.—Genesis 6:9-22.
4, 5. Why did Abraham fully trust Jehovah?
4 Another example of true faith is Abraham. Nearly 3,900 years ago, God told him to sacrifice Isaac, his only son by his wife, Sarah. (Genesis 22:1-10) How did Abraham respond? Hebrews 11:17 states: “By faith Abraham, when he was tested, as good as offered up Isaac.” However, at the last moment, Jehovah’s angel stopped Abraham. (Genesis 22:11, 12) Still, why would Abraham even consider doing such a thing? Because, as Hebrews 11:19 says, “he reckoned that God was able to raise [Isaac] up even from the dead.” But how could Abraham have faith in a resurrection when he had never seen one and there was no previous record of one?
5 Remember, Sarah was 89 when God promised them a son. Sarah’s womb was beyond childbearing—dead, so to speak. (Genesis 18:9-14) God restored Sarah’s womb to life, and she bore Isaac. (Genesis 21:1-3) Abraham knew that since God restored Sarah’s dead womb to life, then he could also restore Isaac to life if need be. Romans 4:20, 21 says of Abraham: “Because of the promise of God he did not waver in a lack of faith, but became powerful by his faith, giving God glory and being fully convinced that what he had promised he was also able to do.”
 6. How did Joshua express confidence in Jehovah?
6 More than 3,400 years ago when Joshua was over a hundred years of age and after a lifetime of experiencing how trustworthy God is, he gave this reason for his confidence: “You well know with all your hearts and with all your souls that not one word out of all the good words that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you. Not one word of them has failed.”—Joshua 23:14.
7, 8. What saving course of action did faithful Christians take in the first century, and why?
7 About 1,900 years ago, many humble people demonstrated true faith. They realized from the fulfillment of Bible prophecy that Jesus was the Messiah and accepted his teachings. Having a solid basis in the facts and in the Hebrew Scriptures, they put faith in what Jesus taught. Thus, when Jesus said that God’s judgment was coming against Judea and Jerusalem because of unfaithfulness, they believed him. And when he told them what course of action they had to take to save their lives, they took it.
8 Jesus told believers that when Jerusalem was surrounded by armies, they should flee. Roman armies did come against Jerusalem in the year 66 C.E. But then the Romans left for some unexplained reason. That was the signal for the Christians to abandon the city, for Jesus had said: “When you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, then know that the desolating of her has drawn near. Then let those in Judea begin fleeing to the mountains, and let those in the midst of her withdraw, and let those in the country places not enter into her.” (Luke 21:20, 21) Those with true faith abandoned Jerusalem and the surrounding area and fled to safety.
Consequences of a Lack of Faith
9, 10. (a) How did the religious leaders show their lack of faith in Jesus? (b) What were the consequences of that lack of faith?
9 What did those without true faith do? They did not flee when they had the opportunity. They thought that their leaders could save them. Yet, those leaders and their followers also had the evidence of the Messiahship of Jesus. So why did they not accept what he said? Because of their wicked heart condition. This was exposed earlier when they saw many of the common people flock to Jesus after he resurrected Lazarus. John 11:47, 48 relates: “The chief priests and the Pharisees gathered the Sanhedrin [the Jewish high court] together and began to say: ‘What are we to do, because this man [Jesus] performs many signs? If we let him alone this way, they will all put faith in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.’” Joh 11 Verse 53 says: “Therefore from that day on they took counsel to kill him.”
10 What a wonderful miracle Jesus had performed—bringing Lazarus back from the dead! But the religious leaders wanted Jesus killed for doing that. Their gross wickedness was further exposed when “the chief priests . . . took counsel to kill Lazarus also, because on account of him many of the Jews were going there and putting faith in Jesus.” (John 12:10, 11) Lazarus had just been raised from the dead, and those priests wanted to see him dead again! They were not concerned about God’s will or the welfare of the people. They were selfish, concerned about their positions and advantages. “They loved the glory of men more than even the glory of God.” (John 12:43) But they paid for their lack of faith. In the year 70 C.E., Roman armies came back and destroyed their place and their nation, as well as many of them.
Faith Demonstrated in Our Time
11. Early in this century, how was true faith demonstrated?
11 In this century, there have also been many men and women of true faith. For instance, back in the early 1900’s, people in general were anticipating a peaceful, prosperous future. At that same time, those who put faith in Jehovah were announcing that mankind was about to enter its worst time of trouble yet. That is what was foretold in God’s Word in Matthew chapter 24, 2 Timothy chapter 3, and elsewhere. What those people of faith said actually did happen, beginning in 1914 with World War I. The world indeed entered the foretold “last days” with “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Timothy 3:1) Why did Jehovah’s servants know the truth about world conditions back then when others did not? Because, like Joshua, they had faith that not one of Jehovah’s words would fail.
12. Today, what promise of Jehovah do his servants fully trust?
12 Today, Jehovah’s servants, who put their trust in him, number nearly six million worldwide. They know from the evidence in fulfillment of God’s prophetic word that he will soon bring this violent, immoral system of things to an end. So they are confident that the time is near when they will see the outworking of 1 John 2:17, which says: “The world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” His servants completely trust that Jehovah will fulfill this promise.
13. How far can you trust Jehovah?
13 How far can you trust Jehovah? You can stake your life on him! Even if you lose your life now for serving him, he will give you back a much grander life in the resurrection. Jesus assures us: “The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs [that is, in God’s memory] will hear his voice and come out.” (John 5:28, 29) Do you know any doctor, political leader, scientist, businessman, or any other human who can do that? Their past record shows that they cannot. Jehovah can, and he will!
A Wonderful Future for Faithful Ones
14. What wonderful future does God’s Word promise faithful ones?
14 Jesus indicated the surety of a new world under God’s heavenly Kingdom, saying: “Happy are the mild-tempered ones, since they will inherit the earth.” (Matthew 5:5) That reinforced God’s promise found at Psalm 37:29: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” And just before the death of Jesus when an evildoer expressed faith in him, Jesus said to that man: “You will be with me in Paradise.” (Luke 23:43) Yes, as King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus will see to it that this man is resurrected to life on earth with the opportunity to live forever in that Paradise. Today, those who put their faith in Jehovah’s Kingdom can also look forward to living in Paradise when “[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:4.
15, 16. Why will life be so peaceful in the new world?
15 Let us project our minds ahead to that new world. Imagine that we are living in it already. Immediately, we cannot help but observe everywhere the happy people dwelling together in total peace. They are enjoying conditions similar to those described at Isaiah 14:7: “The whole earth has come to rest, has become free of disturbance. People have become cheerful with joyful cries.” Why are they that way? For one thing, notice that the doors to the houses have no locks. There is no need for them, since there is no crime or violence. It is just as God’s Word said it would be: “They will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.”—Micah 4:4.
16 There is no more war either, for in this new world, war is outlawed. All weapons have been turned into implements of peace. In the complete sense, Isaiah 2:4 has been fulfilled: “They will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.” But, then, that is what we expected! Why? Because many inhabitants of the new world learned to do that while serving God in the old world.
17. What living conditions will prevail under God’s Kingdom?
17 Something else you notice is that there is no poverty. No one lives in a squalid shack or wears rags or is homeless. Everyone has a comfortable home and well-kept property with lovely trees and flowers. (Isaiah 35:1, 2; 65:21, 22; Ezekiel 34:27) And there is no hunger because God has fulfilled his promise that there would be abundant food for all: “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” (Psalm 72:16) Indeed, under the guidance of God’s Kingdom, a glorious paradise extends earth wide, just as God purposed back in Eden.—Genesis 2:8.
18. In the new world, what things will no longer threaten people?
18 You also marvel at the vigorous energy everyone has. This is because they now have perfect bodies and minds. There is no more sickness, pain, or death. No one is in a wheelchair or a hospital bed. All of that is gone forever. (Isaiah 33:24; 35:5, 6) Why, none of the animals are a threat either, for they have been made peaceful by God’s power!—Isaiah 11:6-8; 65:25; Ezekiel 34:25.
19. Why will every day in the new world be one of “exquisite delight”?
19 What a wonderful civilization is formed by the faithful inhabitants of this new world! Their energies and skills and the wealth of the earth are devoted to positive pursuits, not to hurtful ones; to cooperating with others, not to competing with them. And everybody you meet is someone you can trust because, as God promised, all are “persons taught by Jehovah.” (Isaiah 54:13) Since everyone is governed by God’s laws, the earth is “filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” (Isaiah 11:9) Truly, every day in this new world is what Psalm 37:11 said it would be, one of “exquisite delight.”
A Happy Future Guaranteed
20. What must we do to enjoy a peaceful future?
20 What must we do to be part of that happy future? Isaiah 55:6 tells us: “Search for Jehovah, you people, while he may be found. Call to him while he proves to be near.” And as we search, our attitude should be as described at Psalm 143:10: “Teach me to do your will, for you are my God.” Those who do this can walk blamelessly before Jehovah through these last days and can look forward to a fine future. “Watch the blameless one and keep the upright one in sight, for the future of that man will be peaceful. But the transgressors themselves will certainly be annihilated together; the future of wicked people will indeed be cut off.”—Psalm 37:37, 38.
21, 22. What is God forming today, and how is the training accomplished?
21 Right now Jehovah is calling out from every nation those who want to do his will. He is forming them into the foundation of his new earthly society, as Bible prophecy foretold: “In the final part of the days [the time in which we now live] . . . many peoples will certainly go and say: ‘Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah [his elevated true worship] . . . He will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.’”—Isaiah 2:2, 3.
22 Revelation 7:9 describes these as “a great crowd . . . out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues.” Re 7 Verse 14 states: “These are the ones that come out of the great tribulation,” surviving the present system’s end. This foundation for the new world is now nearly six million strong, with many new ones becoming part of it each year. All of these faithful servants of Jehovah are being trained for life in his new world. They are learning the spiritual and other skills needed to transform this earth into a paradise. And they fully trust that Paradise will become a reality because “he is faithful that promised.”—Hebrews 10:23.
Points for Review
□ What consequences did a lack of faith bring in the first century?
□ How far can God’s servants trust him?
□ What future is in store for faithful ones?
□ What must we do to ensure a happy future for ourselves in God’s new world?
[Picture on page 18]
Right now Jehovah is forming the foundation of a new earthly society

