VOL. XXXVII. JUNE 1 No. 1 1 
A.D. 1916-A.M.6044 



CONTENTS 

Training Our Affections Heavenward . .163 

Setting Affections Above a Gradual Work 164 
"The King in His Beauty" (Poem) . . .165 
The Philippian Jailer 166 

A Weil-Timed Earthquake . . . .167 
Finally, Brethren, Think! .... 168 

The Power of Thought 169 

Questions for Self-Examination. . .169 
Scope of the Abrahamic Covenant . . .169 
Harvest Gatherings and Siftings . . .170 

Sketch of Development of Present Truth. 170 

First Faint Gleam of God's Plan . .170 

Chronology Seen to Be Valuable . .171 

An Important Discovery . . . .171 

The Beginning of the Harvest Work . .171 

Denying the Ransom 172 

"The Watch Tower" Begun . . . .172 
"Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices" 173 

Further Light on the Scriptures . .174 

Doth This Offend You? 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



A POPULAR BOOKLET ON HELL 

No booklet of ours is so much in demand as the one entitled, 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? We have 
these in good supply at 5c each. By the dozen, in booklet, 50c; 
in TOWER form, 40c per doz., 25 for 75c, $2 per hundred, 
postpaid. 



BROTHER RUSSELL AT THE TEMPLE 



Answering many inquiries, we announce that Brother Russell 
endeavors to serve at the New York City Temple on the 
first Sunday of each month. In the forenoon of such days 
there is a baptism, with every provision for those finding 
it convenient to be immersed at that time. 



WHEN ordering books, etc., please consult November 1st 
WATCH TOWER for price. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 

After the close of the hymn the bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
July follow: (1) 20; (2) 60; (3) 257; (4) 293; (5) 85; (6) 
324; (7) 1 19; (8) 267; (9) 46; (10) 130; (1 1) 91; (12) 105; 
(13) 455; (14) 28; (15) 285; (16) 72; (17) VOW; (18) 218; (19) 
272; (20) 160 (21) 213; (22) 98; (23) 172; (24) 260; (25) 
325; (26) 165; (27) 183; (28) 130; (29) 19; (30) 57; (31) 281. 



R5905 : page 163 

TRAINING OUR AFFECTIONS HEAVENWARD 

"Set your affection on things Above, not 
on things on the earth."— Colossians 3:2. 

IN THE natural make-up of humanity there is 
a certain tendency which we all recognize 
as a sort of mental sacrilege, although we 
are unable to philosophize upon it or to explain 



it. So surely as we are men and 

women we have certain impulses of affection, 

certain powers that go out toward other 

creatures, other things; and it is very important 

that we see where they are tending; 

otherwise they will lead to idolatry. Just 

as the little tendrils of a vine will take hold of whatever 

is within reach, so our affections go out to various earthly 

objects; and they need to be pruned and trained, just as 

a vine needs to be. When you desire to have your vine 

grow a certain way, you turn it in the proper direction, 

tie it if need be, and see that its tendrils take hold of 

the proper supports. 

VARIOUS WORLDLY OBJECTS OF AFFECTION 

Thus it is with each of us. These affections are 
proper, they are good; but they need guiding, training. 
If we did not have these affections, we could not love God. 
We must have them in order to a proper balance of 
character. Without them we could not hold together. 
The need for their proper guidance is manifest when we 
see some lady setting her affections on a little dog, giving 
it much time, care, choice food, etc. Some of the wealthy 
set their affections on poodle dogs, bull dogs, bird dogs 
or Angora cats. Some make pets of Canary birds, rabbits, 
white mice, etc. They spend upon those pets much 
valuable time, thought and care that might be much 
better spent in other ways— often treating them as if they 

R5906 : page 163 

were children, and lavishing as much affection upon them 
as if they were human. Some do the same with flowers. 

Although we believe in having a very kindly feeling 
toward dumb animals, and although we greatly admire 
flowers, yet we hold that as the Lord's people we should 
not treat any of these as if they were human beings, nor 
set our affections upon them to our injury and [he neglect 
of much more important things. There are plenty of children 
to care for; and we should not put flowers, dogs 
and toys in place of them. Although it is very proper for 
us to think how good is our Heavenly Father to give us 
all these things for pleasure, yet we should be on guard 
that we do not set our affections upon them and give them 
too large a place in our hearts. Where people do this, 
something valuable has been lost in their lives. If they 
are grown people, perhaps it would have been better if 
they had had children, rather than to set their love upon 
dogs and cats, and to waste precious time upon them. 

As we look out upon the world of mankind, we see that 
some are much better balanced than others. We sympathize 
with the world; for most of them do not know 
the Lord. They are not Christians. Very many of them 
have poor, meager lives with little to fill their hearts and 
to brighten and enlarge their mental horizon. Many who 



spend little or no time upon pets, set their affections and 
thoughts upon a home. It is a great pleasure to them to 
be able to say, "I have a good home of my own." This 
longing for home is a natural craving of our beings. 
Phrenologists call this natural trait, inhabitiveness— love 
of habitation. But we are not to permit our affections to 
center even here. As children of God we should have 
far higher aspirations than the world has. 

Many set their hearts upon having a large bank account. 
We have known people whose minds are so unbalanced 
that they would do almost anything to secure 
a good bank account. And when this is gained, they 
still are not satisfied. They continue to grasp after more, 
often resorting to very questionable or very dishonest 
methods to gain their ends. Such people are mentally and 
morally deranged. But we are to remember that the 
human family in their fallen condition are all more or 
less deranged. Only a thorough and radical course of 
treatment can remove the difficulty. The Lord alone can 
cure the malady that affects the entire human race. 

LEGITIMATE AFFECTIONS LIABLE TO PERVERSION 

There are still higher affections than those we have 
named which are also dangerous unless properly trained 
and guided. These are the affections of man for woman, 
woman for man, man for man, woman for woman, etc. 
All this is proper, of course, but we are to avoid inordinate 
affections, and are to have only that which is ordinary— 
that is, reasonable, proper. We are to beware of going 
to extremes. In His Word God has given us the proper 
outlines of conduct for His children; and we can know 
these only when we study His directions. Otherwise we 
are sure to take a wrong course. "Set not your affection 
on things on the earth." 

It is God's arrangement that even husbands and wives 
should not set their affections too much upon each other. 
Thus the Apostle Paul enjoins, "The time is short; it 
remaineth that they that have wives be as though they 
had none." (1 Corinthians 7:29.) The intimation seems 
to be that we should not reckon our earthly relationships 
as being the highest and best of all things. It is a great 
thing to have each other's support in the trials and difficulties 

R5906 : page 164 

of life. We are not wishing to say anything to 

weaken this blessed bond. But it should be held in accordance 

with knowledge of and in harmony with God's Word. 

It should not be permitted to be in any wise a hindrance 

to our running the Heavenly race successfully. It should 

not become an earth-born cloud to veil from us the 

Father's face and approval. 

By natural tendency we would all be inclined to go 
wrong; therefore we need to give careful heed to the 
admonition to set our affection on things Above. Let 



each of us look around carefully and sweep before our 
own doors. We are not here simply to have a good time. 
We are here for the purpose of learning certain principles, 
certain lessons that the Lord would have us learn, 
so that we may more than ever shape our lives in harmony 
therewith, that we may be able to see all the things of 
life from God's viewpoint. God's Word does not go into 
every detail of life; but it lays down important principles 
that touch our lives at every point; and it is for us to 
learn more and more how to apply these principles, to see 
what we need to restrain, what we need to cultivate, etc. 
The Lord wishes us to be intelligent children. 

"GOD FIRST" 

Those who come into harmony with the mind of the 
Lord have that wisdom from Above, which is first pure, 
then peaceable, easy of entreatment, full of mercy and 
good fruits. (James 3: 17.) Each of us should scrutinize 
the affairs of his own life and observe whether to any 
extent he is setting his affections upon earthly objects 
or things, even upon things which are in themselves 
right and proper. One cannot love his wife too 
much, unless he permits her to come into the Lord's place 
in his heart. If he should love her so much that he would 
please her rather than the Lord, then he is doing wrong. 
God must be first. Everything must be subordinate. 
Everything should be brought into line with this: GOD 
FIRST-His will. His Plan, His ways. 

As husbands and wives, kindred and friends, there is 
a certain degree of love that is in full harmony with the 
Heavenly love, the Father's will; and there are other 
affections or degrees of affection that are not in accordance 
therewith. Beware of these latter. Every one is 
imperfect, and each has tendencies whereby he might be 
led astray. Our great Adversary goeth about seeking 
whom he may devour. If he could, he would be glad to 
devour us. The better Christian one is, the better the 
Adversary would like to get hold of him. 

To be a child of God does not mean that we shall be 
free from all earth-born tendencies. The Apostle points 
out that there is a continual fight of the New Creature 
against the old. (Galatians 5: 17.) The Heavenly impulses, 
tendencies and aspirations need to be fought for; 
they must be carefully and continually cultivated. Not 
only must our affections be torn from their earthly props, 
to which they naturally cling, but they must be trained 
Heavenward, and be held there by the cords of love and 
devotion to God. Do not let them gravitate again earthward. 
There are many things on this earth that are attractive, 
that are beautiful; but we need not set our hearts 
upon them. We may see them and admire them; but we 
must go right along the narrow way. Our hearts are only 
just so large; and if we fill them with flowers or pets or 
earthly ambitions or affections, how can there be room 
for the infinitely more important and beautiful things? 



FRUITS, NOT CHIPS, SHOULD FILL OUR MENTAL BASKETS 

We all remember the familiar story of the boy who 
was very fond of reading novels, and whose father wished 
to impress a valuable lesson upon his mind. One day he 
said to his son, "John, empty that basket of apples in the 
corner; then go and fill the basket with chips." The boy 
did so, and brought in the basket filled with chips. "Now," 
said the father, "put all the apples also into the basket." 
The surprised boy said, "Father, I cannot put the apples 
in while the chips are there." "No," said the father, and 
your mind is just like that basket. It can hold only so 
much; and if you fill it with chips, there will be no room 
for other and better things." 

This was a wise father; he gave his son a good suggestion. 
You and I, as New Creatures in Christ Jesus, 
should fill our minds with the glorious Heavenly things— 
the Heavenly hopes, the Heavenly ambitions, the Heavenly 
affections. All these earthly things are but as chips in 
comparison. The mind and the heart filled with chips 
cannot contain the fruits of the Spirit. If we fill our 
baskets with the Heavenly loves and joys, the spiritual 
treasures, we shall have that which is transcendently 
above any earthly love and joy. 

Beware of earthly, spurious love; for it will be a 
hindrance to the Heavenly love. The two should not be 
confused and mixed. The unselfish natural love, which 
is an element of perfect human nature, will not, if kept 
in subservience to the Heavenly, interfere with our spiritual 
interests. The one does not infract or destroy the 
other. There should be a natural love for husband, wife, 
children, parents, and the Lord would have this continue; 
but He would have it in full subjection to the Heavenly 
things. Here, also, God should be first. 

SETTING AFFECTIONS ABOVE A GRADUAL WORK 

In our text the Apostle is addressing Christians, the 
class who are day by day training their affections Heavenward. 
This matter of setting the affections on Heavenly 
things, however, is something that must be repeated, persevered 
in; for the affections are inclined to slip off. We 
have nothing but our old brains with which to do our 
thinking, and these brains have tendencies toward the 
flesh. Therefore the necessity arises for a repeated and 
continual setting of the affections on the things Above, 
until they become securely fastened there, fixed, established. 
Heaven is to be our eternal Home, not the earth, 
not the fleshly condition. All the precious promises center 
Above. Christ our beloved King is there. We are 
being prepared to enter soon into Heaven itself, the condition 
beyond the veil. The glories of the Holiest of all 
are now ours by faith; and they will soon be ours in 
reality if we hold fast and continue faithful to our covenant 
with God. 



The Lord has now through His promises given us a 
foretaste of the good things to come. We have "the earnest 
of the Spirit." It is like the paying down of a hundred 

R5907 : page 164 

dollars to secure the purchase of a house. The balance 
remains due, and the buyer does not get the property 
until this balance is paid. But the earnest money holds 
the place for him until the full payment is made. By giving 
us His Holy Spirit God binds the contract into which 
we have entered with Him. In giving us this advance 
payment the Lord says, "Now prove to Me how faithfully 
you will keep your part of the Covenant into which we 
have entered. You keep your part, and I will keep Mine." 
"Faithful is He that calleth us, who also will do it." The 
only question is whether we shall do our part faithfully; 
for God will surely do His part. 

CAREFUL PREPARATION OF THE BRIDAL GARMENTS 

When we ponder on earthly things we see that they 
are not worthy to be compared with the Heavenly things. 

R5907 : page 165 

But there is danger of spending consecrated time on 
things that are of less value even than flowers, etc. How 
much time do you think you should spend in reading the 
newspapers? How much does this enable you to set your 
affections on the things above? Each of us is responsible 
to the Lord for how he uses every moment of his time- 
God's time. We are not here condemning the reading of 
important world-news which bears upon the fulfilment 
of Scripture prophecy. It is not wrong for us to keep 
in touch with the progress of the great war, for instance, 
in so far as it is related to the incoming Kingdom. But 
we do not need to read much to find out what is necessary. 

Doubtless if Jesus were here in the flesh now. He 
would be interested in noting how the world conditions 
are fulfilling the testimony of the Scriptures. He told us 
to watch for these fulfilments and to lift up our heads 
when we saw them coming to pass. But how can we lift 
up our heads if we do not see them coming to pass? And 
how can we see them if we do not read that which will 
give us this necessary information? But we are not to 
read for entertainment, nor are we to read what is unprofitable 
to us as New Creatures. 

So then, dear brethren and sisters, we see the course 
we are to pursue. We are to be the Bride of Jehovah's 
great Son. Therefore we must be very diligent to get 
everything in readiness for the approaching marriage. 
When we consider the preparations which an earthly 
bride makes for her nuptials, we have a good illustration 
of how important it is for us to have our garments all 
prepared, our robes spotless, our embroidery-work all 



completed beforehand. You and I are privileged to have 
a most important part in the greatest, grandest wedding 
ever held. Therefore we should be ready. We who were 
by nature children of wrath even as others, are now 
privileged to be cleansed from all defilement by the precious 
blood of Christ. Daily also we are to wash with 
the water of the Word. We are to be purified from all 
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and be fitted to become 
the Bride of our Heavenly King. 

This preparation means a continuous work as long as 
we sojourn in the mortal body. God's great Program has 
been so arranged as to demonstrate who will be fit to constitute 
the Bride of His Son. This decision in our case 
will depend on our diligence in making ourselves ready. 
If we attend to this most important work properly, we 
shall have no time to fritter away. We shall have little 
time for anything else than this one thing. But the proper 
making of ourselves ready means the helping of others 
as we have opportunity, especially the brethren who are 
walking this same Heavenly way with us. We are to lay 
down our lives for the brethren. This is an important 
part of our preparation. We are to build up ourselves 
and also the brethren in the most holy faith. 

We hope, then, dear friends, that we are getting ready 
for the marriage of the Lamb, for our marriage to the 
Lamb. Something that we may do or fail to do today 
may have a bearing upon our final readiness. Our minds 
are the foundation for everything in this matter. The 
Lord knows that we have imperfect bodies. So the testing 
will not be as to whether our bodies are perfect, but 
whether our hearts are perfect. If our heart is perfect 
before God, we shall bring our words, our actions and 
our thoughts into harmony with the Law of Love to the 
extent of our ability. If we see to it that we keep our 
hearts thus loyal, we shall become more and more a copy 
of God's dear Son, our Heavenly Bridegroom; and we 
shall enter in due time with exceeding joy into our "house 
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens." Then our 
Lord will present us before the Father— the "Bride 
adorned for her Husband"; He will present us with exceeding 
joy, BLAMELESS. 

Oh, the blessedness of this thought! Can we be 
blameless? If we reach the Kingdom, dear brethren, we 
shall indeed be blameless! Meantime, our characters are 
to be blameless here. God would never blame us for 
things we could not help, but only for the things we 
could help; and He has made an arrangement whereby 
if we have made mistakes we can go to the Fountain of 
cleansing. If we strive to do our best, and if we go 
daily, or oftener if necessary, to the Mercy Seat for 
pardon and cleansing, we shall be spotless in the Father's 
sight; and in His own due time He will give us perfect 
bodies like our Lord's. Then we shall be perfect in the 
most absolute sense. 

So long as we stay in the imperfect flesh we shall 
need the Throne of Heavenly Grace. We shall need 



mercy and assistance from the Lord every day. If we 
are faithful at heart, our mistakes will help us to be more 
watchful, more positive, than before. The Lord so arranges 
His providence as to teach us the necessary lessons. 
As we grow in the Divine likeness, we shall more 
and more come to love as God and Christ love— to love 
character, to love the principles of righteousness. We 
have never seen God or Christ with our physical eyes, 
yet we love them above all else. (1 Peter 1:8.) We 
have never seen the Apostle Paul, or the Apostle John, yet 
we love them; for we know their characters are lovable 
and worthy of admiration. We love the personality 
which shines from their writings, the beauty of their 
spirit. We love St. Paul because he counted all things 
but loss and dross that he might win Christ and be found 
in Him. We are to love whatever is good and noble and 
worthy, and in proportion as it is so. 

What do we love in each other? Is it the shape of the 
head, the symmetry of the features, the cut or style of 
the clothing? Oh, no! We love one another in proportion 
as we see the Master's likeness in each other. If 
one is much like Jesus, we love such a one all the more. 
This is the Heavenly, the spiritual love. This is the kind 
of love which we are to cultivate day by day. All other 
affections are to be entirely secondary. Let our love and 
esteem be for the things that are highly esteemed in the 
sight of God; let these be more beautiful to us than all 
else, that we may become like unto our Father in Heaven. 



R5907 : page 165 

"THE KING IN HIS BEAUTY" 

"Thine eyes shall see the King! The very same 
Whose love shone forth upon the curseful tree. 

Who bore thy guilt, who calleth thee by name; 
Thine eyes shall see! 

"Thine eyes shall see the King! The Mighty One, 
The Many-crowned, the Light -enrobed; and He 

Shall bid thee share the Kingdom He hath won; 
Thine eyes shall see! 

"And in His beauty! Stay thee, mortal song, 
The 'altogether lovely' One must be 

Unspeakable in glory— yet ere long 
Thine eyes shall see! 

"Yes! though the land be 'very far' away, 
A step, a moment, ends the toil for thee; 

Then changing grief for gladness, night for day. 
Thine eyes shall see!" 



R5907 : page 166 

THE PHILIPPIAN JAILER 
-JUNE 18.-ACTS 16:16-40.- 

AN EXPERIENCE WITH EVIL SPIRITS-SAD CONDITION OF A 
SLAVE GIRL-HER ENRAGED OWNERS REVENGE THEMSELVES ON 
ST. PAUL AND SILAS-IGNORING THE FACTS IN THE 
CASE, THEY RAISED FALSE CHARGES-THE MISSIONARIES 
BEATEN AND IMPRISONED-SINGING PRAISES TO GOD 
UNDER ADVERSE CONDITIONS-A WELL-TIMED EARTHQUAKE- 
JAILER CONVERTED-THE MAGISTRATES, AFTER LEARNING 
THE TRUTH REGARDING THE PRISONERS, MADE AMENDS. 

"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 

and thou slialt be saved."— Verse 31. 

WHILE the missionaries were day by day passing 
from Lydia's home to the place of worship, 
outside of the city gate, they were met 
repeatedly by a young woman known in 
Philippi as a Pythoness, or Sibyl— a fortune-teller. 
She was a slave girl possessed by an 
evil spirit— one of the fallen angels— the 
spirit working through her, divining, or giving 
intelligence of lost articles, telling fortunes, 
foretelling future events, etc. She 

was evidently well known to all the people; and the exercise 
of her profession brought large income to a joint-stock 
company that owned her— apparently a syndicate 
of influential men. 
For several days, as the missionaries went to and from 

R5908 : page 166 

the home of Lydia, attending to the Lord's work, this 

slave girl followed them, shouting, "These be the servants 

of the Most High God, which show unto us the way of 

salvation!" Of course, the girl did not know St. Paul and 

his companions; but the evil spirits did. To what extent 

they had forecast the results we may not know definitely, 

but quite possibly what occurred was what they had premeditated; 

namely, that the Apostle would cast out the 

evil spirit, and that this would bring upon the missionaries 

and their converts a violent attack from the owners of 

the girl and their friends, and all whom they could arouse 

to a frenzy of excitement, of wrath and of rioting. 

It is also possible that the evil spirit may simply have 
told the truth without considering the possibility that the 
Apostle might command it to come out of the woman— 
perhaps supposing that he would be rather pleased with a 
testimony from any quarter. But we read that St. Paul 
was grieved as day after day this testimony was given— 
not that he was grieved that a testimony was made regarding 
the Truth, but that it should come from such a 



source; for he knew that the evil spirit would have no 
respect for the Truth. Any of the fallen angels who 
would have respect for God and for the principles of 
righteousness would not seek to obsess humanity when 
they knew that such obsession would be to their injury 
and contrary to the Divine will. 

Some teachers will probably suggest that this woman 
had hysteria, or that she was somewhat demented. But 
either thought is out of accord with the facts in the case 
as Scripturally set forth, and is quite contrary to the 
words of the Apostle. St. Paul said not a word to the 
young woman, assuming that she was not accountable. 
He addressed the evil spirit as such, and in the name of 
Jesus commanded it to come out of the woman— just as 
our Lord and the Apostles under His instruction had 
frequently cast out these evil spirits.— Mark 5:1-17; 
Matthew 10:1; Luke 10:17, etc. 

THE REVENGE OF THE SYNDICATE 

Just as the owners of the swine were angry with our 
Lord because of the loss of their swine when the legions 
of demons cast out of the man had entered into the animals, 
so it was with the owners of the slave girl. We 
can imagine what consternation was aroused amongst 
them when they found not only that their source of gain 
for the future was gone, but that the large sum of money 
invested in this girl was lost; for such spirit-possessed 
slaves had a high market value. They became desperately 
angry. Nothing will so greatly move men as love or 
selfishness; and under present conditions selfishness moves 
the vast majority with intense power. The syndicate had 
no hope of getting the evil spirit back into the slave; and 
so they must have revenge upon those who had brought 
financial loss to them. 

There is much of this spirit abroad in the world today. 
As long as the Truth and the Lord's servants quietly go 
their way, the world will generally be too busy with its 
own affairs to molest them. But as soon as any perceive 
that truth and righteousness are inimical to their interests 
and prospects, their opposition becomes intense. But we 
do not consider it to be the chief business of the Lord's 
people to stir up the animosity of the world and thus to 
bring persecution upon themselves. As a rule it is best 
that we leave the world to watch its own affairs, while 
we preach the Gospel, not using it as a sledge-hammer 
to break men's hearts, but as the Message of joy, peace, 
love and blessing to those whose hearts, under Divine 
providence, have already been broken, and who have ears 
to hear the Message of the Grace of God. 

Very generally the Apostles pursued as smooth a 
course as principle would permit; and in this instance St. 
Paul very evidently acted under special guidance of the 
Lord. The Apostle's general instruction to the Church is, 
"As much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men." 
(Romans 12:18.) The thought is. Do not go out of your 



way to stir up trouble; but if the Lord in His providence 
permits trouble to arise, be courageous and full of faith 
in Him who has permitted it, that He will overrule it 
for good and to our ultimate benefit. 

Evidently the owners of the Pythoness had influence; 
for they succeeded quickly in arousing a mob determined 
to have revenge upon St. Paul and Silas. The two missionaries 
were carried before the rulers at the market place. 
There the syndicate ignored the truth of the matter 
and raised spurious charges, claiming that the prisoners 
were teaching a religion contrary to the laws of Rome, 
and thus likely to raise sedition. This was contrary to 
the truth; for the Lord's servants went, according to law, 
outside of the city gates for their worship. 

However, under the circumstances, the false charge 
was sufficient to bring down upon the Lord's representatives 
the severest penalties which their judges could inflict. 
The magistrates, who held office especially for the 
preventing of rioting and for preserving order, were 
greatly excited and rent their garments as an indication 
of their distress and dissatisfaction that such a disturbance 
should be brought to their city. The thought was 
that the men against whom the populace would thus rise 
up must be guilty of something and thus deserving of 
punishment. They knew not that the evil spirits had to 
do with the arousing of the riot. As St. Paul elsewhere 
expressed it, "We contend not with flesh and blood 
[merely], but with wicked spirits in influential positions." 

THE MISSIONARIES IMPRISONED 

To satisfy the mob and to restore peace quickly, the 
magistrates ordered the missionaries to be beaten, presumably 
with rods, and then committed them to prison. 
Alas, what a reward for missionary effort! What a recompense 
for sacrificing their lives for the Lord and the 
Truth— that these noble men should be evil-spoken of. 
evil-thought of and evilly treated! 

Let us remember that the God who changes not is our 

R5908 : page 167 

God, and that He has supervision of the interests of the 
Church today as then. Let us remember that He requires 
of us today, as of those missionaries of old, that we be 
willing to represent Him, willing to endure hardness and 
thus to make full proof of our ministry— of our service 
for Christ and His Message. Would it require faith on 
the part of the missionaries to accept such experiences as 
providential and not to think of these as evidences of the 
Lord's disfavor or neglect? So must we learn similar 
lessons of faith in the School of Christ, and be glad to 
follow in the footsteps of Jesus and the Apostles. We 
must learn to rejoice in tribulations as in prosperity. 

The prison was constructed with outer cells, more or 
less accessible to the light and to air, and with an inner 



or central dungeon for the most vicious criminals. It was 
into this inner prison that St. Paul and Silas were thrust, 
and their feet made fast in the stocks. It was under these 
unfavorable circumstances, with their backs raw and 
bleeding from the scourging, that these faithful brethren 
were so filled with the spirit of rejoicing that they gave 
vent to their feelings in hymns of thankfulness for the 
privilege of suffering in connection with the Lord's work 
and of enduring tribulations for righteousness' sake. 

We can readily see that nothing less than a strong, 
living faith in God enabled these two missionaries to feel 
that their adversities endured for the sake of the Gospel 
meant to them the Divine approval, if rightly received. 
They realized that their trying experiences were but "light 
afflictions" which, under Divine providence, would work 
out for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. Only this enabled these mistreated men to triumph 
in their hour of distress and to praise God for the privilege 
of suffering as members of the Body of Christ, filling 
up a share of the sufferings of Christ in order that by 
and by they might also share His glory as members of 
His Body— members of the great antitypical Moses, the 
Mediator of the New Covenant.— Col. 1:24; Acts 3:22. 

These things were written for our instruction, that 
we, beholding the faithfulness of others, might be encouraged. 
Our covenant is the same as theirs, and theirs 
was the same as our Lord's; for the sufferings of Christ 
are one, however varied in character, and the glories to 
follow will be one, although the sharers will differ as star 
differeth from star in glory. The greater the sufferings 
endured faithfully, uncomplainingly, rejoicingly, the 
greater will be the reward in the Kingdom of our Father 
and of our Lord and Savior. 

A WELL-TIMED EARTHQUAKE 

Whilst the missionaries were singing, an earthquake 
shock was experienced which jarred the walls, loosed 
the staples of the chains wherewith they were bound, and 
released the bars whereby their prison doors were held 
in place. The jailer, finding the doors open, supposed 
that the prisoners had escaped. Knowing that he would 
be held responsible, he drew his sword and was about to 
commit suicide, when St. Paul called to him and said, 
"Do thyself no harm. We are all here." 

By this time the jailer was fully convinced that the 
missionaries committed to his care were remarkable men 
—not ordinary criminals. Possibly, indeed, he had some 
knowledge of demonism and obsession, and had heard that 
by word of mouth one of these men had spoiled a supposedly 
Divine oracle, by exercising some superior power. 
At all events he was now ready to care for these prisoners 
and to hear the Message of the Love of God. 

Presumably he first made the prison secure, the while 
thinking over these matters, and then brought the missionaries 
into his own living quarters in the prison. He 



attended to their comfort, and meantime heard from them 
something respecting their mission-respecting Jesus the 
Messiah and His death as the world's Redeemer. The 
jailer was convicted of sin. He realized in a general way 
at least that all mankind are sinners, aliens, separated 
from God by wicked works. He longed for a realization 
of forgiveness of his own sins and for a reconciliation 
with his Creator; and he perceived that these missionaries 
could help him. Hence he inquired, "What must I do 
to be saved?" What must I do to come into relationship 
with God, that I, like you, might be able to realize His 
loving care in all of my affairs; that I, like you, might be 
able to glory in tribulation and to realize that under 
Divine providence all things will work together for my 
good now and hereafter? 

The answer came promptly: "Believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house." 
Taking this statement as a text, the missionaries explained 
to the jailer and his household some of the philosophy of 
the Divine Plan of Atonement— the death of Jesus, the 
Just for the unjust; the blessing that in due time is to 
reach Adam and his race through the resurrection processes 
and the privilege now of hearing and accepting the 
Divine call to joint-heirship with Jesus as His "members" 
in the sufferings of the present and in the glory to follow. 

THE JAILER CONVERTED 

The Truth-seed sank into good soil. Those present 
believed and gratefully accepted the privilege of discipleship 
—to suffer for Christ's sake. Forthwith they were 
baptized, thus symbolizing their death to the world, to sin 
and to self, and their desire to walk in newness of life 
as members of The Christ. How the missionaries must 
have realized that they were as providentially directed to 
the jail by the injustice of the magistrate as they had 
been previously guided to the riverside prayer meeting! 
Thus their faith was strengthened. They were willing to 
endure hardness with patience and joy for the sake of 
the great privilege of carrying the Good Tidings to others. 

According to some standards it was now high time 
for these missionaries to strike for an increase of salary 
and a parsonage, and especially to strike against any 
further persecution, and to tell the Lord that they had had 
enough along the lines of self-sacrifice. But the effect 
was just the opposite. They were the more encouraged 
to go on, to endure still further sufferings. 

As followers of Jesus, we must see to it that our experiences 
tally with those of the Master and His Apostles. 
We must neither look for any other kind of experiences 
nor be satisfied unless we find opportunities of suffering 
for the Truth's sake. We may be assured that, although 
times are somewhat changed, our Lord was quite right 
when He declared through His Apostle, "All that will live 
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Timothy 3: 12.) 
It may be in his own home and family or in 



the Church or from the world; for if he is faithful in 
letting his light shine he will not escape. 

If, therefore, any one of the Lord's people is escaping 
persecution, he should feel fearful of his condition and 
should make careful examination as to whether he is 
faithful to all the privileges and opportunities that he can 
find. This does not mean, however, that we should seek 
persecution in the sense of doing foolish things or of 
doing proper things in a foolish manner. But it does 
mean that we should not shrink from the responsibility 
of proper conduct because of fear of consequences. Fear 
is one of the most subtle foes of the people of God. It 
should be offset by trust, by faith in God. 

R5908 : page 168 

COMPANIONS IN SUFFERING 

The record declares that St. Paul alone rebuked the 
evil spirit. Thus he alone was responsible for the tumult 
which led to the imprisonment of himself and Silas. We 
can readily perceive how Silas might improperly have 
taken a course in opposition. He might have publicly 
reprimanded St. Paul, and at least partially have joined 
with the multitude and thus have escaped arrest, beating 
and imprisonment. We are glad that it was not so with 
Silas, that he was a worthy companion to the noble St. 
Paul. He recognized that the Lord's blessing was upon 
the Apostle, and that St. Paul was being especially used 
of the Lord, and that therefore whatever experiences 
came to them the Lord was both able and willing to overrule 
for their good. 

Thus Silas was privileged to share in the beating, in 
the songs and in the conversion of the jailer. Surely it 
brings a great blessing to have faith in the Lord, and to 
be obedient to Divine providences rather than to be too 
worldly-wise, too cautious and self-seeking. In Hebrews 10:32,33, 
the Apostle mentions some who "endured a great 
fight of afflictions," and some who were merely their companions 
in the shame without experiencing the same losses. 
He points out that God appreciates faithfulness in either 
of these respects and will duly give a reward. Let us be 
faithful to the Lord— followers of His leading and 
sharers of His blessings. 

THE PLIGHT OF THE MAGISTRATES 

The next morning the rulers, having learned something 
of the circumstances of the preceding night, ordered 
the release of the missionaries. Evidently they realized 
that they had no just cause against St. Paul and Silas. 
The beating and the imprisonment of the two were merely 
to satisfy the public clamor— just as when Pilate similarly 
commanded that our Lord be beaten, not as a satisfaction 
of justice, but to appease the anger of the multitude. 
But St. Paul had not been a lawyer for nothing. 



The night before, he had probably attempted to tell the 
rulers that he and Silas were Roman citizens and had the 
right to demand a fair trial before receiving any kind of 
punishment. But the clamor of the mob was probably so 
great that their protests were unheard. 

When the order for their release reached the prison, 
the missionaries sent word to the rulers that they were 
Roman citizens; and that Roman law had been violated 
in three particulars in their case; (1) They had been 
beaten; (2) This had been done publicly; (3) This was 
reprehensible in that they had not been legally condemned. 

ST. PAUL'S SOUNDNESS OF MIND 

These charges against the rulers might have gone hard 
against them. Hence it is not to be wondered at that 
they came to the prison, as the Apostle requested, and 
brought the missionaries forth publicly, thus giving evidence 
to the people that they conceded that an injustice 
had been done on the previous night. This would avoid 
leaving a reproach upon the faith at Philippi. The public 
could not say to the disciples, "Your teachers were tried 
and expelled from this city, and forbidden to return." 

On the other hand, notice the spirit of compromise. 
St. Paul and Silas did not insist on going forth to preach 
in public, and demand that they be given legal protection 
in the exercise of their liberties. On the contrary, they 
concluded that they had accomplished all in their power, 
and that God's providence was now directing them elsewhere. 
They acted upon the Master's counsel, "When 
they persecute you in one city, flee ye into another." 

Tims a peaceful compromise was effected, by which 
the magistrates were relieved from further difficulty and 
the missionaries were honorably led forth as men who 
had done nothing amiss, but who had concluded that in 
the interests of peace they would quit the city, although 
their rights as Roman citizens would have permitted them 
to remain. Some of the Lord's people make the mistake 
of not sufficiently insisting on their rights; and others err 
in the opposite way of insisting too much for their earthly 
rights. Here in St. Paul's case we find illustrated the 
proper course— "the spirit of a sound mind." He insisted 
upon such of his rights as were reasonable and necessary 
for the Lord's Cause; but he freely relinquished other 
rights in the interest of peace, in harmony with his covenant 
of sacrifice and with the Scriptures. 

Before separating the missionaries returned to the 
home of Lydia, where they met the brethren and comforted 
them. What they said for the comfort of the 
brethren is not difficult to imagine. They surely recounted 
the joy which they had experienced in suffering for 
Christ's sake and told how the Lord had overruled their 
trials, difficulties, sufferings and imprisonment for good, 
that thereby the jailer and his family were added to the 
number of brethren. 

Whoever has read the New Testament properly has 



surely noticed the spirit of brotherhood therein recorded 

as prevalent amongst those accepted of the Lord as members 

of the Household of Faith. And whoever intelligently 

comes into contact with those who are now rejoicing 

in the Present Truth must surely note the same spirit 

of brotherhood in a remarkable degree. 



R5908 : page 168 

FINALLY, BRETHREN, THINK! 
-JUNE 25.-QUARTERLY REVIEW- 

THE POWER OF THE MIND, THE WILL-AS A MAN THINKETH, 
SO IS HE-THE POWER OF EVIL THOUGHTS-THE POWER OF 
GOOD THOUGHTS-THINK OF PURE THINGS-NOT EARTHLY 
THINGS -OF THINGS OF GOOD REPORT-OF THINGS OF 
VALUE-OF PRAISEWORTHY THINGS-EACH RESPONSIBLE 
FOR CARE OF HIS OWN MIND. 

Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever 
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever 
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are of good report: if there be 
any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things."— Philippians 4:8. 

COMPARATIVELY few, even of educated and 

scientific people, seem to appreciate the great 

power of the mind and its potent influence 

upon all the affairs of our lives. Few mothers 

realize that their very thoughts have to do 

with the molding of their unborn children 

—giving them either helpful or injurious 

dispositions. Few fathers realize this, or 

seek to cooperate with their wives in the 

bringing forth of noble children— by stirring 

up the minds of their wives during pregnancy with 

noble thoughts, elevating ambitions, high ideals, with 

things of beauty, grace, art, purity, reverence, spirituality. 

When people come to know the power of the mother's 

mind for good or for evil toward the children, it will undoubtedly 

work a radical change in many homes; for it 

is our conviction that the majority of people would rather 

do right than do wrong, and that one of their chief difficulties 

and stumbling blocks is ignorance. 

But while interested in mankind in general, we are 
never to forget that the Bible is addressed to the children 
of God, who have entered into a special covenant with 

R5908 : page 169 

Him through the Lord Jesus Christ, and who have become 
New Creatures through the begetting power of the 
Holy Spirit. The world will be taught and developed 



during the Millennium. But now, in the present life, the 
only opportunity for development is on the part of those 
who have received the begetting of the Holy Spirit, and 
whose great and only hope is a perfecting on the spirit 
plane in the Resurrection of the Just. As much, therefore, 
as we feel interested in the world, it is the Christian's 
duty to follow the example of the Lord and to be interested 
especially in his fellows, his brethren in Christ. 

THE POWER OF THOUGHT 

The Apostle's exhortation may be taken as a personal 
one by every Christian, and also as a general exhortation 
to the whole Church— that they seek to build one another 
up in the most holy faith and along the lines indicated in 
our Golden Text. 

Each individual is responsible for the care of his own 
mind. In becoming Christians we gave our wills to the 
Lord, agreeing that henceforth we would not follow the 
dictates of our wills; but that, ignoring these, we would 
follow the guidance of the Lord's will. It was on this 
condition that the Lord received us into His family; and 
any failure to follow these terms is contrary to our covenant. 
The Lord through His Word gives us the necessary 
instructions as to what His will is; and these messages, 
received into good and honest hearts, bring forth 
fruitage of obedience, and this leads on to the development 
of the fruits of the spirit. 

"As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." Many 
Christians have learned to govern their actions, to refrain 
from carnal strife. Many have learned to control their 
tongues in a measure, remembering that the same tongue 
with which we praise God could be used in doing injury 
to fellow creatures, as the Apostle points out. (James 3:1-10.) 
But restraint of conduct and of word is difficult 
unless the mind, the will, be brought into the line with 
the will of God. Hence God shows us the reason for 
what He requires, and sets before us exceeding great and 
precious promises. These are intended to work in us— 
to work in our minds and to work out in our words and 
actions the Lord's good pleasure, the Lord's will. 

QUESTIONS FOR SELF-EXAMINATION 

The Apostle, in our Golden Text, points out the proper 
course for us to take in getting control of ourselves, our 
thoughts, our words and our conduct. Every thought 
should be challenged; for if an evil thought or a selfish 
thought or a mean thought, a depraved thought, be admitted, 
it will germinate and bring forth a great defilement, 
which will affect our words and our conduct, and 
will extend to others. We may learn to do the challenging 
readily, even along the comprehensive lines which the 
Apostle lays down in this lesson. What at first may require 
considerable time for decision will by and by be 
decided almost instantly: 



(1) Is the thought which is seeking consideration in 
our mind an honorable one? If so, it may pass in and 

be entertained. If not, it should be immediately resented 
and driven out from the mind as an evil influence. 

(2) Is the thought suggested a pure one— not sensual, 
not selfish? If so, if it pass these examinations, it 
may pass on for further consideration. If by these it 
fails to prove its purity, it should be immediately resented 
as a thought likely to do great harm— as would the entrance 
into our home of things infected with a plague. 

(3) Is the thought lovely? Does it appertain to 

things that are lovable? Does it excite lovable influences, 
or is it identified more or less with hate, resentment, anger, 

R5909 : page 169 

malice? If lovely, it may pass on. If not, it must be immediately 
expelled, not permitted to go further, to do 
harm to ourselves and to others. 

(4) Is it reputable? This cannot mean: Is the thing 
well spoken of by the world? For the Apostle himself 
and our Lord Jesus were reviled by the world, who said 

all manner of evil against them falsely. The word reputable 
here must be taken to mean that which would be 
thought well of by all reputable people, if they knew and 
understood everything connected with the thought. 

(5) Has the thought any virtue, or is it in any sense 
of the word praiseworthy? If so, it may be admitted. 
If not, it should be repelled; for even if it be blameless 
otherwise, the fact that it is not of any value is a reason 
for its rejection. We have no time and no place for 
things that are merely not bad. We desire to have in 
our hearts and our minds things that are positively good, 
helpful, beneficial in some way. Otherwise, the thought 
should be repelled as a mere cumberer of the ground of 
our hearts, of our minds, needed for profitable things. 
Much novel reading is of this character— not evil, but 
not advantageous, not upbuilding. 

Whatever we may be naturally, the people of God who 
follow the instructions of the Divine Word surely become 
noble people, helpful people, possessed of the spirit of a 
sound mind; and these things will be only a part of their 
preparation for the Kingdom and for the great work then 
to be entrusted to them as the servants of God under 
their Redeemer and Head. 



R5909: page 169 

THE SCOPE OF THE ABRAHAM IC COVENANT 

Question.— Which is the greater, the Abrahamic Covenant 
or the New Covenant? 

Answer.— The Abrahamic Covenant is an all-embracing 
arrangement. Everything that God has done and will 



yet do for our race is included in that Abrahamic Covenant. 

The Law Covenant of Israel was added to this 

Covenant "because of trangression." Although only a 

typical arrangement, nevertheless the Law Covenant developed 

a certain faithful class, to be made "princes in 

all the earth" during the Millennial Age. This Covenant 

was represented by Hagar; and her son Ishmael 

represented the nation of Israel. (Galatians 4:21-31.) 

The Christ, the New Creation class, was represented in 

Isaac, Sarah's son. Sarah, Abraham's first wife, represented 

that part of the Abrahamic Covenant which pertained 

to the Spiritual Seed, the New Creation, that which 

we sometimes speak of as the Sarah Covenant. This 

Sarah Covenant— the Grace Covenant, the Covenant of 

Sacrifice (Psalm 50:5)— brings forth the Isaac class, 

the Church, head and Body. 

Even as Isaac was not born after the flesh in the 
ordinary sense (Abraham and Sarah being too old naturally), 
but was a special creation, so with The Christ 
company, the Church. This "Isaac" class is developed 
as a distinctly new creation, formed from members of the 
fallen human race. The Divine invitation to these is to 
present their bodies living sacrifices. They sacrifice their 
human nature that they may attain with their Head, the 
antitypical "Isaac" the Divine nature— something never 
before offered. After this New Creation is completed, 
the blessing indicated in God's Promises to Abraham will 
reach all the families of the earth. It will teach them, 
first through the "Isaac" Seed, the New Creation, and 
secondly, through the Ancient Worthies developed in the 
Ages preceding this Age, under God's typical arrangements. 

All kindreds and families of the earth will be blessed 

R5909 : page 170 

by the privilege or opportunity to become children of Abraham, 
children of God, whom Abraham represented in a 
figure. "I have made thee a father of many nations 
(Genesis 17:5; Romans 4: 17), said the Lord to Abraham 
—"In becoming thy seed shall all the nations of the 
earth bless themselves." These will be blessed under the 
New covenant, an arrangement whereby the Abrahamic 
Covenant will be fulfilled as relates to Israel and to all. 

The Abrahamic Covenant, then, embraces all the other 
Covenants, those Covenants being merely different features 
of God's arrangements by which the work implied 
in the great Abrahamic Covenant or Promise is to be 
accomplished. 

As we have elsewhere previously shown, Abraham took 
another wife, after the death of Sarah— Keturah. By her 
he had many sons and daughters. Thus the New Covenant 
is typed and its grand work of bringing many to life 
—to "the liberty of the sons of God."— Romans 8: 1 9,2 1 . 



R5909: page 170 

HARVEST GATHERINGS AND SIFTINGS 

MANY are the inquiries relative to the truths presented 

in the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and 

THE WATCH TOWER, as to whence they came 

and how they developed to their present symmetrical 

and beautiful proportions. Were they 

the results of visions? Did God in some supernatural 

way grant the solution of these hitherto 

hidden mysteries of His Plan? Is the 

author of these writings more than an ordinary 

being? Does he claim supernatural wisdom or 

power? Or how comes this revelation of 

God's Truth? 

No, dear friends; we claim nothing of superiority; nor do 
we aspire to exalt ourself in the estimation of our brethren 
of the Household of Faith, except in the sense that the Master 
urged it, saying, "Whosoever will be chief among you let 
him be your servant." (Matthew 20:27.) Our position 
amongst men of the world and of the Nominal Church, is 
certainly far from exalted; for we are everywhere spoken 
against. We are fully content, however, to wait for exaltation, 
until the Lord's due time. (1 Peter 5:6.) In the words 
of the Apostle, we therefore answer, "Why look ye upon us, 
as though by our own power we had done these things?" 
We also are a man of like passions with yourselves, of like 
infirmities and frailties, earnestly striving by overcoming many 
besetments, discouragements, etc., to press along the line toward 
the Prize of our High Calling, and claiming only, as a 
faithful student of the Word of God, to be an index finger, as 
we have previously expressed it, to help you trace for yourselves 
upon the sacred page the wonderful Plan of God— no 
less wonderful to us, we assure you, than to yourselves. 

No, the truths we present, were revealed in visions 
and dreams or by God's audible voice; nor were 
they revealed all at once, but gradually, especially since 1870, 
and particularly since 1880. This present unfolding of Truth 
is not due to human ingenuity or acuteness of perception, but 
to the simple fact that God's due time has come; and if we 
did not speak, and no other agent could be found, the very 
stones would cry out. 

We give the following history, not only because we have 
been urged to give a review of God's leadings in the path 
of light, but especially because we believe it to be needful that 
the truth be modestly told, in order that misapprehensions and 
prejudicial misstatements may be disarmed, and that our 
readers may see all along the way the Lord has helped 
and guided us. In so far as the names and views of others 
who have parted company with us may be associated with this 
history, we shall endeavor to bring forward only such points 
as are necessary to an understanding of our position and of 
the Lord's leadings. Nor can we name all the little points 
of Divine favor to which was tested, prayers were answered, 
etc., remembering that our Master and the early 



Church left no such example of boasting faith, but admonished 
otherwise, saying, "Hast thou faith, have it to thyself." 

We will not go back to tell how the light began to break 
through the clouds of prejudice and superstition which enveloped 
the world under Papacy's rule in the Dark Ages. The 
Reformation movement, or rather movements, from then until 
now, have done their share in bringing light out of darkness. 
But we will here confine ourselves to the consideration of the 
Harvest truths set forth in the publications of the THE WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY formerly called MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER, now called STUDIES EST THE 
SCRIPTURES and THE WATCH TOWER. We begin the narrative 
at the year 1868, when Editor, having been a consecrated 
child of God for some years, and a member of the Congregational 
Church and of the Y.M.C.A., began to be shaken in 
faith regarding many long accepted doctrines. 

SKETCH OF DEVELOPMENT OF PRESENT TRUTH 

Brought up a Presbyterian, indoctrinated from the Catechism, 
and being naturally of an inquiring mind, I fell a ready 
prey to the logic of infidelity, as soon as I began to think 
for myself. But that which at first threatened to be the utter 
shipwreck of faith in God and the Bible, was, under God's 
providence, overruled for good, and merely wrecked my confidence 
in human creeds and systems of Bible misinterpretations. 

I was led gradually to see though each of the creeds 
contained some elements of truth, they were, on the whole, 
misleading and contradictory of God's Word. Among other 
theories, stumbled upon Adventism. Seemingly by accident, 
one evening I dropped into a dusty, dingy hall in Allegheny, 
Pa., where I had heard that religious services were held, to 
see if the handful who met there had anything more sensible 
to offer than the creeds of the great churches. There, for the 
first time, I heard something of the views of Second Adventism, 
by Jonas Wendell, long since deceased. Thus I confess 
indebtedness to Adventists as well as to other denominations. 

Though his Scripture exposition was not entirely clear, 
and though it was very far from what we now rejoice in, 
it was sufficient, under God, to reestablish my wavering faith 
in the Divine inspiration of the Bible, and to show that the 
records of the Apostles and the Prophets are indissolubly 
linked. What I heard sent me to my Bible to study with 
more zeal and care than ever before, and I shall ever thank 
the Lord for the leading; for although Adventism helped me 
to no single truth, it did help me greatly in the unlearning of 
errors, and thus prepared me for the Truth. 

FIRST FAINT GLEAM OF GOD'S PLAN 

I soon began to see that we were living somewhere near 
the close of the Gospel Age, near the time when the Lord 
declared that the wise, watching ones of His children should 
come to clear knowledge of His Plan. At this time, myself 
and a few other Truth seekers in Pittsburg and Allegheny, 
formed a class for Bible study; and the period from 



1870 to 1875 was a time of constant growth in grace, in 
knowledge and in love of God and his Word. We came to 
see something of God's love, how it had made provision for 
all mankind, how all must be awakened from the tomb in 
order that God's loving Plan might be tested to them, and 
how all who will then exercise faith in Christ's redemptive 
work and will render obedience in harmony with their knowledge 
of God's will, might then, through Christ's merit, be 
brought back into full harmony with God, and be granted 
everlasting life. This we saw to be the Restitution work 
foretold in Acts 3:21. 

But though seeing that the Church was called to jointheirship 
with the Lord in the Millennial Kingdom, we had up 
to that time failed to see clearly the great distinction between 
the rewards of the Church now on trial and the reward of the 
faithful of the world after its trial, at the close of the Millennial 
Age— that the reward of the former is to be the glory 
of the spiritual. Divine nature, while that of the latter is to 
be the glory of Restitution— restoration to the perfection of 
human nature, once enjoyed in Eden by the head of the race. 

However, we were then merely getting the outlines of 
God's Plan and unlearning many cherished errors, the time 
for the clear discernment of the minutia not having fully 
come. And here I gratefully mention assistance rendered 
by Brothers George Stetson and George Storrs, the latter the 
Editor of The bible Examiner, both now deceased. The study 
of the Word of God with these dear brethren led step by 
step into greener pastures and brighter hopes for the world, 
though it was not until 1872, when I gained a clear view of 
our Lord's work as our Ransom-price, that I found the 
foundation of all hope of Restitution to lie in the doctrine. 

Up to that time, when I read the testimony that all in 
their grave shall come forth, etc., I yet doubted the full 
provision— whether or not it would be understood to include 
idiots and infants who had died without reaching any degree 
of understanding, beings to whom the present life and its 
experiences would seem to have been of little advantage. 
But when in 1872 I came to examine the subject of Restitution 
from the standpoint of the Ransom-price given by our 
Lord Jesus for Adam and consequently for all lost in Adam, 
it settled the matter of Restitution completely, and gave me 
the fullest assurance that ALL must come forth from their 
graves and be brought to a clear knowledge of the Truth 
and to a full opportunity to gain everlasting life through Christ. 

R5909:page 171 

Thus passed the years 1868-1872. The years following, to 
1876, were years of continued growth in grace and in knowledge 
on the part of the handful of Bible students with whom 
I met in Allegheny. We progressed from our first crude and 
indefinite ideas of Restitution to clearer understanding of 
the details; but God's due time for clear light had not yet come. 

During this time, too, we came to recognize the difference 
between our lord as "the man who gave Himself," and as 
the One who would come again, a spirit being. We saw that 



spirit beings can be present and yet invisible to men, just as 

we still hold and have set forth in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 

Vol.2, Chapter 5. And we felt greatly grieved at the error 

of Second Adventists, who were expecting Christ in the flesh 

and were teaching that the world and all in it except Second 

Aventists would be burned up in 1873 or 1874 and whose 

time settings and disappointments and crude ideas generally 

of the object and manner of our Lord's coming brought more 

or less reproach upon us and upon all who longed for and 

proclaimed His coming Kingdom. 

CHRONOLOGY SEEN TO BE VALUABLE 

These wrong views so generally held of both the object 
and manner of Christ's Second Advent, led me to write a 
pamphlet: "The Object and Manner of the Lord's return," 
of which some 50,000 copies were published. 

It was about January of 1876 that my attention was especially 
drawn to the subject of prophetic time, as it refers 
to these doctrines and hopes. It came about in this way: 
I received a paper called. The Herald of the Morning, 
sent by its Editor, Mr. N. H. Barbour. When I opened it, 
I at once identified it with Adventism from the picture on 
its cover; and I examined it with some curiosity to see what 
time the Adventists would next set for the burning of the 
world. But judge of my surprise and gratification when I 
learned from its contents that the Editor was beginning to 
get his eyes open on the subjects that for some years had so 
greatly rejoiced our hearts in our class in Allegheny— that 
the object of our Lord's Return is not to destroy, but to 
bless all the families of the earth: and that His Coming 
would be thief-like, and not in flesh, but as a spirit being, 
invisible to men; and that the gathering of His Church and 
the separation of the "wheat" from the "tares" would progress 
in the end of this Age without the world's being aware of it. 

I rejoiced to find others coming to the same advanced 
position, but was astonished to find the statement very cautiously 
set forth, that the Editor of The Herald of the Morning 
believed the prophecies to indicate that the Lord was 
already present in the world unseen and invisible that the 
Harvest work of gathering the wheat and tares was already 
due; and that this view was warranted by the time prophecies 
which but a few months before he had supposed had failed. 

Here was a new thought: Could it be that the time 
prophecies, which I had so long despised, because of their 
misuse by Adventists, were really meant to indicate when 
the Lord would be invisibly present to set up His Kingdom?— 
a thing which I clearly saw could be known in no other way. 
It seemed, to say the least, a very reasonable thing to expect 
that the Lord would inform His people on the subject, especially 
as He had promised that the faithful should not be 
left in darkness with the world, and that although "the Day 
of the Lord" would come upon others as a thief in the night 
(stealthily, unawares), nevertheless it should not be so to the 
watchers, the earnest saints.— 1 Thessalonians 5:4. 

I recalled certain arguments used by my friend Jonas 



Wendell and by other Adventists to prove that 1873 would 
witness the burning of the world, etc.— the chronology of 
the world showing that the six thousand years from Adam 
ended with the beginning of 1873— and other arguments drawn 
from the Scriptures and supposed to coincide. Could it be 
that these time arguments, which I had passed by as unworthy 
of attention, contained as important truth which the 
Adventists had misapplied? 

AN IMPORTANT DISCOVERY 

Anxious to learn from any quarter, whatever God had 
to teach, I at once wrote to Mr. Barbour, informing him of 
my harmony on other points and desiring to know particularly 
why, and upon what Scriptural evidence, he held that 
Christ's presence and the Harvest of the Gospel Age dated 
from autumn of 1874. The answer showed that my surmise 
had been correct; namely, that the time arguments, 
chronology, etc., were same as used by Second Adventists 
in 1873. It also explained that Mr. Barbour and Mr. J. H. 
Paton, of Michigan, a worker with him, had been regular 
Second Adventists up to that time; and that when the date of 
1874 had passed without the world's being burned up, and 
without their seeing Christ in the flesh, they were for a time 
dumbfounded. They had examined the time prophecies which 
had seemingly passed unfulfilled, and had been unable to find 
any flaw. Therefore they began to wonder whether the time 
was right and their expectations were wrong— whether the 
views of Restitution and blessing to the world, which others 
were teaching, might not be the things to look for. 

It seemed that not long after their 1874 disappointment, a 
reader of The Herald of the Morning, who had a copy of 
the Emphatic Diaglott, noticed something in it which he 
thought peculiar-that in Matthew 24:27,37,39, the Greek 
word parousia, which in our Common Version is rendered 
"coming," is in the Diaglott translated "presence"— evidently 
the correct translation of the Greek. This was the clue; and 
following it, they had been led through prophetic time toward 
proper views regarding the object and manner of our Lord's 
Return, and then to the examination of the time when the 
things indicated in God's Word as related to Christ's Parousia 
should take place. Thus God leads His children often from 
different starting points of Truth. But where heart is 
earnest and trustful, the results must be to draw all together. 

There were no books nor other publications setting forth 
the time prophecies as then understood. So I paid Mr. Barbour's 
expenses to come to see me at Philadelphia (where I 
had business engagements during the summer of 1876), to 
show me fully and Scripturally, if he could, that the prophecies 
indicated 1874 as the date at which the Lord's presence 
and the Harvest began. He came; and the evidence satisfied 
me. Being a person of positive convictions, and fully consecrated 
to the Lord, I at once saw that the special times in 
which we live have an important bearing upon our duty and 
work as Christ's disciples; that since we are living in the 
time of the Harvest, the Harvest work should be done; and 



that Present Truth is the sickle by which the Lord would 
have us do a reaping work everywhere among His children. 

I inquired of Mr. Barbour as to what was being done by 
him and The Herald. He replied that nothing was being done; 
that nearly all the readers of the The Herald, being disappointed 
Adventists, had lost interest and stopped their subscriptions; 
and that thus, with money exhausted. The Herald might be 
said to be practically suspended. I told him that instead of 
being discouraged and giving up the work since his newly 
found light on Restitution (for when we first met, he had 
much to learn from me on the fulness of Restitution, based 
upon the sufficiency of the Ransom given for all, as I had 
much to learn from him concerning time), he should rather 
feel that now he had some "good tidings" to preach, such as 
he never had had before; and that his zeal should be correspondingly 
increased. At the same time, the knowledge of 
the fact that we were already in the Harvest period gave 
to me an impetus to spread the Truth such as I never had 
had before. I therefore resolved upon a vigorous campaign 
for the Lord and the Truth. 

THE BEGINNING OF THE HARVEST WORK 

I determined to curtail my business cares and give my 
time as well as my means to the great Harvest work. Accordingly, 
I sent Mr. Barbour back to his home with money 
and instructions to prepare in concise book form the Good 
Tidings so far as then understood, including the time features, 
while I closed out my Philadelphia business preparatory 
to engaging in the work, traveling and preaching. 

The little book of 196 pages, thus prepared, was entitled. 
The Three Worlds, and while it was not the first book to 
teach a measure of Restitution, nor the first to treat of time 
prophecy, it was, I believe, the first to combine the idea of 
Restitution with time prophecy. From the sale of this book 
and from my purse our traveling expenses were met. After 
a time I conceived the idea of adding another Harvest laborer, 
and sent for Mr. Paton, who promptly responded and whose 
traveling expenses were met in the same way. 

By noticing how quickly people seemed to forget what 
they had heard, it became evident to us that, while the 
meetings were useful in awakening interest, a monthly journal 
was needed to hold and develop that interest. It therefore 
seemed to be the Lord's will that one of us should 
settle somewhere and begin again the regular issuing of The 
Herald of the Morning. I suggested that Mr. Barbour do 
this, as he had experience as a type-setter, and could therefore 
do it more economically; while Mr. Paton and I would 
continue to travel and contribute to its columns as we should 
find opportunity. To the objection that type was now 
sold, and that the new subscriptions that would come in would 
not for a long time make the journal self-sustaining, I replied 
that I would furnish the money for purchasing type, 
etc., and leave a few hundred dollars in bank subject to Mr. 
Barbour's check, and that he should manage this as economically 
as possible, while Mr. Paton and I would continue 



to travel. This seemed to be the Lord's will in the 
matter, was done. 
It was after this, while a tour of the New England 

R5909 : page 172 

states that I met Mr. A. P. Adams, than a young Methodist 

minister, who became deeply interested and accepted the 

Message heartily during the week that I preached to his congregation. 

Subsequently I introduced him to little gatherings 

of interested ones in neighboring towns, and assisted 

otherwise, as I could, rejoicing in another who, with study, 

would soon be a colaborer in the Harvest field. About this 

time, too, I was much encouraged by the accession of Mr. 

A. D. Jones, then a clerk in my employ in Pittsburgh— a 

young man of activity and promise, who soon developed into 

an active and appreciated colaborer in the Harvest work, and 

is remembered by some of our older readers. Mr. Jones ran 

well for a time; but ambition or something else eventually 

worked utter shipwreck of his faith, and left us a painful 

illustration of the wisdom of the Apostle's words: "My 

brethren be not many of you teachers, knowing that we shall 

have a severer judgment. "—James 3:1, Diaglott. 

SIFTING AS WHEAT 

"Satan hath desired to have you, that he might sift you as 
wheat."— Luke 22:31. 

Until then all had run smoothly onward. We had been 
greatly blessed with the Truth, but not especially tested in 
our love and fidelity to it. But with the summer of 1878, the 
parallel in time to our Lord's crucifixion and His utterance 
of the above quoted words, the sifting began which has 
continued ever since, and which must, sooner or later, test 
every one who receives the light of Present Truth. 

"Think it not strange concerning the fiery trials which 
shall try you, as though some strange thing happened to you"; 
for "the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is"— 
whether he has built his faith flimsily of wood, hay and 
stubble, instead of with the valuable stones of God's revealed 
Truth' or whether he has built it upon the shifting 
sands of human theories (Evolution, etc.) or has built it 
upon the solid rock, the Ransom, the only sure foundation, 
which God has provided. They who would build upon that Rock 
shall be saved personally, even though they may have built 
up an illogical faith, which the "fire" and shaking of this 
Day of trial shall overthrow and utterly consume. But they 
who have built upon any other foundation, whether they 
have used good or bad materials, are sure of complete wreck. 
-Luke 6:47-49; 1 Corinthians 3:1 1-15. 

The object of this trial and sifting evidently is to select 
all whose heart desires are unselfish, who are fully and unreservedly 
consecrated to the Lord; who are so desirous of 
having the Lord's will done, and whose confidence in His 
wisdom. His way and His Word is so great, that they refuse 
to be led away from the Lord's Word, either by the sophistries 



of others or by plans and ideas of their own. These 
in this sifting time will be strengthened and will increase 
their joy in the Lord and their knowledge of His plans, even 
while their faith is being tested by the falling into error of 
thousands on every hand.— Psalm 91:7. 

The sifting began: It was regarding St. Paul's statement 
(1 Corinthians 15:51,52), "We shall not all sleep, but 
we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye," etc. We still held the idea which Adventists, and indeed 
all Christians, hold, that at some time the living saints 
would be suddenly and miraculously caught away bodily. 
thenceforth to be with the Lord. And now our acquaintance 
with time prophecy led us to expect this translation 
of the saints at the point of time in this Age parallel to 
the Lord's resurrection; for many of the parallelisms between 
the Jewish and Christian dispensations were already seen by 
us, and formed one of the features of the little book above 
referred to— The Three Worlds. 

We did not see then as we do now (see STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. III., Chapter 7), that April, 1878, marked the 
time for the beginning of the establishment of the Kingdom 
of God, by the glorification of all who were already asleep 
in Christ; and that the "change" which St. Paul mentions in 
1 Corinthians 15:51 is to occur in the moment of dying 
to all the class described, from that date onward through the 
Harvest period, until all the living members ("the feet") of 
the body of Christ shall have been changed to glorious spirit 
beings. But when, at that date, nothing occurred which we 
could see, a reexamination of the matter showed me that our 
mistake lay in expecting to see all the living saints changed 
at once, and without dying— an erroneous view shared in by 
the whole Nominal Church, one which we had not yet recognized 
as an error and discarded. 

Our present clear view was the result of the examination 
thus started. I soon saw that in the Apostle's words, "We 
shall not all sleep," the word sleep was not synonymous with 
die, though generally so understood; that, on the contrary, 
the expression "sleep" here used represents unconsciousness; 
and that the Apostle wished us to understand that from a 
certain time in the Lord's presence. His saints, though they 
would all die like men (Psalm 82:6,7), would not remain 
for any time unconscious, but in the moment of dying would 
be "changed," and would receive the spirit body promised. 
Throughout this Gospel Age, dying has been followed by 
unconsciousness, "sleep" This continued true of all true 
saints who fell "asleep in Jesus," up to the time when He 
took the office of King (Revelation 11:17), which we have 
shown was in the spring of 1878. See STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. II., pp. 212-219. 

Not only did the king at that date awaken in His likeness 
all the members of his body, the Church, who slept, but for 
the same reason (the time for establishing the Kingdom having 
come) it is no longer necessary that the "feet" or last 
remaining members go into "sleep," or unconsciousness. On 
the contrary, each now, as he finishes his course, faithful 
unto death, will at once receive the Crown of Life, and being 



changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, cannot be 

said to sleep, or be unconscious at all. Here— 1878— Revelation 14:13 

became applicable: "Blessed are the dead who die 

in the Lord from henceforth." 

So this reexamination showed further light upon the 
pathway and became a good cause for encouragement, as 
evidencing the Lord's continued leading. 

DENYING THE RANSOM 

But while thus helped to clearer views and brighter 
hopes, and while I diligently endeavored to help others, the 
spring of 1878 proved far from a blessing to Mr. Barbour 
and to many under his influence. Rejecting the plain, simple 
solution presented above, Mr. Barbour seemed to feel that 
he must of necessity get up something new to divert attention 
from the failure of the living saints to be caught away. 
But alas, how dangerous it is for any man to feel too much 
responsibility and to attempt to force new light! To our 
painful surprise, Mr. Barbour soon after wrote an article 
for The Herald denying the doctrine of the Atonement- 
denying that the death of Christ was the Ransom-price for 
Adam and his race, saying that our Lord's death could no 
more avail for the payment of the penalty of Man's sins than 
would the sticking of a pin through the body of a fly and 
causing it suffering and death be considered by an earthly 
parent as a just settlement for misdemeanor in his child. I 
was astonished; for I supposed that Mr. Barbour had a clear 
understanding of the work of Christ as our Sin- Offering, 
our willing Redeemer, who gladly cooperating in the Divine 
Plan, gave Himself as the Ransom, or corresponding price, 
to meet the penalty upon Adam, that Adam and all his posterity 
might in due time go free from sin and death. 

A totally different thing indeed was the willing, intelligent, 
loving offering of our Redeemer, according to the Plan devised 
and revealed by Infinite Wisdom, from the miserable 
caricature of the Ransom offered in Mr. Barbour's illustration. 
Either I had given Mr. Barbour credit for clearer views 
than he ever had, or else he was deliberately taking off and 
casting away the Wedding Garment of Christ's righteousness. 
The latter was the only conclusion left; for he afterwards 
stated that he had previously recognized Christ's death as 
man's Ransom. 

Immediately I wrote an article for The Herald in contradiction 
of the error, showing the necessity that "One die for 
all," "the Just for the unjust"; that Christ had fulfilled all 
this as had been written; and consequently God could be 
just and forgive and release the sinner from the very penalty 
which He had justly imposed. (Romans 3:26.) I also wrote 
to Mr. Paton, calling his attention to the fundamental character 
of the doctrines assailed, and pointing out the time 
and circumstances all corresponded with the parable of the 
one who took off the wedding garment when just about to 
partake of the wedding feast.— Matthew 22:1 1-14. 

Mr. Paton replied that he had not seen the matter in so 
strong a light before; for Mr. Barbour had a strong, dogmatic 



way of putting things which had for the time over-balanced 
him. I urged that, seeing now the importance of 
the doctrine, he also wrote and article for The Herald, which 
in no uncertain tone would give his witness also for the 
precious blood of Christ. This he did. These articles appeared 
in The Herald from July to December, 1878. 

"THE WATCH TOWER" BEGUN 

It now became clear to me that the Lord would no longer 
have me assist financially, or be in any way identical with, 
anything which cast an influence in opposition to the fundamental 
principle of our holy religion. Therefore, after a 
most careful though unavailing effort to reclaim the erring. 
I withdrew entirely from The Herald of the Morning, and 
from further fellowship with Mr. Barbour. But a mere withdrawal 
I felt was not sufficient to show my continued loyalty 
to our Lord and Redeemer whose cause had thus been violently 

R5909 : page 173 

assailed by one in a position to lead the sheep stray— 
and in that position, too, very largely by my individual assistance 
and encouragement, when 1 believed him to be, in all 
sincerity, true to the Lord. I therefore understood it to be 
the Lord's will that I should start another journal, in which 
the standard of the Cross should be lifted high, the doctrine 
of the Ransom defended and the Good Tidings of great joy 
proclaimed as extensively as possible. 

Acting upon this leading of the Lord, I gave up traveling, 
and in July, 1879, the first number of THE WATCH TOWER 
AND HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE made its appearance. 
From the first, it has been a special advocate of the Ransom; 
and, by the grace of God, we hope it will be so to the end. 

For a time we had a most painful experience. The readers 
of THE WATCH TOWER and of The Herald were the same; 
and from the time the former started, and the supply of funds 
from this quarter for The Herald ceased, Mr. Barbour not 
only drew from the bank the money deposited by me and 
treated all he had in his possession as his own, but poured 
upon the Editor of THE WATCH TOWER the vilest of personal 
abuse, in order to prevent THE WATCH TOWER and the doctrine 
of the Ransom from having due influence upon the 
readers. This, of course, caused a division, as such things 
always do. The personal abuse, being regarded by some as 
true, had its intended effect of biasing the judgments of many 
on the subject of the Ransom; and many turned from us. 

OTHERS REPUDIATE THE RANSOM 

But the Lord continued His favor, which we esteem more 
valuable than the favor of the whole world. It was this 
time that Mr. Adams espoused the views of Mr. Barbour, and 
likewise forsook the doctrine of the Ransom. And true to 
our interpretation of the parable of the Wedding Garment, 
as given at the time, Mr. Barbour and Mr. Adams, having 



cast off the Wedding Garment of Christ's Righteousness, went 
out of the light into the darkness of the world on the subjects 
once so clearly seen; namely, the time and manner of 
the Lord's presence; from that time, onward, they expected 
Christ, Spring or Fall, down to the Spring of 1892, which 
was their latest disappointment, so far as we heard.* 



*Mr. Barbour died some years after this article first appeared 
in print. 



During this ordeal, or we might truly call it, battle for 
the cause of Christ, we had the earnest cooperation of Mr. 
Pat on, who, up to the Summer of 1881, was an appreciated 
colaborer and defender of the doctrine of coming blessings 
through Christ, based upon the Ransom for all given at Calvary. 
The book, the Three Worlds, having been for some 
time out of print, it seemed as if either another edition or a 
new book covering the same features should be gotten out. 

Mr. Paton agreed to get it ready for the press; and Mr. 
Jones offered to pay all the expenses incident to its printing 
and binding and to give Mr. Paton as many copies of the 
book as he could sell, as remuneration for his time spent 
in preparing the matter, provided I would agree to advertise 
it liberally and gratuitously in THE WATCH TOWER. (For this 
reason, Mr. Jones' address was, probably, the only one mentioned 
in our advertisement of it.) He well knew that there 
would be a demand for it if I should recommend it, and that 
his outlay would be sure to return with profit (for those 
books did not sell at such very low prices as we charge for 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES). I not only agreed to this, 
but contributed to Mr. Paton's personal expenses in connection 
with the publishing, and as well paid part of the printer's 
bill, at his solicitation. 

STILL FURTHER SIFTINGS 

In the end, I alone was at any financial loss in connection 
with the book. Day Dawn, the writer and the publisher both 
being gainers financially, while I did all the introducing by 
repeated advertisements. We need to give these particulars 
because of certain misrepresentations and one-sided and partial 
statements of acts which were afterward published and 
circulated in tract form by Mr. Paton, who also became later 
an advocate of the "other Gospel," of which the Cross of 
Christ is not the center, and which denies that He "bought us 
with His own precious blood." (Galatians 1:6-9.) Mr. Paton 
afterward published another book, which though called by 
the same name as the one I introduced, was on another and 
false foundation, which I could not and did not recommend, 
but which I esteemed misleading sophistry, tending to undermine 
the whole structure of the Christian system, yet retaining 
a sufficiency of the truths which we once held in common to 
make it palatable and dangerous to all not rooted and 
grounded upon the Ransom Rock. 

The false foundation which this later Day Dawn presented 
is the old heathen doctrine of Evolution, renamed, which not 



only denies the fall of man, but, as a consequence, all necessity 

of a redeemer. It claimed on the contrary, that not by 

Redemption and Restitution to a lost estate, but by progressive 

evolution, or development, man has risen and is still to 

rise from the lower condition in which he was created until, 

by his own good works, he ultimately reaches the Divine nature. 

Mr. Paton claimed that our blessed Lord Himself was 

a degraded and imperfect man, whose work on earth was to 

crucify a carnal nature (which it was claimed He possessed), 

and to thus show all men how to crucify their carnal or sinful 

propensities. 

And here we remark that the darkness and degradation 
which came upon the whole world in its fallen, cast-off condition, 
and which was only intensified by Papacy's priestcraft 
during the Dark Ages, when contrasted with the light of intelligence 
which God is now letting in upon the world, have 
gradually led men to esteem present intelligence as merely a 
part of the process of evolution. This view, as we have shown 
in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. I., p. 162, though quite 
incorrect, is nevertheless the occasion of the great predicted 
falling away from the faith in the Bible during this Harvest 
period. (Psalm 91:7.) And few Christian people seem to be 
well enough grounded in the Truth to be able to withstand 
this trial of this "evil day," in which many will fall, while 
only the few will stand. 

The little history of the way Mr. Paton came to turn from 
us and from the Ransom to oppose that which he once clearly 
saw and advocated, is important; for it became the occasion 
of another sifting, or testing, of THE WATCH TOWER readers 
(by that time a much larger number), because Mr. Paton had 
been a respected brother and coworker with us, and because 
as a traveling representative of the THE WATCH TOWER and its 
doctrines (his expenses being met in part by WATCH TOWER 
subscriptions and renewals, as well as by money from myself), 
he was personally known to a larger number of our 
readers than was the Editor. It came about thus: 

In the year 1881, Mr. Barbour, still publishing The Herald, 
and still endeavoring to overthrow the doctrine of the Ransom, 
finding that on a preaching tour I had used a diagram 
of the Tabernacle to illustrate how Christ's sacrifice was 
typified in the sacrifices of typical Israel, wrote an article 
on the Atonement, in which he undertook to show that the 
sacrifices of the Day of Atonement typified almost anything 
else than what they do typify. I could readily see through 
the fallacy of his presentation, which made the bullock and 
the goat typify one thing in one verse and another thing in 
each other verse in which either was mentioned. But I well 
knew that people in general are not close reasoners, and that 
with the cares of life upon them, they are too apt to accept 
a seeming interpretation, without a critical examination of 
the words of the Scriptures and their context. 

After I had thought the matter all over, I reexamined the 
chapter. (Leviticus 16.) But while seeing the inconsistency 
of Mr. Barbour's interpretation, I could only confess that I 
did not understand it and could not give a connected interpretation 
which would fit all the details so plainly stated. 



and all of which must have a particular meaning. What 

could I do? those reading both The Herald and THE WATCH 

TOWER would probably be misled if not helped out of the 

difficulty; and to merely say the The Herald's interpretation 

was inconsistent with itself, and therefore a misinterpretation, 

would be misunderstood. Many would surely think that 

I opposed that view from a spirit of rivalry; for there are 

always people with whom everything resolves itself into personality, 

rivalry and party spirit, and such cannot understand 

others who take a higher and nobler view, and who think 

always and only of the Truth, regardless of persons. 

"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" 

I went to the Lord with this, as with every trial; I told 
Him just how it seemed to me, how anxious I felt for the 
dear sheep, who having their appetites sharpened by the 
Truth were by their very hunger exposed to Satan's deceptions. 
I told him that I realized that He was the Shepherd 
and not I, but I knew also that he would be pleased 
with my interest in the sheep and my desire to be His servant 
and to declare the Truth, the Way and the Life to them; 
that I felt deeply impressed that if the time had come for 
the permission of a false view to deceive the unworthy, it 
must also be His due time to have the truth on the same 
subject made clear, that the worthy ones might be able to 
stand, and not fall from the Truth. 

Believing that the due time had come for the correct understanding 
of the meaning of the Jewish sacrifices which all 
Christians see were typical of "better sacrifices," and trusting 
that the Lord would grant the insight as soon as I got 
into the attitude of mind best fitted to receive the light, I 
prayed with confidence that if the Lord's due time had come, 
and if he were willing to use me as His instrument to declare 

R5909 : page 174 

the massage to His dear family, I might be able to rid my 
heart and mind of any prejudice that might stand in the way, 
and be led of His Spirit into the proper understanding. 

Believing that the prayer would be answered affirmatively, 
I went into my next morning prepared to study and 
write. The forenoon I spent in scrutinizing the text and every 
other Scripture likely to shed light upon it, especially the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, and in looking to the Lord for wisdom 
and guidance. But no solution of the difficult passage 
came. The afternoon and evening were similarly spent, and 
all of the next day. Everything else was neglected, and I 
wondered why the Lord kept me so long. But on the third 
day, near noon, the whole matter came to me as clear as the 
noonday sun— so clear and convincing and harmonious with 
the whole tenor of the Scriptures, that I could not question 
its correctness; and no one has ever yet been able to overthrow 
it. (The matter has been published in several editions 
in pamphlet form, under the title, TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF 
THE BETTER SACRIFICES, and can be had by addressing 



THE WATCH TOWER Office at Brooklyn.) 

Then I knew why the Lord had led me to the solution so 
slowly and cautiously. I needed a special preparation of 
heart for the full appreciation of all it contained; and I was 
all the more assured that it was not of my own wisdom; for 
if of my own, why would it not have come at once? I found 
that the understanding of that subject was bound to have a 
wide influence upon all our hopes and views of all truths— 
not that it overturned old truths or contradicted them, but 
that, on the contrary, it set them all in order and harmony, 
and straightened out little knots and twists. 

For instance, the doctrine of justification by Faith had 
always been more of less confused in my mind— as it has 
been in every mind— with the doctrine of sanctification, which 
calls for self-sacrifice and works. This was all made clear 
and plain at once; for the types show that we all, as sinners, 
needed first of all Christ's Ransom-sacrifice that we must 
appropriate its merit to ourselves by faith; that thus we are 
justified (reckoned free from sin), when we by faith accept 
of Christ's sacrifice on our behalf and consecrate ourselves 
to God. The type shows, too, that it is only after being thus 
cleansed in God's sight (by our acceptance of Christ's finished 
work as our Ransom-sacrifice, and the imputation of Christ's 
merit to us) that God is willing to accept our offering and receive 
us as joint-sacrificers with Christ: and that, if faithful 
to the end, following in His footsteps, we shall be granted 
the favor of joint-heirship in the kingdom. 

STILL FURTHER LIGHT ON THE SCRIPTURES 

Here I first saw that the great privilege of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ and partakers with Him of the Divine nature 
is confined exclusively to those who would share with 
Him in His sacrifice and service of the Truth. And here, too, 
I saw for the first time that the Lord was the first of these 
sacrifices— the Sin- offering; consequently, that none of God's 
servants, the Prophets and faithful ones who lived and died 
before Christ, were priests after His order or sharers in the 
sacrifice with Him, even though some of them were stoned, 
others sawn asunder, and others slain with the sword, for the 
cause of God; that though they would get a good and great 
reward, they would belong to a separate class and order from 
those called to sacrifice and joint-heirship with Christ in the 
kingdom, at and since Pentecost. 

Here, too, I first saw that the Acceptable Day of the Lord 
signifies this Gospel Age, the time during which God will accept 
the sacrifice of any who come to Him through Christ, 
the great Sin-Offering; that when this Acceptable Day ends, 
the reward of joint-heirship and the Divine nature ends; and 
that when this great Day of Sacrifice, the Gospel Age (the 
real Day of Atonement, has closed, when all the members of 
the body of Christ shall have participated with Him in the 
sacrifice of their rights as justified men, and shall be glorified, 
then the blessings shall begin to come to the world— the Millennial 
blessings purchased for them by their Redeemer, according 
to the grace of God. 



This first brought me to a clear recognition of the distinction 
of natures— of what constitutes human nature, what 
constitutes angelic nature and what constitutes Divine nature, 
as shown in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Vol. I., Chapter X. 
And whereas I had used the word RESTITUTION in a general 
way to mean some sort of a blessed change, now under the 
clear light. I began to see that the great work of Restitution 
could mean only what the word implies— a restoration of that 
which was lost (Matthew 18:1 1), a restoration to the original 
condition from which man once fell. 

Then I saw that God's Plan when carried out, would not 
bring all of His creatures to the level of the Divine nature, 
but that He purposed to have an order of beings called 
angels, who though perfect, would always be of a different 
order, or nature, from the Divine nature; and that He likewise 
purposed to have a race of beings of the human nature 
of whom Adam was a sample, or pattern of whose future 
earthly home— Paradise— Eden was a sample, or pattern. I 
also saw that God purposed that Christ and His joint-sacrificers 
and joint-heirs to be God's instruments for blessing 
the fallen race and restoring them to the perfection enjoyed by 
Adam in Eden, a condition which God said was "very good." 
and in which man was an image of his Creator. 

When all these things unexpectedly shone out so brightly 
and clearly, I did not wonder that the Lord gave me several 
days waiting and preparation for the blessing; and to Him 
I rendered praise and thanks. All my faintness of heart and 
all fear of the bad effect of the wrong view fled before this 
evidence of the Lord's leading in the pathway that "shines 
more and more unto the perfect Day." I saw at once that 
these new developments would probably prove a stumbling-block 
to some, as well as a great blessing to others who were 
ready for them. Instead, therefore, of publishing it in the next 
WATCH TOWER, I determined to first present the matter privately 
to the more prominent brethren; remembering the 
Apostle Paul's course in a similar matter.— Galatians 2: 1,2. 

OTHERS WITHDRAW FROM US 

Accordingly, I sent the invitation and the money necessary 
for the traveling expenses to four of the more prominent 
brethren, requesting a conference. Mr. Paton, from Michigan, 
was one of the four, and the only one who rejected the 
first rays of light. Nor could he find any fault with the 
exegesis, though urged, as all were, to state anything which 
might seem inconsistent, or to quote any passage of Scripture 
thought to be in conflict. There were none; and every question 
only demonstrated the strength of the position. I therefore 
urged that what was beyond the criticism of those most 
familiar with the Plan of God must be the Truth and ought 
to be confessed and taught, especially when it arranged and 
ordered all the other features of the Truth so beautifully. 

I pointed out, too, how necessary it was to a logical holding 
of the Ransom to see just what this showed; namely, the 
distinctions of natures— that our Lord left a higher nature 
and took a lower nature, when He was made flesh, and that 



the object in that change of nature was that He might, as a 
man a perfect man, give Himself a Ransom for the first perfect 
man, Adam, and thus redeem Adam and all lost in him. 
I also showed how, as a reward for this great work. He was 
given the Divine nature in His resurrection— a nature still 
higher than the one He had left when He became a man. 

But either Mr. Paton's mental vision or his heart was 
weak; for he never took the step; and before long, he, too. 
forsook the doctrine of the Ransom. Yet he still used the 
word Ransom, while denying the idea conveyed by the word; 
nor could he give the word any other definition or otherwise 
dispute the correctness of the meaning which we attach to it 
—which may be found in any English dictionary and is true 
to the significance of the Greek word which it translates. 

Notwithstanding our best endeavors to save him, he drifted 
farther and farther away. I was obliged to refuse his articles 
for THE WATCH TOWER for the same reason that obliged me 
to refuse to spend the Lord's money entrusted to me to assist 
Mr. Barbour to spread the same pernicious theory. 

It was about this time that Mr. Jones informed me that 
the copies of the book. Day Dawn, which I had purchased 
last were all that were left; and announcing it so that no 
more orders for it might come to the TOWER Office, I took 
occasion to promise MILLENNIAL DAWN, which should present 
the Plan of the Ages in the clearer, more orderly manner 
made possible by the new light shed upon every feature of 
it by the lessons from the Tabernacle. 

About this time Mr. Paton concluded that he would publish 
another book under the name Day Dawn, revised to harmonize 
with his new views, which ignored the Ransom, 
ignored justification, and the need of either, and taught that 
all men will be everlastingly saved— not in any sense as the 
result of a sacrifice by Christ, but as the result of each one's 
crucifying sin in himself— the law under which the poor 
Jews tried to commend themselves to God, but which justified 
none. Many and severe were the calumnies heaped upon me 
because I exposed this change, told that the original Day Dawn 
was out of print, and that the new book was on a different 
foundation from that which I had recommended. 

FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS 

During this time I was busied with an immense work, 
known to some of you— the issue and circulation of over 
1,400,000 copies of two pamphlets: one entitled. FOOD FOR 
THINKING CHRISTIANS, and other, TABERNACLE TEACHINGS. 
The united matter of these two pamphlets was about the size 

R5909 : page 175 

of that of SCRIPTURES STUDIES, Vol I. Besides this, I was 
flooded with thousands of joyous and joy-giving letters, from 
those who had received and were reading the pamphlets thus 
distributed, and were asking questions and more reading 
matter. To add to our pressure, financial complications came; 
and thus for four years I was hindered from fulfilling my 



promise of MILLENNIAL DAWN, now called STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES. Nor is our promise of the complete set fulfilled 
even yet. Six volumes are out, but the Seventh Volume is 
not yet issued. During these years, however, we were 
struggling through an immense amount of labor (all cheerfully 
undergone for the sake of our Lord and His saints); 
and each year we hoped afresh to be able to gather the hours 
necessary to complete the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
And the same great Adversary of the Truth later hindered 
other volumes of the series. 

Some who have The Three Worlds or the old edition of 
Day dawn would perhaps like to know my present opinion 
of them— whether I still think them profitable books to loan 
to truth-seekers. To this I reply. Certainly not; for the very 
immature views of God's Truth therein presented fall far 
short of what we now see to be God's wonderful Plan. 
Things which are now clear as noonday were then cloudy 
and mixed. The distinction between the perfect human 
nature, to which the obedient of the world will be restored 
during the Millennium, and the Divine nature, to which the 
Little Flock, the sacrificing Elect of the Gospel Age are soon 
to be exalted, were then unnoticed. All now so clear was 
then blurred, mixed and indistinct. Neither had we then 
seen the steps or planes, shown upon the Chart of the Ages 
in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. I., which have assisted 
so many to distinguish justification and sanctification 
and to determine their present relationship to God. 

And the time reckonings which those books presented. 
lacking point and leaving the reader in doubt as to 
what the author is attempting to prove to them, tend only 
to confuse the mind and to give the impression that time 
prophecies are merely clues and serve no definite purpose or 
object. Hence, I answer most decidedly, I would not recommend 
or use either of those books to day. Once I was much 
less careful about what I circulated or commended, but I am 
learning every day to be more and more careful as to what 
sort of food I put before any of the Lord's hungry sheep. 
The lord has taught me that it is a responsible matter to be 
a teacher, even to the extent of circulating a book or paper. 
Even the book. Food for Thinking Christians (now out of 
print), published and circulated during the year 1881. 1 no 
longer commend, because it is less systematic and therefore 
less clear than later publications. 

STILL ANOTHER SIFTING 

Another chapter in our experience needs to be told, as it 
marks another shaking and sifting. Mr. A. D. Jones proposed 
to start another paper on the same lines as THE WATCH 
TOWER, to republish some of the simpler features of God's 
Plan and to be a sort of missionary and primary teacher. 
Knowing him to be clear on the subject of the Ransom, I 
bade him Godspeed and introduced a sample copy of his 
paper, Zion's Day Star (now for many years discontinued), 
to our nearly ten thousand readers, only, as it soon proved, 
to stumble some of them into rank infidelity, and others into 



the rejection on the Ransom. For though The Day Star 
steered a straight course for a few months, and maintained 
the same position as THE WATCH TOWER with reference to 
the Ransom, and for the same reason refused the no-ransom 
articles sent in for its columns by Mr. Paton, yet within one 
year it had gone boldly into infidelity, and totally repudiated 
all the rest of the Bible as well as those portions which teach 
the fall of Adam and the Ransom therefrom in Christ. 

All this meant another strain, another sifting, another 
cutting loose of friends, who erroneously supposed that our 
criticisms of the false doctrines were prompted by a spirit 
of rivalry, and who did not so soon see whither his teachings 
were drifting, nor how the importance of holding fast 
the first principles of the doctrines of Christ— how Christ 
died for our sins, and rose for our justification. 

These shaking and sifting processes continued to progress, 
and are not yet over; for all must be thoroughly tried and 
tested. It is not a question of who may fall, but of "who 
shall be able to stand?" as the Apostle puts it. And we have 
need again to remember the Apostolic admonition, "Let him 
who thinketh he standeth [who feels very confident, as did 
St. Peter when he said, 'Lord, though all deny Thee, yet 
will not I'] take heed lest he fall." 

THE TEST ON ALL CHRISTIANS 

This doctrine, of another way of salvation (and salvation 
for all, too) than the Cross of Christ, is not only the 
error which since 1874 has been sifting all who came into the 
light of present Truth, but it is the trial that has come upon 
the whole of Christendom to try them. (Revelation 3: 1 0.) 
It has spread among all classes of Christian people, especially 
among ministers of all sects. The number who believe that 
Christ's death provides the Ransom-price for Adamic sin is 
daily getting smaller; indeed there has been an actual stampede 
from the doctrine of man's fall in Adam and his ransom 
from that fall by "the Man Christ Jesus." (1 Timothy 2:5,6.) 
As the Psalmist prophetically pictured it, a thousand shall 
fall to one that shall stand.— Psalm 91:7. 

The time has come for each one to declare himself 
boldly. Whosoever is not for the Cross and the ransom there 
effected, is against it! He that gathereth not, scattereth 
abroad! Whoever is silent on this subject, when it is being 
assailed by foes on every hand, whether it be the silence of 
fear or of shame or of indifference, is not worthy of the 
Truth, and will surely be one to stumble quickly. Whoever 
from any cause sits idly by while the banner of the Cross is 
being assailed, is not a soldier of the Cross worthy of the 
name, and will not be reckoned among the overcomers who 
shall inherit all things. And God is permitting these very 
siftings, in order to sift out all who are not overcomers and 
to test and manifest the Little Flock, who like Gideon's band 
will, though few in number, share the victory and honors of 
their Captain in glory. 

Are you prepared for the issue, dear brethren and sisters? 
The armor of Truth has ben given you some time past; 



have you put it on? Have you made it your shield and 
buckler, your defence, against all the wily arts of the Evil One? 

Do not be deceived by the agents whom the Adversary 
often uses. In this matter he will be as cunning as in his 
presentation of the misrepresentations of Truth. 

Aptly indeed did the Prophet liken this infectious poison 
to a pestilence. (Psalm 91:6.) A pestilence spread because 
people are in a physical condition which renders them susceptible 
to disease. Physicians say that those whose systems 
are in good, healthy order are in little danger of any disease. 
In like manner a spiritual pestilence will flourish, not only 
because all will be exposed to it who have not a clear intellectual 
appreciation of the doctrines of Christ, but from 
another cause also. Out of the heart are the issues of life; 
therefore the most needful of all things to be in right condition 
is the heart. How is your heart? Is it proud boastful, 
independent, self-concious, self-willed? If so, take care; 
you will be very liable to this epidemic, no matter how far 
from it you may seem to be. 

"A heart resigned, submissive, meek, 

My great Redeemer's Throne, 
Where only Christ is heard to speak. 

Where Jesus reigns alone." 

With such a heart you are safe. In meekness and lowliness, 
you will never think of redeeming yourself from the 
condemnation that you inherited through Adam, by sacrificing 
present sinful desires, but you will flee to the Cross, where 
God himself opened the Fountain for sin and uncleanness, 
present as well as past. 

DOTH THIS OFFEND YOU? 

We presume that this article will offend some, though it is 
not designed to offend any. It is written for the defense 
of the meek against the sophistries of error. "Who shall 
ascend into the Hill of the Lord [into the Kingdom offered], 
or who shall stand in His Holy Place? He that hath clean 
hands and a pure heart [who is diligently fashioning his 
life after the principles of holiness], who hath not lifted up 
his soul unto vanity [who cultivates no earthly ambition or 
pride, but patiently waits for the glory to follow the course 
of present self-sacrifice], nor sworn deceitfully [ignoring or 
despising Hi s Covenant with GodJ. He shall receive the blessing 
of the Lord [the Kingdom glory and joint-heirship with 
Christ], and righteousness [perfection, full deliverance from 
present infirmities, etc.] from the God of his salvation." 
(Psalm 24:3-5.) "Seek righteousness, seek meekness; it may 
be ye shall be hid in the Day of the Lord's anger [this evil day 
—this day of snares, pitfalls, flying arrows and destructive 
pestilences]." (Zephaniah 2:3.) "Watch and pray, that ye 
enter not into temptation"— that "your minds be not corrupted 
from the simplicity that is in Christ." Let all the 
meek fully awake to the trial of the hour. And while many 
are putting stumbling-blocks in the way of the "feet" of the 



Body of Christ, let each soldier of the Cross be vigilant, not 
only to stand, but to assist others to stand bearing up the 
"feef'-Psalm 91:1 1,12. 



page 176 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 177 
