“Follow the Christ!”
District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
This series of three-day conventions began in the United States in May and will continue into 2008 in hundreds of cities worldwide. In most places the program will be opened with music on Friday at 9:20 a.m. Each day of the convention will focus on Jesus.
Friday’s program theme is “Look Intently at the Chief Agent and Perfecter of Our Faith, Jesus.” (Hebrews 12:2) The welcoming address is “Why Follow ‘the Christ’?” A three-part feature is the symposium “Appreciating Jesus as the Greater Moses, David, Solomon.” The morning session concludes with the keynote address, “Jesus’ Unique Role in Jehovah’s Purpose.”
On Friday afternoon the first talk is “‘We Have Found the Messiah’!” It is followed by “Finding Treasures ‘Carefully Concealed in Him.’” The hour-long, five-part symposium “Keep Christ’s Mental Attitude in You” includes the talks “He ‘Received Them Kindly,’” “He ‘Became Obedient as Far as Death,’” and “He ‘Loved Them to the End.’” The session concludes with the discourse “They ‘Keep Following the Lamb No Matter Where He Goes.’”
Saturday’s program theme is “My Sheep Listen to My Voice, . . . and They Follow Me.” (John 10:27) An hour-long symposium “Follow Jesus’ Pattern in the Ministry” will include practical suggestions for improving our ministry. After the talks “He ‘Loved Righteousness and Hated Lawlessness’—Do You?” and “‘Oppose the Devil’ as Jesus Did,” the morning program will conclude with a discussion of baptism, after which those who qualify will be baptized.
Saturday afternoon’s program begins with the symposium “Do Not Follow . . .” Its six parts are “After the Crowd,” “Your Hearts and Your Eyes,” “Unrealities,” “False Teachers,” “False Stories,” and “Satan.” The next talks include “The Superiority of Being ‘Taught by Jehovah’” and “Help Them Return to the Flock.” The day ends with a convention highlight, the talk “Come Be My Follower.”
Sunday’s theme is “Continue Following Me.” (John 21:19) After the talk “Do Not ‘Beg Off’ From Following the Christ,” the six-part symposium “Precious Gems From the Sermon on the Mount” will focus on such sayings of Jesus as: “Happy Are Those Conscious of Their Spiritual Need,” “First Make Your Peace With Your Brother,” and “Practice Giving, and People Will Give to You.” The morning program concludes with the public talk, “Who Are the Real Followers of Christ?” The afternoon highlight is a full-costume drama based on the Bible account of Gehazi, the greedy attendant of God’s prophet Elisha. The convention ends with the talk “Keep Following Christ, Our Invincible Leader!”
Make plans now to attend. To find the location nearest you, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write the publishers of this magazine. The March 1 issue of The Watchtower, our companion magazine, has a list of all the convention locations in the United States and Canada.

