VOL. XXXV MARCH 15 No. 5 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Memorial Supper April 10th 83 

Eating and Drinking It Worthily 83 

"Are Ye Able?" 84 

Are We Willing to Share His Ignominy? 85 

Drinking the Lord's Cup by the Church 85 

Love and Loyalty Manifested by Submission 85 

Our Reasonable Service 86 

The Terms of Discipleship 86 

Consecration Not the End of Our Work 87 

The Completeness of Our Offering 88 

Let Us Go On "In Full Assurance of Faith"! 88 

Cost of Discipleship 90 

Definition of Cross-Bearing 91 

Salt is Good, But- 92 

Heavenly Interest in Sinners 92 

The Value of a Man 93 

Interesting Questions 94 

Some Interesting Letters 95 

I.B.S.A. Berean Studies-Vol. II 95 

page 82 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 



Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



LITERATURE FOR THE BLIND 

Requests for Bible literature for the Blind should be sent 
direct to Gould Free Library for the Blind, South Boston, 
Mass. 

Brother Gould has to loan the six volumes of STUDIES in 
English Braille; also Vols. I. and II. in New York Point, and 
Vol. I. in American Braille. Besides this, he has translated, 
and ready to loan, many of the booklets issued by our Society, 
as well as special sermons. 

When returning books or pamphlets for the Blind, please 
return them direct to the Gould Library. The Post-Office will 
handle them without postage if the package is plainly marked, 
"Literature for the Blind, Postage Free." 



RE CLIPPINGS 

We wish to express thanks for interesting clippings, and 
also for clippings containing attacks upon us. We request 
that you give name and date of paper each time, or, preferably, 
the whole page. If the whole paper be sent, please 
mark the article plainly and address W.T.B.& T. Society, 
File H, 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 



JEWISH HOPES AND PROSPECTS 

We have a good supply, and now offer these booklets 
FREE, postpaid. 



When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 
to make them payable in all cases to the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. 



R5420 : page 83 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER APRIL TENTH 

WE WILL celebrate the Memorial Supper on the 

evening of Friday, April 10. We trust that 

all of the Lord's consecrated people everywhere 

will avail themselves of their privilege 

of memorializing the death of the Redeemer 

for our sins and— as the Apostle 

points out— our participation with the Redeemer 

in His sufferings and death to human 

conditions. As our Lord and the 

Apostles met and symbolized His death in 

advance of the event, so it is appropriate for us to meet 

on the anniversary to celebrate His sacrifice. 

The doing of this annually, in harmony with the evident 
purpose of the Lord in establishing this Memorial 
instead of the Jewish Passover, makes the occasion a very 
impressive one, much more so than any celebration which 
ignores the anniversary feature and celebrates occasionally 
—monthly, weekly, quarterly, etc. Let us not find 
fault with others who do differently; but, as opportunity 
offers, let us inform them of our reasons for observing 
this great event on its anniversary. 

As often as we do this (yearly) we do show forth the 
Lord's death until He come. While we believe that our 
Lord has been present for a number of years— during the 
Harvest— this does not hinder us from continuing the 
blessed Memorial of His death. Our thought is that our 
Lord meant that we were to continue celebrating His 
death until, at His Second Coming, the full Harvest work 
of the Age shall be completed, and the entire Body of 
Christ, the Church, shall be received into glory. Then, as 
He declared, we shall drink of the New Cup with Him. 

Whereas now we drink of His Cup of suffering, 
shame, ignominy, reproach, the world's derision and opposition, 
His New Cup will be a Cup of joy, blessing, 
glory, honor, immortality— the Divine nature. The Father, 
who poured for our Lord the Cup of suffering, has already 
poured for Him the Cup of blessing and glory. As 
we are privileged to share with Him in this Cup of suffering, 
so with our resurrection "change" we shall be privileged 
to share with Him the Cup of glory and blessing. 
Yea, ours is a mingled Cup now, a bitter-sweet; for 
by faith we already enjoy many of the things which He 
has in reservation for them that love Him. 

In the Lord's arrangement the moon symbolized the 
Jewish prospects, while the sun symbolized the prospects 
of the Gospel Age. The Law Dispensation was a shadow, 



or reflection, of the things future, as the moon's light is 
the reflection of the rays of the sun. We are near the 
time of the rising of the Sun of Righteousness with healing 
in His beams, to flood the world with the light of the 
knowledge of God. Seeing this, we lift up our heads and 
rejoice, as the Master directed. Since all the overcoming 
members of the Church are included in that Sun of 
Righteousness, according to our Lord's parable (Matthew 13:43), 
it follows that the Elect Church must all be 
gathered, and her glorification must be completed before 
the full light of the Millennial glory will shine forth upon 
the world. 

In partaking of the Memorial we may look forward 
with the eye of faith to the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, 
in contrast with the conditions which prevailed 
at the time when the first Memorial was observed. Then, 
the Moon (the Law Covenant) was at its full; and immediately 
after the rejection of Jesus and His crucifixion 
the Jewish polity began to wane. It is worthy of note 
that the very day on which Jesus was crucified the moon 
was at its full, and the waning began at once. So this 
year, on April 11, the moon will be at its very full, and 
will then begin its wane. The 1 1th, therefore, corresponds 
to the day on which our Lord was crucified; and 
the evening of the 10th corresponds to the night of the 
first Memorial Supper. 

EATING AND DRINKING IT WORTHILY 

As from the intelligent appreciation of the fact symbolized 
by the Memorial Supper a great blessing comes, 
and a joy proportionate to the participator's faith and 
obedience, so also a condemnation attaches to an unworthy, 
improper participation in the Memorial. None are 
to participate except those who have come into relationship 
with the Lord by consecration of their hearts— their 
all— to Him and His service. 

None can come into this consecrated condition except 
as they have recognized themselves as sinners and the 
Savior as the Redeemer from sin, whose merit is sufficient 
to compensate for the defects of all those who 
would come unto the Father through Him. All such should 
partake with a great deal of joy. Remembering the 
sufferings of the Master, they are to rejoice in those sufferings 
and in the blessings that these have brought to 
their hearts and lives. None are to drink of the fruit of 
the vine on such occasions except those who have appropriated 
the merit of the sacrifice of Christ and who fully 
realize that all their blessings are through Him. None 
are to drink of the Cup except those who have given up 
their all to the Lord, for this is what the Cup signifies— 
it is the Cup of suffering, the Cup of death— a full submission 

R5420 : page 84 

to the will of God. "Thy will, O God, not Mine, 



be done," was the prayer of the Master, and is to be the 
sentiment and petition of those who partake of the 
Memorial Supper. 

For others to participate in this Memorial Supper 
would be a farce, would be wrong, and would bring more 
or less of condemnation, disapproval, from God and from 
their own consciences— and that in proportion as they 
realized the impropriety of their course. 

But let none think that they should remain away from 
the Memorial because of imperfections of the flesh. This 
is a great stumbling-block to many. So long as we are in 
the flesh, imperfection of word, deed and thought are possible 
—yea, unavoidable. St. Paul says that we cannot do 
the things that we would. It is because we need Divine 
grace to forgive our daily, unintentional, unwilling trespasses 
that all whose sins have been forgiven and who 
have been accepted into fellowship with Christ are encouraged 
to come to the Throne of Heavenly Grace in 
prayer. The Apostle says, "Let us come with courage to 
the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need." (Hebrews 4:16.) It was 
because of our needs that God opened up the way and 
made this arrangement for us. 

By God's provision for the forgiveness of our sins, of 
which we have repented, and for which we have asked 
forgiveness in Jesus' name, we may realize ourselves as 
no longer sinners under condemnation, but as clothed 
with the robe of Christ's righteousness. This is the 
thought behind St. Paul's expression, which applies to 
every day: "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service."— 
Romans 12:1. 

All Christians should keep their accounts squared with 
the Lord. If they come short, they should lose no time 
in getting the account squared, in obtaining forgiveness 
through the merit of the Savior's sacrifice. Such accounts 
with the Lord should be settled promptly at the time of 
their occurrence, or not later than the day of their occurrence. 
They should not be allowed to accumulate; for 
they will rise as a wall between the soul and the Heavenly 
Father. But whatever has been the condition in the past, 
the Memorial season, above all others, is the time for 
making sure that no cloud remains between the Lord and 
us, to hide us from His eyes. 

Thus forgiven, thus cleansed of any defiling spot on 
our robe of Christ's righteousness, let us keep the feast 
—the Memorial of our Lord's death. In it let us afresh 
acknowledge and impress upon our minds the importance 
of the merit of His sacrifice and death, and how it represents 
the grace of God to us, as it will by and by represent 
the same grace extending through the Millennial 
Kingdom to the whole world. Let us remember also our 
devotion of ourselves, our consecration to be dead with 
our Lord, to be broken as members of His Body, parts of 
the One Loaf, and to participate in the drinking of His 



Cup of suffering and shame and death. "For if we suffer 
[with Him], we shall also reign with Him."— 
2 Timothy 2:12. 

We trust that the celebration of the Memorial this 
year may be a very deeply impressive one, an occasion of 
rich blessing to all of the Lord's consecrated people 
everywhere. "For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed 
for us; therefore let us keep the feast."— 1 Cor. 5:7,8. 

We trust that each little class, or group, of Bible students 
celebrating the Memorial together will appoint one 
of their number a secretary to write a post-card to THE 
WATCH TOWER office, stating briefly the interesting facts 
connected with the celebration, the number present, and 
the number participating, so far as can reasonably be 
estimated. 



R5421 : page 84 

"ARE YE ABLE?" 

"Are ye able to drink of the Cup that 
I shall drink of? "-Matthew 20:22. 

WE RECALL the circumstances under which 

these words were uttered by our Savior: It 

was just a few days before His crucifixion 

Jesus had promised His disciples that they 

should sit with Him in His Throne in His 

Kingdom. So confident were they that this 

would be as the Lord had said that they 

were discussing the position they might 

occupy. The mother of the two disciples, 

James and John, came to Him and asked 

whether her two sons might sit, the one on His right 

hand and the other on His left, in the Kingdom. And 

Jesus, turning to the two disciples, replied by asking them: 

"Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and 

to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" 

We know that Jesus' baptism in water took place at 
the beginning of His ministry. In harmony with the 
Divine Plan, He was to die as the Savior of men. And 
He symbolized this death as soon as He was thirty 
years of age— as soon as was possible under the Law. 
During the three and a half years of His ministry, He 
was accomplishing this baptism, He was pouring out His 
soul unto death, and this death He finished at Calvary. 
Jesus said, "The baptism that I am [being] baptized with" 
—now— not a baptism which was either future or past. 

But He spoke differently of the Cup— "the Cup that 
I shall drink of." He thus implied that the Cup was 
future— not in the present nor in the past. He had told 
His disciples that He would go up to Jerusalem; and 
that there He would be crucified, and on the third day He 
would rise again. And He said on another occasion, 



"Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His 
blood, ye have no life in you." What the Master said 
about His being crucified the disciples did not understand 
But Jesus understood the situation, and He knew that 
this Cup was about to be poured for Him. And so He 
spoke of it again, saying of Himself, "The Cup that My 
Father hath poured for Me, shall I not drink it?" 

OUR LORD'S SPECIAL TRIAL 

We might think of the word, Cup as representing various 
experiences of life— that everybody has his Cup of 
mingled joy and sorrow. But Jesus used the word in a 
different sense. When He was in the Garden of Gethsemane 
He prayed, "O My Father, if it be possible, let 
this Cup pass from Me! Nevertheless, not as I will, but 
as Thou wilt." And again, the same night He prayed, 
saying, "O My Father, if this Cup may not pass away 
from Me, except I drink it, Thy will be done!" In the 
matter of His baptism into death, there was no hesitation 
on our Lord's part. On the contrary, from the very beginning 
He voluntarily participated in it. The ignominious 
death was the thing that He prayed might pass, if it 
were possible. But this was what He learned was the 
Father's will for Him, and He was content to have it so. 

There was nothing in the Law to indicate that our 
Lord should be executed as a blasphemer of the Divine 
Law. Yet blasphemy was the charge preferred against 
Him. The Sanhedrin decided that He was a blasphemer 

R5421 : page 85 

in that He had said, "Destroy this Temple, and in three 
days I will raise it again," and also in claiming that He 
was the Son of God. Apparently, then, the thing which 
was specially weighing on His mind and from which He 
would have liked to be relieved was the ignominy and 
shame of being crucified as a criminal, as a blasphemer of 
the Father He loved so well. 

Jesus knew that He had come into the world to die, 
and that He must suffer. But this part of His experience 
He had not fully understood. Evidently He knew that "as 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so 
must the Son of Man be lifted up"; for comparatively 
early in His ministry He had stated this in His conversation 
with Nicodemus. But as He came down nearer and 
nearer to the time of His humiliation, His degradation, 
and realized all that it meant, He felt a great shrinking 
from it and poured out His heart in the cry, "If it be possible, 
let this Cup pass from Me!" But immediately- 
proving that His affirmation, at the time of His consecration, 
"Lo I come to do Thy will, O God," was not empty 
words— He added, "Nevertheless, not as I will, but as 
Thou wilt! "-Matthew 26:39. 

ARE WE WILLING TO SHARE HIS IGNOMINY? 



And so to His disciples our Savior said: Are you 
able to lay down your lives completely, even though this 
shall mean to you injustice in the taking away of your 
lives? Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink 
of? There will be disgrace and ignominy connected with 
it all. Are ye willing to share with Me in this, My Cup? 
They answered: "We are able." They were willing. 

This, we see, is the same Cup represented in the Communion 
Service. The bread represents the body and the 
wine the blood of our Lord. The Cup especially represented 
the shame and ignominy connected with His death; 
and the two disciples said that they were willing to share 
His Cup— they had no hesitancy. At any cost they would 
be faithful. They would comply with any conditions He 
would make. They did not, of course, yet know the full 
import of the word baptism or of the word cup. These 
were things all His disciples were feeling after. When 
Pentecost should come, these things that Jesus had spoken 
to them would come to their remembrance, as He had 
foretold. (John 16:4; 13:19.) But they were willing and 
anxious. And that is all that we can be. Jesus guaranteed 
that, being willing, they should have these experiences; 
that, continuing willing, continuing to suffer with 
Him here, they should reign with Him in His Throne. 
But as to the particular place for each in the Throne, that 
would not be for Him to say, but for the Father. 

The courage, the fortitude, of our dear Redeemer in 
walking the narrow way fills us with admiration. How 
strong and brave was His character! He had no thought 
of looking back; His whole being was intent upon accomplishing 
the will of His Father in Heaven— upon sacrificing 
Himself in the interest of the world. What a noble 
Example was set before the Apostles!— greatness in 
humility, victory through entire self-surrender! 

DRINKING OF THE LORD'S CUP BY THE CHURCH 

The drinking of the Lord's Cup by the Church, represents 
our participation in the sufferings of Christ in 
the present time. None shall be a member of the Body 
of the great Mediator of the New Covenant unless he 
come in now under the proper terms. The drinking of 
the blood, then, is the sharing of the Cup. For if we 
drink not of His Cup, neither shall we share with Him in 
His glory. He said, "Drink ye all of it." All must drink, 
and the entire Cup must be drained during this Age. 

It is a very great privilege that we are permitted to 
have a share in the sufferings of Christ. "If we suffer 
[with Him], we shall also reign with Him." We shall 
participate in the inauguration of the New Dispensation, 
and in dispensing its blessings. The Antitype of Moses, 
who will do the sprinkling, is Christ the Head and the 
Church His Body, glorified, of whom we read in Acts 3:22: 
"For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet 
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 



brethren, like unto me"— that is, Moses was His type, on 
a smaller scale. The Body is now being raised up. Jesus 
was first raised up, then all the Apostles; and following 
after, the remaining members of His Body. 

As Moses sprinkled all the people, so this antitypical 
Moses, when completed, will "sprinkle" the world of mankind; 
and this will mean the bringing of them into harmony 
with the Divine Law. It will require the thousand 
years to "sprinkle" mankind. So there is a great difference 
between the drinking of the Cup and the sprinkling 
of the blood. The sprinkling with the blood represents 
justification, while the drinking of the Cup by the Church 
represents, not only justification, but sanctification. 

OUR LORD'S RECOGNITION OF THE DIVINE PURPOSES 

Our Lord, in His memorable words to St. Peter— "The 
Cup which My Father hath given Me, shall I not drink 
it?"— referred, evidently, to His dying experiences, which 
were severe in the extreme. He was dishonored of men 
and reckoned as an enemy of God— a blasphemer. His 
physical sufferings He knew would be intense, but to His 
perfect mind the shame and desisted, the opprobrium, 
added greatly to the poignancy of His anguish. Yet this 
was the Cup the Father had given Him; it was the Divine 
purpose respecting Him. 

Our Lord had all the experiences necessary for proving 
and testing His loyalty; for it was necessary that He 
manifest His loyalty before both angels and men. The 
whole matter had been Divinely arranged from before the 
creation of man. He was "the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the world." (Rev. 13:8.) Everything pertaining 
to that slain Lamb was foreknown by the Father. 
Jesus was to drink the Cup which belonged to the sinner, 
in order that He might redeem man and might thus be a 
faithful and merciful High Priest. This was the Cup of 
suffering and death. It was necessary that Jesus should 
suffer the death of the cross, in order that He might 
redeem the Jew. 

LOVE AND LOYALTY MANIFESTED BY SUBMISSION 

All His sufferings were foretold in the Scriptures. 
The crucifixion was pictured by the lifting up of the 
brazen serpent in the wilderness. All of His experiences 
were foreknown, forearranged and necessary. When He 
came to earth to do the Father's will, He did not know of 
all that was to come. But He learned obedience by the 
things which He suffered, the things which were "written 
in the Book." He submitted Himself to all the Father's 
will, and thus He proved His loyalty. As He Himself 
declared, "I came not to do Mine own will, but the will of 
My Father which sent Me!" As the hour of the consummation 
of His sacrifice drew near, in the lonely shades 
of Gethsemane, the Master prayed, "My Father, if it be 
possible, let this Cup pass from Me!" We are not to 



suppose that He prayed for the Cup of death to pass 
away; but He wondered whether or not the ignominious 
experiences of the crucifixion might pass. Yet we find 
that He did not murmur nor rebel, but said, "Not My will, 
but Thine, be done!" 

SPECIAL SUPERVISION OF OUR CUP 

We see that our beloved Lord drank of the bitter Cup 
to its dregs, and did so thankfully. And we are to remember 

R5422 : page 86 

that He gave the Cup to us, that we should all 
drink of it— not that we should all have exactly the same 
experiences that He had, but that we must all drink of 
the Cup of suffering and death in the Father's own way. 
Jesus was the Perfect One, and the Father dealt with 
Him in a very particular manner. 

In our cases the experiences would be different; because 
of our imperfection we could not be dealt with 
from the standpoint of perfection. We are, therefore, 
not to think of our Cup as a definite, fixed program as 
was the Master's, but rather that the Father permitted us 
to have a share in the Cup of death with His Son. Our 
Cup is supervised by our Savior, although it is the Cup 
poured by the Father; for it is the Father's Program. 

In the Master's case the Cup was necessary for the 
sins of the whole world. In our case it is not necessary, 
but it has pleased the Father to grant us a share in the 
sufferings and glory of our Lord. Jesus makes good our 
deficiencies and develops our characters, fashioning us 
into His own glorious Image. Without this supervision of 
our Cup by our Lord, we might be very poorly developed 
in many qualities; therefore our Cup needs to be specially 
supervised. And so He assures us that, while the necessary 
experiences are coming to us, at the same time His 
grace will be sufficient; and His strength will be made 
perfect in our weakness, and all things will be made to 
work together for our good. 

Let us never forget that unless we partake of His Cup, 
unless we are immersed into death with Him, we can 
have no share in His Kingdom of glory, we can never sit 
with Him in His Throne. Let us then count all the things 
of this earth as loss and dross that we may attain this 
Pearl of Great Price. As the experiences of suffering 
come to us, let us not be affrighted, nor "think it strange 
concerning the fiery trials that shall try us, as though 
some strange thing happened unto us"; for even "hereunto 
were we called," to suffer with our beloved Master now, 
and by and by be glorified together with Him in the Kingdom 
eternal! 

"Are ye able to walk in the narrow, strait way, 

With no friend by your side, and no arm for your stay? 

Can ye bravely go on through the darkening night? 



Can ye patiently wait till the Lord sends the light? 

"Ah, if thus ye can drink of the Cup He shall pour, 
And if never the banner of Truth ye shall lower, 
His beloved ye are, and His crown ye shall wear, 
In His Throne ye shall sit, and His glory shall share!" 



R5422 : page 86 

OUR REASONABLE SERVICE 

"I beseech you therefore, brethren by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service."— Romans 12:1. 

THIS exhortation of St. Paul's is based upon 

the preceding statements of the eleventh 

chapter of this same Epistle, as is shown by 

the connecting word therefore— because of 

those things recited in that chapter. The 

eleventh chapter tells of the mercies of God 

toward both Natural Israel and Spiritual 

Israel— not so much to the world. But the 

tenth chapter takes up in elaborate form the 

mercies of God toward all His creatures. In 

this Epistle the Apostle is addressing those who had been 

Gentiles. In view of these mercies of God (His Plan of 

Salvation and the call of some of the Gentiles to take the 

places in the Body of Christ, lost by Natural Israel) St. 

Paul exhorts his hearers to present their bodies living 

sacrifices, holy and acceptable. 

The question naturally arises, Whom did the Apostle 
address? He evidently is using these words as an exhortation, 
not to the world, but to believers. The introduction 
to the Epistle indicates that it was written to 
those already consecrated. But evidently some connected 
with the Church at Rome had not yet made a consecration. 
Some who were believers, who had come to a knowledge 
of the Lord and had counted the cost of self-sacrifice, but 
who had not given themselves fully to the Lord, might 
yet become brethren in the Truth in the full sense. The 
Apostle's words would apply equally to both classes— 
those who had presented their bodies living sacrifices, 
and those contemplating doing so. It would have been 
fully as proper to say, Brethren, you who have already 
given yourselves to the Lord, I beseech you that you fulfil 
your Vow of Consecration; for your bodies are holy 
and acceptable to God. 

The Heavenly Father never forces anybody; but He 
tells them that He is willing to accept sacrifices, and that 
now is the acceptable time to present them. He sets 
forth the fact that self-denial and sacrifice are the only 
terms upon which one can come into fellowship with 
Him. But nowhere does He urge or command any one 



to make a consecration. To do so would be to change 
the matter from sacrifice to obligation; and the very 
thought of sacrifice is in opposition to requirement. 

THE TERMS OF DISCIPLESHIP 

Our best example of what we should do in shown by 
our Lord and the Apostles, the chief members of God's 
royal family. Our Lord did not seek to entrap any into 
His service— as we see done today. On the contrary, He 
proceeded along high and noble lines. He said, "Come 
unto Me, all ye that are oppressed and heavy-laden." 
This is an appeal to reason. If you have found that you 
are sin-sick, come unto Me— I have the will and the way 
to help you to come to the Father. 

When talking to the young ruler of the synagogue, 
our Lord set forth the terms of discipleship. He did not 
say, Never mind; do not make it too serious a matter. On 
the contrary, He stated just what are the terms of consecration. 
No man could be His disciple unless he would 
surrender all. To this rich young man our Lord showed 
that with all his morality there was inconsistency. He 
possessed wealth, and should use that wealth to the glory 
of the Lord. He must not be selfish, or he could not be 
Christ's disciple. 

The young man might have said, I have some children 
for whom I must make provision. But the Lord said, 
Give all that you have to God. A parent can consecrate 
his children, so far as he is concerned. The Lord would 
not ask any one to do that which he was unable to do. 
But he said, "Take up your cross and follow Me," if you 
would be My disciple. -Mark 10:21. 

Again our Lord said, "He that putteth his hand to 
the plow, and looketh back, is not fit for the Kingdom." 
(Luke 9:62.) We should make up our mind to use all 
of our powers, or else stand aside. The Lord's method 
should be our guide. We should not try to entrap any 
one or resort to hocus-pocus to convince any one. We 
should not plead what there is to be gained in a material 
way by becoming a Christian. We should tell people 
that there is no other way to come into Christ but by 
the way of the cross. We cannot reach Him in any 
other way. It is the Lord's way or no way. We must 

R5422 : page 87 

bear the cross, as He bore it. We believe that we do the 
people more good by setting forth the Message with no 
uncertain sound than trying to entrap them. Nevertheless, 
in putting before them the trials and cross, 
we should also put before them the glory to follow. 

TEXT APPLIED TO THE CONSECRATED 

To those who have already made a consecration the 
thought would be, You have entered into a Covenant with 



God to follow Jesus. You have given up your own human 
will. Remember that this includes your mortal 
body. Continue the work of presenting your body— of 
dying daily. Keep before your mind this Covenant of 
Sacrifice; for it is not yet fulfilled. The mere promise 
to fulfil a covenant is not fulfilling it. 

The Father begets us of the Holy Spirit, and gives us 
the great privileges that belong to those who have become 
New Creatures in Christ. Then it is for us to go 
forward, and day by day lay down our lives in His service. 
It would be appropriate, therefore, for the Apostle 
to say to such, Lay down your lives daily. Remember 
that it is your mortal bodies which you are to sacrifice 
in the Lord's service. It is yourselves as old creatures, 
human beings, and not as New Creatures, that are being 
sacrificed. Yours is a living sacrifice in the sense that 
this body, reckonedly passed out of sin, is being continually 
sacrificed. It is not given to preserve, or to be 
your everlasting possession; but it is your covenant and 
privilege to accomplish the sacrifice of your flesh. Therefore 
I beseech you to do this. 

TEXT APPLIED TO THE TENTATIVELY JUSTIFIED 

To those whose justification has not been vitalized, 
the text might mean, You are desirous of serving God. 
This is indicated in your attending the meetings of the 
Church. The fact that you assemble with the saints of 
this congregation signifies that you love holy things— 
that you desire to know the will of God. Now then, 

R5423 : page 87 

brethren, I beseech you to make a full consecration of 
yourselves to God. Consider your body as a living sacrifice 
—not that you are to commit suicide and destroy 
your body, but that you are to esteem your body a living 
sacrifice, day by day using your strength and your life 
in the Lord's service. 

The exhortation, "Present your bodies," then, would 
seem to be applicable both to the consecrated and to those 
who are following on to know the Lord. The next statement 
should be understood to be in harmony— "holy and 
acceptable to God." If this statement be taken in relation 
to those who are already consecrated, then the Apostle 
is saying, This vitalization of your justification which 
the Lord has granted you has constituted you holy. And 
because the Lord counts you holy, and yourselves wholly 
acceptable to Him, you should continue to do good works 
—complete the good work which you have begun. The 
sacrifice being esteemed of God holy and acceptable, the 
results will be grand and glorious. 

This exhortation, viewed from the standpoint of one 
who has not completed his consecration, might be understood 
to mean, if you take this step of consecration, remember 
that then the merit of Christ will be imputed to 



you, and that through the arrangement which He has 
made in Christ God is willing to accept you. 

CONSECRATION TO DEATH MOST REASONABLE 

Every one who recognizes God's mercies and blessings 
finds it a "reasonable service" to sacrifice the earthly 
things for the precious privilege of serving Him. If it 
was a reasonable service for Jesus to leave the Heavenly 
glory, to become a man, and to sacrifice Himself unto 
death, then surely ours is most reasonable. We, being 
imperfect, have very little to give; and when there is an 
opportunity for showing our appreciation of the Heavenly 
Father, then we should make haste to use it. 

The Father made a proposition to the Lord Jesus, and 
it is not to be supposed that He would suggest anything 
but a reasonable service. To have asked Jesus to sacrifice 
His life for humanity without any reward of a future 
life would have been a most unreasonable thing. The 
Father set before the Redeemer a great joy, to be the 
recompense of His obedience. And so with us. The 
Lord does not invite us to sacrifice ourselves at the present 
time without any reward from Him. He tells us that 
if we do this He will make us joint-heirs with His Son, 
participators with Him in all the joys of the Kingdom. 

CONSECRATION NOT THE END OF OUR WORK 

The term Brethren may be viewed from two different 
standpoints. On the one hand, we may apply it to those 
who are in the state of prospective justification, in a justified 
attitude of mind, and whose justification is growing 
by every step they take toward God. On the other 
hand, it would refer to those who have become brethren 
in the fullest sense— who have taken the step of consecration, 
and whose consecration has been accepted by the 
Father through the Lord Jesus. With these there is a 
continual, a daily presentation. This morning we presented 
ourselves before the Lord and asked His blessing 
on the day. It is a presentation day by day and hour by 
hour. It is a constant surrender of self-will, in this way 
and in that way— a daily waving of our offering before 
the Lord. So it was with our Lord Jesus. He not only 
made the full consecration at the beginning, but day by 
day He laid down His life, until the sacrifice was completed 
on Calvary. 

For one to make a consecration of his time and his 
talents, and then to withhold his offering, would insure 
his not gaining the great prize for which the Father invited 
him to run. The Great Company will be made up 
of those who have presented their bodies, but who neglected 
their opportunities for laying down their lives— their 
time, influence, money, all— in the Lord's service. 
This neglect will lose them their place in the Throne, 
their privilege of being a part of the Bride class. The 
Bride will be made up of those who not only have presented 



their bodies in the beginning, but have faithfully 
continued that presentation unto death. 

CONSTRAINED BY GOD'S MERCIES 

The Apostle states the reason why we should make 
this presentation of ourselves as being the "mercies of 
God"— "I beseech you by the mercies of God, that ye 
present your bodies." God's mercies are to a certain 
extent over all. He sends His sunshine and His rain 
upon the evil as well as upon the good. For many 
centuries God's special mercies were granted only to the 
Jews. But the arrangement of God's Plan is such that 
Gentiles, as well as Jews, may now come into God's favor. 
God broke down the middle wall of partition through 
Christ, and thus gave all people an opportunity to come 
back into harmony with Him and to have Him as their 
Father, their Life-Giver, and through Christ to share 
His blessings. 

As many as see and hear and have the eyes of their 
understanding opened, should consider this a reason for 
a full consecration, a full surrender, to the Lord. It is 
truly a most reasonable service, as the Apostle points out; 
and the prize which He attaches to the matter makes it 
unspeakably desirable and precious. It would be very 
unreasonable to accept God's marvelous favors and then 
neglect to live up to the conditions attached to them. If 

R5423 : page 88 

we really believe God, if we have a proper faith in His 
exceeding great and precious promises, we will joyfully 
and faithfully meet the requirements. 

A lady said to us recently: You put more stress on 
godly living than we in our Church have done. You say, 
"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be 
saved." You put a special stress on believing. Yes, we 
replied, this word believe has a most important bearing 
on the entire matter. If we should say to you that if on 
your way home today you would stop at a certain house, 
of a certain number, you would find, in a particular 
corner under the steps, a little bag, and that it contained 
valuable treasure which should be yours— if you believed 
our words you would go and get that bag. If you said 
that you believed us, and then went another way altogether, 
we would be sure that you had not believed us. 
Your course would prove it. 

Now the Lord has offered us the opportunity of being 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord in "an inheritance 
incorruptible and individual and that fadeth not away." If 
we believe this fact, we will seek to know just what the 
conditions are. Whoever really believes will find that the 
conditions are very easy in comparison with the great 
reward. But if he fails to put forth his greatest effort 
to win this great prize, he will show that he has not believed 
the Message; for if he recognizes the offer and 



believes it, he will surely be eager to lay aside every 
weight and encumbrance and run patiently to the end to 
obtain the crown.— Hebrews 12:1,2. 

THE COMPLETENESS OF OUR OFFERING 

It is, therefore, a reasonable service. The Apostle 
tells us the conditions. All who would have this great 
blessing must offer themselves living sacrifices, holy and 
acceptable to God. It is ours to present our bodies. It 
is not the New Creature who does the presenting; there 
in no New Creature at the time the body is presented. 
Our natural mind discerned from the Message of the 
Lord that there is a more excellent way— of harmony 
with the Lord— and we desired to come thus into 
harmony with Him. And that new, or changed, will presents 
our earthly interests and all that we have in sacrifice. 
We are altogether human when we offer ourselves 
to the Lord. We are then begotten to a new mind, a new 
hope, and thus are New Creatures. 

While we present ourselves to God, we do not come 
to Him directly with our presentation. We come through 
the great High Priest— as in the type, the offering of the 
Lord's goat was presented by the high priest. We come 
to the Father through the Redeemer. We do not offer 
a justified sacrifice, but come with all our sins, for 
cleansing in that fountain opened for us. The sentiment 
of our hearts is: 

"Just as I am without one plea, 
But that Thy blood was shed for me, 
And that Thou bidst me come to Thee— 
O Lamb of God, I come! " 

But God could not accept a sacrifice in that imperfect 
condition; it is only as we come through the Priest that 
He recognizes us. If we were perfect, we might come 
in our own name; but we are not perfect, and so we come 
only through this High Priest, Jesus. The great High 
Priest then imputes His merit, and includes our sacrifice 
as a part of His own. The Divine blessing then comes 
upon us— we are begotten of the Holy Spirit. Thenceforth 
we are New Creatures in Christ. We have been 
presented in God's way and have been accepted. 

REFUSAL TO ACCEPT SHOWS LACK OF APPRECIATION 

Now we are dead; and our life is hid with Christ in 
God. We presented our bodies, and they were made living 
sacrifices: they were then received by God and were 
slain with Christ and we arose to walk in newness of life. 
By the body is meant also all the earthly interests, both 
present, past and future— every interest that we ever had 
or might ever have. Such a one gives up all the hope or 
right he might otherwise have had in a future Restitution. 
The covenant is a complete one. The sacrifice of 
such became holy and acceptable to God as soon as the 
merit of Jesus was imputed; and our offering continues 



to be acceptable to the end. And as day by day we lay 
down our lives in the Lord's service, it brings us more 
and more of the Lord's blessings, and we are more and 
more filled with His Spirit. 

R5424 : page 88 

To render all that we have in the service of the Lord 
is not only a most reasonable thing, but an offering far 
too small. It is far less than we would gladly render to 
Him who has manifested toward us such wondrous compassion 
and grace. When God has offered us so great a 
reward and blessing in return for our poor lives, we 
should feel that a refusal to accept this offer would be 
an indication not only of a pitiful lack of appreciation 
of Infinite Goodness, but also a weakness of mind. It 
would show a puerility of judgment which is unable to 
weigh and compare the trifling and transitory pleasures 
of self-will for this brief life with an eternity of joy and 
blessing and glory on the Divine plane, far above angels 
and principalities and powers and every name that is 
named, next to our glorious Lord and Head— a station so 
glorious, so exalted, that no human mind can grasp its 
infinitude. Let us be faithful— even unto death! 



R5424 : page 88 

LET US GO ON "IN FULL ASSURANCE OF FAITH"! 

"Having an High Priest over the House of 

God, let us draw near with a true heart, 

in full assurance of faith."— Hebrews 10:21,22. 

THE Apostle Paul is here drawing to the attention 

of the Church, and especially to those 

familiar with the Jewish arrangements of 

that day, the fact that the Aaronic priesthood 

was only a typical one, designed for a 

time to illustrate greater things; that God's 

real Plan was not to be carried out by the 

Aaronic priesthood from the House of Levi, 

and that their sacrifices of bulls and goats 

could not take away sins; but that from 

year to year this arrangement merely shielded God's 

typical people— typically covered them— through their 

Covenant. The Apostle points out that there is to be a 

greater Priesthood, after the Order of Melchizedek; that 

our Lord is the Head of this Priesthood, and that the 

Gospel Church are His members, the under-priesthood. 

He then asks, why should a better priesthood be needed 

than the one that God provided in Aaron and his sons? 

The answer is that they were sinners, and could never 

really cancel sin; and the blood of those animals possessed 

no real merit. Those priests themselves never 



really got back into favor with God. They merely had 
access into a typical Holy and Most Holy. 

But now we have Christ as the Head of this new 
Order of Priesthood; let us realize our position as under-priests 
of this order. Our High Priest has entered into 
the true Most Holy. The evidence of this came in the 
Pentecostal blessing showing that the Father was well 
pleased with the sacrifice made by our Lord, and that all 
things were then ready to permit us also to come near to 

R5424 : page 89 

God, sharing our Redeemer's experiences, that we might 
later go to Him beyond the veil and share His glory. 
Seeing that God has thus made all these gracious provisions, 
and has accepted us as the House of God to take 
the place of the House of Aaron— and so much greater 
than his House— let us enter into the real Holy and Most 
Holy, "with a true heart, in full assurance of faith." 
The under-priests were permitted to enter into the 
Holy, and after the Day of Atonement into the Most 
Holy. All, in this Gospel Age, who have made consecration 
to God, and have been begotten of the Spirit, 
are in the first Holy. Aaron and his sons were a type of 
the true Priesthood; but we are not of the order of 
Aaron; we are not members of the Aaronic priesthood, 
but of the Melchizedek Priesthood, under its great High 
Priest. "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a 
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of 
Him who hath called you out of darkness into His 
marvelous light."— 1 Peter 2:9. 

LET US COME WITH TRUE HEARTS 

Seeing, then, that we have confidence that God has 
made this arrangement, confidence to take the proper 
steps, and have presented our bodies living sacrifices, 
have gone through the antitypical consecration, and received 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit, let us begin at 
once the work of the new Order of Priesthood. There 
are great things to be accomplished: let us fully enter in 
with Him— let us become full participators in this work- 
in everything that God has for us to do. Let us come 
with true hearts, however, realizing how wonderful are 
our blessings, how precious is the provision of the covering 
of our Savior's merit. Let us be true and loyal to this 
Covenant into which we have entered with God. 

The Lord's call under this Covenant is, "Gather My 
saints together unto Me, those who have made a Covenant 
with Me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) This call, or invitation, 
has been going forth during the entire Gospel 
Age. And all the holy ones, all who have entered into 
this Covenant, are privileged to have a share in the 
sacrifice of Christ and to co-labor with Him. 

Let us come with full assurance of faith in the sense 
that we shall have no doubt whatever that God's promises 



are true and for us. The world sees no cause for sacrificing 
in the present life, and they count us fools all the 
day long, as the Apostle says. But nevertheless in full 
assurance of faith, let us go on! Let us loyally press forward 
unto the end of the way, until we shall be joined 
to our great High Priest, and enter into His rest! 

ANOINTED IN HIM 

The anointing of the high priest in the type represented 
the Divine appointment to office. Aaron was thus 
anointed of God. The Apostle Paul says that "no man 
taketh this honor unto himself, but he that was called of 
God, as was Aaron." Even Christ took not this honor 
upon Himself. God appointed Him, saying, "Thou art a 
Priest forever, after the Order of Melchizedek." 
(Hebrews 5:4-6.) God's direct dealings were with the 
Lord Jesus Christ. He was the One acceptable to the 
Father. God gave His Holy Spirit to our Lord in fullest 
degree. Jesus Himself tells us that God gave not His 
Spirit by measure unto Him, because He was able to receive 
the Holy Spirit in full measure. Those who are 
counted as His members are not able to receive the Spirit 
in full measure, because of their imperfection. The less 
fallen man can receive more of the Spirit, and the more 
fallen man can receive less. 

When Christ appeared in the presence of God for us, 
and applied His merit for those who would offer themselves 
to become members of His Body, to be associated 
with Him in the glorious Kingdom work, He received 
Divine approval and sanction, which was manifested by 
the begetting by the Holy Spirit of those who had presented 
themselves in consecration, the Holy Spirit being 
first given at Pentecost. The Apostle Peter says that God 
fulfilled His promise to Jesus by granting Him the Holy 
Spirit to shed forth upon His disciples. (Acts 2:33.) It 
is of the Father, and by the Son. 

It was not necessary that the Heavenly Father should 
pour out His Holy Spirit upon each individual member of 
the body. We understand that the picture given in the 
type is quite complete. The Holy Spirit being poured out 
upon the Head of the great High Priest, and flowing down 
over the skirts of His garments, all His Body is thus 
anointed. We each receive our share of the anointing 
when we come into the Body, and under the Robe. 

FULL ASSURANCE BASED ON KNOWLEDGE 

Speaking to those who are privileged to come to God 
in prayer, the Apostle says, "Let us draw near in full assurance 
of faith." He is speaking to the House of God 
class. Natural Israel were of the House of God, too, but 
they were servants. The servants belong to the House, 
of course, but not in the very special sense, as do the 
children. We have the suggestion given us that Moses 
was faithful as a servant over his House, but that the 



Church of Christ are a House of Sons, and that Christ is 
Head over this House. It is this House of Sons that may 
draw near to God. The assurance with which these may 
rightly approach is dependent upon certain conditions 
here indicated. They must have a true heart, and are not 
to be double-minded. Entire heart loyalty must be theirs; 
they must fully demonstrate that they meant what they 
said when they gave their lives to God. Then they may 
come to the Lord with holy boldness, in full assurance of 
faith. All the steps of God's true people are steps of 
faith, of realization of His care. But there is a full assurance 
of faith in contrast with a lesser faith. A faith that 
is only partial will bring us somewhat near to God. A 
faith that is strong will bring us nearer. But a full assurance 
of faith is that faith which, if retained, will bring 
us off "more than conquerors," and make us at last members 
in full of the Royal Priesthood— in glory. 

This full assurance of faith cannot be attained in a 
day. It requires quite a degree of information. And 
God has provided this information by instructing us in 
His Word as to what Christ did for us, and what He is 
willing to do; why He died for us, etc. All this is furnished 
us as a basis for faith. Then to further strengthen 
our faith, we have all the exceeding great and precious 
promises, and His daily providences over us. Therefore 
this fully consecrated class may draw near, and have the 
full assurance that they may attain all the glorious things 
to which God has invited them— to be heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord "to an inheritance 
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away." 

FULL ASSURANCE NECESSARY TO GOD'S APPROVAL 

The Apostle intimates that without this full assurance 
of faith the child of God cannot come close to Him. Only 
those who trust the Father as a little child would trust its 
earthly parent, can expect to make good progress in the 
narrow way and have the courage and confidence which 
it is the privilege of all who are His to have, and without 
which we cannot have the perfect peace and rest of heart 
promised. "According to your faith be it unto you," is 
the promise. The desire to draw nearer and nearer to 
God must be in our heart; else we shall fail to go on and 

R5425 : page 90 

attain our privilege in Christ. Such a desire is a manifestation 
of our hunger and thirst after righteousness, 
which the Lord expects to see before He makes good to 
such His engagement that they shall be filled. 

There are definite conditions specified in the Word as 
necessary to continued progress along this line. As we 
cannot draw close to the Lord except through this full 
assurance, neither can we have the assurance unless our 
hearts are kept "sprinkled from an evil conscience," or a 
consciousness of evil; for, as the Apostle also declares, "If 



our own heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, 
and knoweth all things." (1 John 3:20.) We may be 
sure that if our course as New Creatures in Christ is 
condemned by our own conscience it would also be condemned 
by God. 

Therefore, if the child of God would draw very near, 
and would have the blessed realization of the Father's 
smile of approval continually, he must seek to have a conscience 
void of offense toward God and toward men— a 
conscience which can truthfully say, I am striving to do 
that which would be pleasing to the Lord, that which is in 
full harmony with my Covenant of Sacrifice; and I am 
striving also to do that which would justly have the approval 
of righteous men. Nothing short of this is at all 
permissible in those who have consecrated themselves to 
be members of the Royal Priesthood, to sacrifice their 
lives in the Lord's service that they may reign with Him. 

CAUSE AND REMEDY FOR LACK OF FAITH 

He who has begun a good work in us is both able and 
willing to complete it. (Philippians 1:6.) But how few 
children of God, comparatively, have this "full assurance 
of faith" which is our glorious privilege! How few can 
say, "Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the 
days of my life, and I shall dwell in the House of the 
Lord forever!" Surely, by God's grace I shall ultimately 
gain the Heavenly Kingdom and the glorious things which 
He has promised to those who love Him. The few who 
can thus enter fully into sympathy with the Apostle Paul 
and the Prophet David in their expressions of confidence 
have therein a great joy, a great blessing, a great rest of 
heart which none others possess. 

Let us therefore inquire why it is that the number 
who thus enter into the rest of faith is so small. What 
are the hindrances to others, and how can these hindrances 
be removed? How can each one of the children of God 
enjoy fully this, his blessed patrimony? Many say, or 
think if they do not say, Oh, that I could feel sure that 
God's goodness and mercy would continue with me to the 
end! Oh, that I could remove my doubts of gaining the 
Kingdom, of being ultimately "more than conqueror"! 

What is the difficulty with these? Why do they not 
have the "full assurance of faith? of their acceptance? 
We answer that their difficulty is a lack of trust in God; 
and such a lack is not pleasing to Him, for "without faith 
it is impossible to please Him; for he that cometh to God 
must believe that He is, and that He is a Rewarder of 
them that diligently seek Him." (Hebrews 11:6.) Moreover, 
this lack of faith is a constant hindrance to their 
overcoming; as it is written: "This is the victory that 
overcometh the world, even our FAITH." (1 John 5:4.) 
The Christian who has not the shield of faith, and a large 
one, is continually at a disadvantage before the Adversary, 
and all the hosts of evil. 

Then let each one who realizes a lack in this direction 



pray earnestly, as the Apostles of old, "Lord, increase our 
faith!" And then, acting in harmony with this prayer, 
let such a one cultivate such faith in his or her own 
heart. (1) Let him refresh his memory continually 
with the precious promises of the Word, becoming very 
familiar with these. (2) Let him seek more and more 
to remember that, having made a covenant with the Lord, 
these promises are his; and in his heart and with his lips 
let him claim them as his before the Throne of Grace, 
with thanksgiving. Let him claim them in his thoughts, 
and in his conferences on holy things with the brethren. 

When trials or difficulties arise, he should call to mind 
these precious promises, remembering that they belong to 
him, because God has given these promises to such as 
love Him and have made a covenant with Him by sacrifice. 
(Psalm 50:5; Malachi 3:17.) He should resolve that 
henceforth he will trust the Word of his Heavenly Father 
implicitly. If some seeming accident befall him, let him 
call to mind the promise, "All things work together for 
good to them that love God, who are called according to 
His purpose." (Romans 8:28.) Let him thus assure 
himself that the seeming accident could not have occurred 
had God not seen a way to make it the channel of a 
needed lesson or blessing to him. 

Let us never forget that He who has begun this good 
work in us changes never, and that if we keep our hearts 
in harmony with Him, if our faith is still firm and clear 
in the great Atonement made for our sins, and we continually 
renew our consecration to Him, keeping our all 
on the altar of sacrifice, letting the Lord consume it in 
His own way, seeking not our own will, our own way, but 
His will alone, we have every reason to have full confidence 
that this good work in us will be finished, that we 
shall enter with joy into the everlasting Kingdom of our 
Lord, and shall hear His blessed words of approval, "Well 
done, good and faithful servant." 



R5425 : page 90 

THE COST OF DISCIPLESHIP 

--APRIL 19.-LUKE 14:25-35.- 

"Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; whosoever will 
lose his life for My sake shall find it."— Matthew 16:25. 

IT WAS at the close of the Great Teacher's 
ministry. Vast multitudes were following 
Him, all, according to the requirements of 
the Law, going up to Jerusalem to keep the 
Feast of the Passover, at which Jesus foreknew, 
that He would die as the antitypical 
Passover Lamb. Occasionally in the journey 
He would turn and address some of the 



multitude. Today's lesson gives us some of 
His teachings. It was the custom of teachers 
in those days to accept disciples, or pupils— those who 
considered them great teachers and desired to learn of 
them and profit by their instruction. To this day Christians 
claim to be the disciples, or followers, of Jesus, 
claim to be giving heed to His word and seeking the 
blessing which He promised to His faithful followers. 

The terms of discipleship which Jesus set forth, it will 
be noted, are very different from those proclaimed by 
some who profess to be His mouthpieces, His ministers. 
They sometimes proclaim that it is a sufficient sign of 
discipleship for persons to arise in a congregation and 
declare that they desire the prayers of God's people. Such 
are counted converts. To get them to take even this 
step requires the holding out of inducements. Sometimes 
the inducements are of a commercial kind— greater business 
prosperity to the merchant, greater favor with the 
employer for the clerk, an entrance into society or a better 
prospect of political preferment. 

If we contrast these methods with the words of Jesus 
in this lesson, we shall perceive that the vast number of 

R5425 : page 91 

nominal Christians have been, so to speak, inveigled into 
professing something that they never intended to profess. 
Many are entrapped into professing Christianity who 
never became Christians, according to the Master's conditions 
of discipleship, and who hearken not to His Word. 

"If any man come unto Me and hate not his father, 
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, 
yea, and his own life also, he cannot be My disciple. 
And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after 
Me, cannot be My disciple." Surely there is no excuse 
for us to misunderstand such plain terms and conditions. 
The Master did not say that only His disciples could ever 
gain everlasting life. His general teaching was that the 
whole world is lost, estranged from God and without the 
right to everlasting life. But He came to die, "the Just 
for the unjust," that all of the unjust might have the opportunity 
of returning to Divine favor. He did not say 
that none but His followers would have such an opportunity 
of future life. Those who so declare are adding 
to the Word and helping thus, eventually, to confound 
themselves. 

What Jesus did teach was that He would in due time 
be "the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh 
into the world." The world had already existed for 4,000 
years before Jesus came, and no one will dispute that 
those who died previous to His coming had no opportunity 
of knowing Him and being His disciples. Yet He 
died to bless them, as well as to bless all who have been 
born into the world since. This blessing of the world, 
He declared, is to be accomplished by His Kingdom; and 
He told them plainly that His Kingdom was not of this 



world, age, or epoch, but of a future period. For the 

time being He was merely inviting disciples, and not attempting 

to reach the world. 

R5426 : page 91 

The disciples were invited to become joint-heirs with 
Jesus in His Kingdom, that they might sit with Him in 
His Throne and participate with Him in His great work 
of human uplift— Restitution of all that was lost in Adam 
and redeemed at Calvary. He told them plainly that only 
through much tribulation would they be able to enter the 
Kingdom class; that the tribulations would prove their 
love of righteousness, their loyalty to God; and that God 
had purposely made the way so narrow that only the 
few, the very choicest of humanity in God's sight, could 
find it— a very few walking in that way to its further end 
of glory, honor and immortality. 

With this view clearly before our mind's eye, there 
is a reasonableness in the hard terms of discipleship. Only 
those willing to comply with such terms, and thus to demonstrate 
their love and loyalty to God, could properly be 
entrusted with the great power, glory and honor which 
will be granted to the Kingdom class, in association with 
the Redeemer, as soon as it shall have been completed. 
Let us examine these words carefully, meanwhile measuring 
ourselves— not our flesh, but our spirit, our intentions, 
our desires. 

Well did Henry Ward Beecher say respecting this 
statement made by the Master: "Never was there before, 
and never has there been since, I apprehend, such a speech 
made to those that professed to be willing and desirous 
to follow another." And probably a parallel statement is 
found in Matthew's Gospel (10:37): "He that loveth 
father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me." 
The word hate is apparently used in contrast with love. 
To be a disciple of Christ, then, means that we must love 
supremely the Lord and the principles for which He stands, 
so that love for others would comparatively be hatred. 

This proposition in its very start signifies a cutting-off 
—so far as the man is concerned, the will, the purpose 
—of every other love that would conflict with our love 
for the Lord and with our obedience to His will. Our 
earthly loves are to be counted as nothing in comparison. 
We are to be ready to sacrifice at the Lord's command 
every earthly hope, aim, object, and to lay down our lives 
willingly, gladly. Such as manifest a devotion of this 
kind can be trusted with anything. Of these the Lord 
speaks, saying prophetically, "They shall be Mine, saith 
the Lord, in that Day when I (come to) make up My 
Jewels."— Malachi 3:17. 

The fact that Jesus was of this character Himself, and 
placed the Father's will above all other considerations, is 
an assurance that all amongst His joint-heirs in the Kingdom 
will have the same mind, the same spirit. He assures 
us that the Kingdom will not be a selfish one, but 



the very reverse. The kings and princes and judges of 
that Kingdom will be not only irresistible in power, but 
incorruptible, unbearably. With them the Divine standard 
will be first, in the absolute sense. 

Such devotion to the Lord as is here described will 
necessarily at some time or other mean the severing of 
many earthly ties. It means that the followers of Jesus 
will be thought a peculiar people; and that many will 
think their course strange, unnatural, insane. Hence, as 
St. Paul said, we are counted fools all the day long for 
Christ's sake— because we preach the Wisdom of God and 
the Love of God in preference to the wisdom of humanity 
and the love of humanity. Of such St. John writes, saying, 
"As He was, so are we in this world"— ostracized, 
misunderstood; reproved, slandered. Only those who 
can stand such an experience can be winners of the crown 
to which Jesus referred, saying, To him that overcometh 
I will give a crown of life, and permit him to sit with 
Me in My Throne. 

Who is sufficient for these things? asks the Apostle. 
And he furnishes the answer: "Our sufficiency is of 
God"; and in the promises— "My grace is sufficient for 
thee; My strength is made perfect in weakness"; and 
again, "I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." 

DEFINITION OF CROSS-BEARING 

Adding to the severity of the terms, Jesus declared, 
"Whosoever doth not bear his cross and come after Me, 
cannot be My disciple." It is not enough that we should 
start out with a courageous intention, a bold acknowledgment 
of Jesus, and a bold profession of discipleship. After 
we have been faithful in taking our stand on the Lord's 
side, we must be proven. Not merely those who have a 
little enthusiasm at the beginning, but those who shall 
demonstrate their worthiness by their faithfulness will be 
accounted worthy, and will be finally accepted by the Lord. 
Cross-bearing must be a daily matter. Our crosses are 
those oppositions of the world, the flesh and the Devil 
which conflict with the Divine will as laid down for us in 
the Lord's Word. The only proper sentiment is that which 
the Master expresses, saying, "Not My will, but Thine." 

As an admonition to all not to undertake discipleship 
without mature deliberation, our Lord gave a parable of 
a man who began to build a tower, laying the foundation, 
but who was not able to complete it, and thus wasted his 
effort and made himself ridiculous, foolish. Another 
illustration was that of going to war without adequate 
preparation— an undertaking which would result disastrously. 
All the followers of Christ set out to build characters 
and to "fight a good fight." Whoever enlists under 
the banner of Jesus takes his stand against Satan and 
sin, and must expect to have a hard battle, and not to receive 
the victor's crown, nor to hear the words, "Well 

R5426 : page 92 



done," except by faithful perseverance in well doing. 
What a blessing it would be if all who espouse the 
cause of Christ would do so with a full, clear understanding 
of what they are doing and with the fixed determination 
to go onward in the good way, not even to look back! 
The cause of Christ would be much further advanced 
amongst men; and while their number would be much 
smaller, their influence and power in the world would undoubtedly 
be much greater. 

"SALT IS GOOD, BUT--" 

Salt has preservative qualities in connection with whatever 
it touches. It also serves to bring out the flavor of 
our food. In olden times it was used as a symbol of faithfulness, 
loyalty; and it is said that even yet some of the 
Arabs would be faithful to death to any person in whose 
home they had eaten salt. To them it seems to mean a 
pledge of loyalty. 

Jesus used salt as a symbol, representing His own 
loyalty to God and the loyalty which all of His followers 
must have, and not only so, but which they must maintain. 
If salt lose its value for seasoning purposes, it is 
useless for anything else. It will not serve as a fertilizer, 
for it has an opposite effect. It is absolutely useless except 
for its intended purpose. So the Christian has a special 
purpose in the world— to be a preservative power, to 
have, as it were, antiseptic qualities, and to draw out all 
the good qualities of those with whom he is connected. 
This is the mission of the Christian in respect to the 
world. If he fail in this, he has failed in the purpose for 
which he was called, and is of no particular value in the 
Lord's service. 

"He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear," said Jesus, 
in conclusion. All of His followers are to take heed to 
these words. Whoever neglects them despises the One 
who gave them, and will surely fail of a blessing that 
might otherwise have been secured. But as for the world, 
"ears they have, but they hear not; eyes have they, but 
they see not." We are not to measure the world by the 
same standards that we measure ourselves and all who 
profess to be the followers of Jesus. The world's highest 
standard is the Golden Rule. The Christian's highest 
standard is self-sacrifice, doing God's will at any cost. 



R5426 : page 92 

HEAVENLY INTEREST IN SINNERS 

-APRIL 26.-LUKE 15:1-10.- 

"There is joy in the presence of the angels of 
God over one sinner that repenteth."— Verse 10. 



BIBLE STUDENTS should always seek to 

view the jewels of the Lord's Word in the 

settings in which they have been placed. To 

neglect this is to lose a portion of the lesson 

intended. The Scribes and the Pharisees 

held themselves aloof from the common people— 

the Scribes, because the masses were 

illiterate; and the Pharisees, under the claim 

that the people were sinners, cut off from 

relationship to God, and therefore not 

proper to be recognized by the holy of humanity, which 

they claimed to be. 

Jesus, however, received the common people, even the 
publicans, acknowledged sinners. His superior knowledge 
did not make Him haughty, and His superior righteousness 
did not make Him proud and unsympathetic. He 
has set His followers an example that they should walk 
in His steps. And the more closely they follow Him, the 
more pleasing will they be to the Father, and the more 
ready for a share in the Kingdom for which we pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come." 

Our lesson tells us how the Pharisees and the scribes 
murmured against Jesus, charging against Him as a sin 
that He received sinners and ate with them. Whatever 
did not harmonize with their standards they could only 
contest. Their difficulty in part was that they had too 
high an opinion of themselves. Their spirit in this matter 
was an evil one, begotten of the Adversary. Hence 
Jesus sometimes spoke of them as being children of the 
Devil, because his works they did, and his spirit they had. 
But even this does not signify that the Pharisees were 

R5427 : page 92 

beyond hope of salvation. Did not Jesus address St. Peter 

on one occasion, saying, "Get thee behind Me, Satan (adversary)"? 

He was an adversary, had the adverse spirit 

at the time; but, corrected in harmony with the Lord's 

spirit, everything was changed. 

So it is with us. "His servants ye are to whom ye 
render service." "By their fruits shall ye know them," 
said the Master. Applying His words to many who profess 
to be His disciples, we are bound to suppose that 
either intentionally or ignorantly they are in opposition 
to the Master's Spirit and teachings— adversaries of His 
teachings. 

Jesus, knowing the thoughts of the Pharisees, and 
perhaps noting their gestures and looks or hearing their 
words, answered them in a parable, saying, "What man of 
you, having a hundred sheep and having lost one of them, 
doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and 
go after that which is lost until he find it?" And finding 
it, he lays it upon his shoulders rejoicing, and tells the 
fact to his neighbors exultantly. This course of the 
shepherd, Jesus declared, illustrates the attitude of God 



and all the holy angels associated with Him. They have 
a special feeling of interest in those who have strayed, 
and especially rejoice in the recovery of such. There is 
more rejoicing over the repentant sinner than over ninety 
and nine just persons needing no repentance. 

Oh, how encouraging it is to us to know that this is the 
sentiment of Heaven, and that the fall of man and our 
imperfections do not stand as a perpetual bar to recognition 
by the Lord, if we return to Him! He is merciful, 
and will abundantly pardon, and will remove our sins 
from us as far as the East is from the West. But this 
interest is in the repentant one or in the one who has 
not sinned beyond repentance. Any sheep, having been 
found by the Shepherd and then preferring the wolfish, 
would no longer be interesting to the Heavenly ones. 

Many apply this parable inconsistently. They seem 
to think of the whole world of mankind as representing 
the flock of a hundred sheep, and the one straying as 
representing the sinners of earth, comparatively few. 
Surely this cannot be the true interpretation! Rather, 
as the Prophet has declared, "All we like sheep have 
gone astray." "There is none righteous, no not one." 

Let us rather interpret the parable on a broader scale, 
in comportment with the facts and the Scriptures. Let 
us understand the one stray sheep to represent Adam and 
his family; and the ninety and nine just persons needing 
no repentance as representing the holy angels. To this view 
every feature of the parable inclines. The Good Shepherd 
left the Heavenly flock and came to earth to find, to redeem, 
to recover, mankind, the lost sheep; and there is 
more rejoicing in Heaven over human recoveries from sin 
and alienation from God than over the holy ones themselves, 
than over each other, who have never been 
alienated, never needed redemption. 

R5427 : page 93 

The lesson to the Pharisees is plain. They had a different 
spirit from that of the holy ones. Theirs was an 
earthly view, a selfish one, a proud and haughty one, out 
of accord with the Divine spirit, and not pleasing to God. 
Jesus would have all of His disciples copy God. "Be ye 
like unto your Father which is in Heaven." "He is kind 
to the unthankful." "His mercy endureth forever"— to a 
full completeness. 

His mercy sent His Son, the Under Shepherd, to be 
our Redeemer, and to help us back into His favor. His 
mercy will pursue the lost sheep until every member of 
Adam's race shall have been brought to a knowledge of 
the Truth and to a full opportunity of returning to the 
fold of God. To this end the Messianic Kingdom is to 
be established. To this end also is the present call for 
the Church, to be a Royal Priesthood, that under the 
guidance of the great Deliverer, they may be co-laborers 
with Him in carrying the Message of God's grace to all 
the members of Adam's family. 



Oh, how different this view of our loving Creator 
from the one which was handed down to us from the 
Dark Ages ! How different from the one which represented 
the Almighty as angry in a vicious sense!— as 
having prepared in advance a place for the eternal torture 
of the human family, except a few who would have 
the hearing ears and happen to hear the Message in the 
present life. On the contrary, we find that God's loving 
provision is only beginning to be manifested, in His 
favor toward Christ and the Church; and that ultimately 
the knowledge of the glory of God shall fill the whole 
earth, until every knee shall bow and every tongue confess, 
to the glory of God. 

THE LOST COIN 

In proportion as we become Godlike we have an interest 
in sinners— especially in those who through heredity 
or evil environment are more deeply steeped in sin, ignorance 
and superstition. Having God's Spirit, we are 
glad to do anything in our power to reach these sinners. 
Nevertheless, we are not to be wise above what is written. 
We are not to expect to find all the sheep. Rather, we are 
to prepare as many as the Lord our God shall call and 
draw to be associated with the great Chief Shepherd in 
the work which He shortly will institute, the work of 
seeking the lost sheep and finding it and restoring it— all 
the willing and obedient. 

"The Son of Man came to seek and to save (recover) 
that which was lost." The race was lost, not merely a 
few, the Church; and their recovery is to include all that 
was lost. This does not signify universalism, but will 
be accomplished in bringing every member of Adam's race 
to a full knowledge of God and to full opportunity of 
recovery from sin and death.— 1 Timothy 2:3,4. 

Jesus gave another parable of similar import, to illustrate 
the same great truth from another angle. It was 
the custom among Jewish women to wear on the forehead 
a fringe of coin bangles. These might be of gold or silver, 
and sometimes represented her dowry. The loss of one 
of these coins would represent more than its intrinsic 
value; for its absence marred the beauty of the bangles. 
The search for the coin would mean that, instead of its 
being abandoned as not worthy of consideration, it would 
be hunted for diligently until found. The female neighbors 
would learn of the loss, and also learn if it were 
found, and would rejoice with her greatly. This is another 
illustration of joy in the presence of the angels of 
God over one repentant sinner. 

THE VALUE OF A MAN 

Jesus said, "Are ye not of much more value than 
many sparrows?" And in the present lesson He intimates 
that a man is of much more value than many coins and 
of much more value than many sheep. We all agree that 



it would be difficult to estimate too highly, too fully, the 
value of a human life, especially if it were our own life 
or the life of some one dear to us. But to what extent 
do we manifest this in our daily lives? 

Each should put the question to himself first, before 
applying it to his neighbors. How do I manifest the 
spirit of God toward my fellow-men, in placing as the 
first object of my interest a human life? What am I 
doing day by day that substantiates my professed interest 
in humanity in general? How am I showing my interest 
in my friends, my relatives, my children, my brothers and 
my sisters? 

The manufacturer should take up this subject and ask 
himself, To what extent am I placing coin as of more 
value than humanity? To what extent am I allowing the 
accumulation of coin to interfere with the making and 
the giving of proper protection to my employees and all 
for whose welfare I have a care, a responsibility? Their 
fingers, their eyes, their limbs, their health, their lives, 
should be precious to every one who has the Spirit of 
God to the slightest degree. 

Each Christian should ask himself, How much of 
God's Spirit have I? How much of my time am I giving to 
helping my fellow-men out of their difficulties and trials 
back to God? How much am I sacrificing of my time and 
strength in going after the lost sheep? Hearken to the 
Apostle, "Be not deceived; God is not mocked." "He 
that doeth righteousness is righteous"— and not merely 
he that professes to be a follower of Jesus. 

Nevertheless, we are not to forget that God is the One 
chiefly interested in this great work, and that He has sent 
forth His Son for its accomplishment. We are not to 
forget that not only we have an interest, but that Divine 
interest and love are greater than ours, and that Divine 
wisdom is superior; and our course should be to give 
strict heed to "Him that speaketh from Heaven," to follow 
His course, His example. 

This may mean that we shall to some extent be misunderstood 
by others. There are many theories for saving 
the world by social uplift, political uplift, moral uplift, 
vice-fighting, etc. Undoubtedly, the principle remains 
always true that there are but two great Captains in the 
warfare between sin and righteousness; namely, Christ 
and Satan. It remains true also that whoever is fighting 
for the One is fighting against the other. It is for us to 
make sure, first of all, that we are on the Lord's side, on 
the side of righteousness, truth, purity and goodness. 
There is still a further step— to make sure that we are 
fighting as our Captain would wish us to fight; that we 
are laboring as He would wish us to labor; that we are 
spending ourselves as He would wish us to be spent. 

"This is the will of God (concerning you), even 
your sanctification." Thus our personal salvation comes 
first, in God's order. Reconciled to God ourselves and 
consecrated to His service, we inquire, What is the next 
step? The answer comes, "Feed My sheep; feed My 



lambs." At first we might be disposed to demur, to say, 
Lord, should we not rather go after the straying, after 
the lost sheep? The answer is given by the Lord, through 
the Apostle, that we are to "do good unto all men as we 
have opportunity, especially unto the Household of Faith.' 
If, therefore, the Household of Faith demands all of our 
time when we have the opportunity, we may be doing 
nothing for the lost sheep, but only helping to perfect 
those whom the Lord has already found. 

R5428 : page 94 

The circumstances of the Lord's providence alone can 
direct our course. When we see His purpose, His object, 
in this arrangement, all is clear. He is taking out of the 
world a peculiar people, to be joint-heirs with His Son 
in the Kingdom; and they all need education along 
spiritual lines for their own development, and to fit and 
prepare them to be the Royal Priesthood— to be kings 
and Priests unto God— who by and by are to judge, to 
chasten, to uplift, to bless, all the world, in proportion 
as they shall prove willing and obedient. 



R5428 : page 94 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
FORGIVENESS VS. EXPIATION 



QUESTION.— In relation to sins partly wilful, 
are stripes given for the portion of wilfulness? 
And when the sin is expiated, is it 
then canceled? 

Answer.— Our Lord died for the sin of 
Adam— for just the one original sin, and all 
sins which grew out of that original sin. 
This sin of Adam affected the body, mind 
and morals of all the race. Therefore we 
each have not only our own inherited imperfections 
to contend with, but also the imperfections of 
all those around us. 

From the time that any one is begotten of the Holy 
Spirit all things become new. The members of the Little 
Flock class have no record whatever of condemnation 
against them; all that condemnation is completely eliminated. 
The imputation of Christ's merit to their flesh 
made them perfect in God's sight, and they were brought 
forth as New Creatures. 

These New Creatures have entered into a Covenant 
with God to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. In the present 
time, as the Apostle says, we have this treasure of 
the new nature in an earthen vessel; that is, we have it 



under unfavorable conditions. We have also besetments 
from those around us and from the Adversary to oppose 
us. All sins, then, that are the result of these adverse 
conditions, and to which our will does not consent, are 
coverable by the merit of Christ. If any of these New 
Creatures unwittingly do that which is contrary to the 
Divine will, they need not remain in a condemned condition. 
The Word instructs us that we should go immediately 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace and obtain mercy 
and forgiveness, and help for every time of need. 

But suppose that the sin is not merely one of temptation 
—suppose there is a measure of wilfulness or a measure 
of slackness, so that the child of God is thus far responsible, 
what then? We answer that he may still go 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace, and the portion of his 
sin which was unwilling will be covered by the merit of 
Christ. Whatever portion of the sin is wilful is deserving 
of punishment, stripes; and these stripes he will 
surely get. The Father will not allow His children to 
wander away without help. The stripes complete the expiation 
of that sin; and it will be canceled from the record. 
Justice has no longer any charge against him. 

But the Scriptures clearly tell us that if any consecrated 
child of God should sin with full wilfulness there 
would be no forgiveness whatever for that sin, and it 
could not be expiated by stripes. The penalty would be 
death— the Second Death. If he sins with no wilfulness, 
in full ignorance, entirely without intention, the sin is 
entirely forgivable, by application for the merit of the 
precious blood. If he sins with partial ignorance and 
partial wilfulness, there is a portion that would be forgiven 
and a portion that must be expiated. 

The Apostle Paul declares that if we would judge 
ourselves we should not be judged of the Lord; but that 
when we are judged of the Lord we are chastened, that 
we may not be condemned with the world. (1 Corinthians 11:31,32.) 
And this chastening that comes upon us 
is the proper penalty for our degree of wilfulness. The 
object of the Lord in meting out this chastisement is that 
we shall learn the needed lesson, and be more watchful. 



CHILDREN OF THE FIRST, OR THE SECOND ADAM? 

Question.— Whose children will the world be when 
they awake in the Morning of the New Dispensation— 
the children of Adam, or the children of Christ, the Second 
Adam? 

Answer.— We understand that they will still be the 
children of Adam. When we think of our Lord as the 
Life-giver of the world, we should remember that He is 
the Life-giver only to those who come unto the Father 
through Him. When the masses of mankind awaken in 
the next Age, they will not have undergone any change 
which would lift them out of Adam and condemnation to 



death, into Christ and justification of life. 

The New Covenant which God will seal with the 
precious blood of Christ is to be a Covenant primarily 
with Israel— to those Jews who are His people, to those 
who will accept Christ. The faithful Israelites who will 
accept the Lord and the Covenant relationship through 
the Mediator which is thus inaugurated for their benefit, 
will, as soon as they do this, come under the blessings of 
this Covenant. But mankind in general, who will not yet 
have come to a position of acceptance of the Mediator, 
will still be in the same attitude of today— aliens, strangers, 
foreigners. The work of the Church during that 
time is described in Revelation 22:17, "And the Spirit 
and the Bride say, Come." But none will begin to live 
until they partake of the Water of Life. 

The world of mankind now go down into death as 
strangers, aliens from God, and it will be for them after 
their awakening to avail themselves of the privileges of 
that time. The Apostle John declares, "He that hath the 
Son hath life." Those who are awakened will not have 
this life, not having come into relationship with Christ. 
His relationship to them during the next Age will evidently 
be that of a benevolent Ruler, who is willing to 
enlighten them, to adopt them, if they will, as children, 
and who is willing to bring them up to the condition 
where they may have life everlasting. It will take the 
entire thousand years to fully perfect the race— to bring 
them up to perfection. 

"Tell the whole world these blessed tidings; 

Speak of the time of rest that nears; 
Tell the oppressed of every nation, 
'Jubilee lasts a thousand years!'" 

The Lord Jesus will become the Father of all, just as 
soon as they comply with the required terms. He will 
give them, first, enlightenment and knowledge. Then if 
they use this knowledge, light and opportunity, and desire 
to come into harmony with Him, He will receive 
them as His children, and grant them the blessings under 
the New Covenant. 

We recall the Scripture which says that the Law shall 
go forth from Mt. Zion and the Word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem. "And many people shall go and say, come 
ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the 
House of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His 
ways, and we will walk in His paths." 

R5428 : page 95 

These people represent the world in general outside of 
those who have accepted the terms of the Covenant. It 
represents them as learning a lesson and desiring to come 
into harmony with God. They say one to another, Let 
us go up to the Mountain of the Lord's House, and let us 
walk in His paths. Not until they do this will the Mediator 
recognize them in any sense of the word, nor will 
they be on probation for everlasting life. As soon as 



they are ready to walk in the way of holiness, they will 
be counted as His children. 



R5428 : page 95 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
FLEETING OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My ever increasing love for the Truths now due, and my 
growing zeal for the scattering of the same among the masses 
of people who are beginning to hunger for something more 
satisfying than brilliant essays and talented choirs, prompts 
me to mention several opportunities for service which many 
might use if brought to their attention. 

Many Sisters have such splendid chances among their 
grocers, druggists, and others with whom they deal. The 
workers in Babylon are always begging these merchants for 
something for the church-fair, or asking them to buy tickets 
for the social. It has occurred to me, why not try to sell 
them the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? Arrangements could 
be made to make purchases when no customers are likely to 
be present, and when the merchants would have spare time. A 
first volume might be carried, and after making purchases, inquire 
whether he has ever seen the book. He might be told 
how it has opened up the Bible to you and then he should be 
canvassed for a set. If he hesitates about taking a set, sell 
him a first volume. Say you will want to know how he likes 
it, as this will make him more likely to read. Try to make 
some of your purchases thereafter when he is not very busy, 
that opportunity may be had to water the seed sown. 

Brethren employed where there are fellow-workmen have 
in many cases a grand opportunity to witness to them. These 
might be canvassed for the STUDIES at the noon hour. Try to 
eat your luncheon (if you take it with you) near a different 
man each day, and in the course of conversation tell him 
about the blessing you have received from these Bible Helps, 

R5429 : page 95 

and arrange to sell or loan him one of them. 

If the Brother has some ability, he might do good by holding 
little question meetings while eating lunch. The answers 
should always be brief and to the point. To be helpful, such 
questions should be on the more simple features of the Plan; 
deep questions would choke those who are spiritual babes. 

For instance, the conversation might be turned to the subject 
of Hell. The Brother could insist that there is not a 
single passage in the Bible where the word means a place of 
endless misery, and the only places seemingly teaching so are 
very highly figurative passages. Then say, "I have a little 
book in which every passage in the Bible where the word 
hell occurs is explained. I will bring it here tomorrow and 



read you a couple of wonderful paragraphs in it." This will 
probably bring them together the next day; and by promising 
to consider further questions the third day, one might 
have a regular little lunch-time class. Of course, the majority 
will tire of it, but a few may stick. 

In the larger towns and cities the Truth-hungry might be 
advertised for. Some city-dailies will allow it among the miscellaneous 
religious advertisements; but in each case, judgment 
will have to be exercised as to where it should be placed, 
and how frequently inserted. The following is suggested as 
an advertisement: 

"Those who want to believe the Bible but have never yet 
found in it anything as satisfying and reasonable as they would 
expect God to give, are invited to send their names and addresses 

to P.O. Box . This is no scheme, but simply an 

effort to bring real religious satisfaction to those who feel 
their faith is shaking." 

Let some able, consecrated Brother call upon those who 
respond, and either sell or loan them "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages." He might first tell them of the blessing he is getting 
from the Word of God now, in contrast to the former conditions. 
He might call again, from time to time, to see what 
progress they are making, if the interest warrants. Sisters 
should call on the ladies who reply. 

I find that the Brethren are not sufficiently alert to the opportunities 
among the foreigners in their town. If there be 
Greek confectioners in your town, send for a half dozen 
Greek tracts to give them. The same might apply to Chinese 
in the laundries, Italians at fruit-stands and in street 
gangs, etc. 

"The Bible Students' Monthly," on "What is Baptism?" is 
specially good where Brother Russell has been misrepresented 
very much, because of the article by Prof. Ellis and letter by 
Rev. T. S. Thompson, endorsing him and his work. The 
Brethren sometimes forget that they are able to do more than 
merely circulate yearly Volunteer literature. Often a special 
tract will fit in very well with local conditions, if circulated at 
the psychological time. 

Every day makes me more desirous for the time when our 
service will not be limited by the weak, imperfect body in 
which we now dwell. I am glad that day is so near. 

I remain, with Christian love, on Jordan's Banks. 
B. H. BARTON. 



page 95 

GRATEFUL FOR THE LIGHT OF TRUTH 

MY DEARLY-LOVED PASTOR:- 

It is impossible for me to express in words the gratitude 
I feel to our Heavenly Father and to you for your faithful 
ministry. Ever since the light has been brought into my life 
by STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES I have been desirous of giving 
you a token of my esteem. 



God, in His mercy, has granted me the privilege of enclosing 
herewith a little gift to you. I realize your time is 
already very heavily taxed, and so do not wish you to feel it 
necessary to acknowledge this note. An interest in your 
prayers, which I know all of God's children have, is all anyone 
can desire. May God's richest blessings be yours! 

Yours in the Master's service, SISTER F.— Mass. 

IN REPLY. 

DEAR SISTER:- 

Yours of the 8th inst. reached me duly, and is much appreciated, 
not only for the intrinsic value of the gift enclosed, 
but also for the sentiments expressed— your Christian love. 
The money, $ 100, goes to your credit in the Tract Fund 
with heartiest appreciation. My personal needs are all supplied 
from the Tract Fund, as are those of all the Pilgrims. 

I am pleased to know that you are enjoying the Truth. 
I agree with you that it is the most wonderful thing and the 
greatest blessing that the Heavenly Father could give us in 
the present life— to know Him and something of His loving 
kindness, not only for the Church, but also for the world. 
With Christian love, 

Your brother and servant, C. T. RUSSELL. 



THINKING TOO MUCH ABOUT SELF 

MY DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am writing to wish you a happy birthday, and a glorious 
"new birth day" at the day that God may choose; also, to say 
that the Lord has brought me safely to Trinidad— I believe in 
answer to prayer before leaving Jamaica. First this, that 
God would send me where I could best be transformed into 
Jesus' likeness; and then be a blessing to others, by His grace. 

So now I wish to say, I am looking for an answer to the 
latter prayer, and intend to co-operate in bringing the answer 
as best I can. 

Brother Coward is still away in Demerara; meanwhile I 
am seeking to assist those already interested. We expect his 
return soon, and I believe we shall co-operate well together. 

Dear Brother, I have just been thinking that possibly an 
article in THE WATCH TOWER dealing on the subject of too 
much approbativeness— thinking about self and what others 
think about us, etc.— might help some; that is, it might 
help them to overcome this tendency. As many of us 
ought to be approaching manhood in Christ, that very 
thing may tend to increase this trouble amongst us, especially 
as some seem inclined to criticize little things a good deal. 
This difficulty, over-approbativeness, seems to be something 
like a "will-o-the-wisp," very hard to catch hold of and kill. 

As ever, your brother in Christ, A. B. BLAKE. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF APRIL. 
QUESTIONS FROM MANUAL ON SECOND SERIES, "STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
STUDY II. 

Week beginning April 5 Questions 1 to 8 

" 12 " 9 to 16 

19 " 17 to 24 

" 26 " 25 to 31 

Question Manuals on VOL. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c. each, or 50c. per doz., postpaid. 



page 97 
