A World Without War Soon
LOOK again at the Bible prophecy in Isaiah that says: “They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.” Notice from the context that those who beat their swords into plowshares are “many people” who walk in the paths of God. (Isaiah 2:2-4, King James Version) This means that these people worship Jehovah God and obey his laws. Who are they?
They must be a multinational people who have not merely rejected weapons of war but who have worked to root out of their minds and hearts the attitudes and dispositions that lead to strife and fighting. (Romans 12:2) Rather than kill their neighbor, they love him. (Matthew 22:36-39) Have you heard of a people like that?
Perhaps you have heard that Jehovah’s Witnesses enjoy an international brotherhood and have renounced taking up weapons to kill others. Think about it: If everyone on earth shared that outlook, would not this planet already be a place of peace and security?
Of course, not everyone shares that outlook. It is as King Solomon wrote about 3,000 years ago: “I myself returned that I might see all the acts of oppression that are being done under the sun, and, look! the tears of those being oppressed, but they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power.”—Ecclesiastes 4:1.
Calling to Lovers of Peace
Will there ever be a world without war? Yes. Will it come through the efforts of men? No. Will it come through a mass conversion of people to true religion? No. The Bible book of Psalms answers: “Come, you people, behold the activities of Jehovah . . . He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”—Psalm 46:8, 9.
How will Jehovah God do that? The book of Proverbs answers: “The upright are the ones that will reside in the earth, and the blameless are the ones that will be left over in it. As regards the wicked [those who disregard God’s laws], they will be cut off from the very earth; and as for the treacherous, they will be torn away from it.”—Proverbs 2:21, 22.
A primary reason why God has not acted before now is this: He is giving people an opportunity to learn about his ways so that they can walk in his paths. The apostle Peter wrote: “Jehovah is not slow respecting his promise, as some people consider slowness, but he is patient with you because he does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.”(2 Peter 3:9) Thus, God’s people unselfishly help others to learn about Jehovah. As Isaiah expressed it, they call out: “Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, . . . and he will instruct us about his ways.”—Isaiah 2:3.
“The Final Part of the Days”
The scripture in Isaiah also foretold that the educating of people in the ways of peace would happen “in the final part of the days.” (Isaiah 2:2) We are living during that time right now. Ironically, the wars of this century indicate that we are.
When Jesus’ disciples asked him what would mark the end of this system of things, he foretold “great earthquakes, and in one place after another pestilences and food shortages.” (Luke 21:11; Matthew 24:3) He also said: “‘When you hear of wars and disorders, do not be terrified. For these things must occur first, but the end does not occur immediately.’ Then he went on to say to them: ‘Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.’”—Luke 21:9, 10.
Although there have been wars for thousands of years, this century alone has witnessed two world wars and, by some counts, literally hundreds of lesser wars. The fact that tens of millions of people have been killed in wars in this century is appalling. According to World Watch magazine, during the 2,000 years prior to the 20th century, on the average, it took 50 years for one million people to die in war. During this century, the length of time it took, on the average, for a million people to die in war was one year.
A World Without War
The terrible wars of our century, together with many other developments foretold in Bible prophecy, show that we are on the threshold of a new world of God’s making. The old world disorder will be swept away to be replaced by a “new earth,” where peace and righteousness will prevail. (2 Peter 3:13) God’s Word says: “Evildoers themselves will be cut off, but those hoping in Jehovah are the ones that will possess the earth. But the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”—Psalm 37:9, 11.
Throughout the earth today, countless millions yearn for a world without war. Showing that God is certain to fulfill his promise to create such a world, a prophet of God wrote long ago: “The vision is yet for the appointed time, and it keeps panting on to the end, and it will not tell a lie. Even if it should delay, keep in expectation of it; for it will without fail come true. It will not be late.”—Habakkuk 2:3.
Wisely, therefore, put your trust in God and enjoy the fulfillment of his promise: “God himself will be with [his people]. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
[Box/Pictures on page 9, 10]
What the Bible Promises for That New World:
No Crime, Violence, or Wickedness
“[God] is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”—Psalm 46:9.
“Evildoers themselves will be cut off . . . And just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more.”—Psalm 37:9, 10.
All Humankind at Peace
“There has been a child born to us, there has been a son given to us; and the princely rule will come to be upon his shoulder. And his name will be called . . . Prince of Peace. To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end.”—Isaiah 9:6, 7.
All the Earth a Paradise
Jesus said: “You will be with me in Paradise.”—Luke 23:43.
“The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”—Psalm 37:29.
A Loving Worldwide Brotherhood
“God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”—Acts 10:34, 35.
A Resurrection of Dead Loved Ones
“The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear [Jesus’] voice and come out.”—John 5:28, 29.
No More Sickness, Old Age, or Death
“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:4.

