From Our Readers
Holocaust  I have always wondered why no one ever spoke up regarding the Holocaust. The series “The Holocaust—Who Spoke Out?” (August 22, 1995) has answered my question. Jehovah’s Witnesses spoke out, and I am very proud of my fellow Witnesses!
C. B., United States
May I—a nonmember—congratulate you on the treatment of the subject the Holocaust. Your objective treatment of this evil manifestation of man’s inhumanity to man is the most illuminating I have encountered. The courage of your fellow Witnesses at that time is something about which, lamentably, the world knows little.
L. B., England
My father lost his life in Sachsenhausen. My oldest brother also lost his life as a result of Nazi imprisonment. I still have vivid memories of the Nazi persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I am thus moved to express my appreciation for the articles. Well done!
F. D. J., Canada
I was very impressed with the articles. But I do not agree that Jehovah’s Witnesses were the one and only “voice in the midst of silence.” The Communists also warned people against Hitler before he came to power. Many ended up in concentration camps.
B. W., Germany
“Awake!” readily acknowledges that Hitler had many political opponents. However, the articles specifically referred to the failure of religious organizations, most of whom collaborated with the Nazi regime. The Nazis themselves identified Jehovah’s Witnesses as their principal religious antagonists. The Witnesses were thus the only religious group given their own prisoner identification symbol in the concentration camps—the infamous purple triangle.—ED.
Japan’s Earthquake  I cried reading the article “Japan’s Sudden Disaster—How People Coped.” (August 22, 1995) I lost my favorite Christian sister in that earthquake. She was very zealous. I know she will be resurrected and I will be able to see her again. I am very grateful for all the spiritual and material assistance we received from the congregation and the Society. I still cry, though, when I think about what happened that day.
T. M., Japan
The organized and swift action on the part of the Witnesses absolutely amazed me. When I read the caring message from the brothers in the congregation in Korea, I just cried and cried. I was so happy to think that I belonged to such a warm organization.
M. K., Japan
Sexual Harassment  Thank you for your article “Young People Ask . . . Sexual Harassment—How Can I Protect Myself?” (August 22, 1995) I am 17 years old, and I met a non-Christian boy at school. I trusted him, but later on he and his friends harassed me with lewd suggestions and threats. I had to leave that school to get free of the situation. I learned a lot from this article. Now I know what to do when it comes to dealing with the opposite sex.
T. G., Portugal
I was sexually harassed and threatened by a coworker. Having been abused as a child, I often find it hard to stand up for myself. Still, I asked him repeatedly to leave me alone. I finally reported him to our employers, and then he left me alone. I really appreciate the article. Women need to know how to handle this problem.
V. A., United States

